
"Fight then on the path of God: lay not burdens on any but thyself; and
stir up the faithful. The powers of the infidels, God will haply
restrain; for God is stronger in prowess, and stronger to
punish."--(Sura IV, 86.)

The severe persecution, the intense torture and mighty aggression of
the Meccans and their allies is referred to in the original word _Bass_,
rendered _prowess_ into English and referred to in the previous verse
77, which shows that the war herein enjoined was to restrain the
aggressions of the enemy and to repel force by force.

It is very unfair on the part of the Revd. T.P. Hughes to twist or
dislocate half a sentence from a verse and put it forth to demonstrate
and prove a certain object of his.

[Sidenote: 127. Meaning of Jihad.]

The second verse quoted by the same author is a mere mistranslation.
There is no such word in the original which admits of being rendered as
"fighting." The true translation of the sentence quoted above from Sura
IV, verse 97, is as follows:--

"Good promises hath he made to all. But God hath assigned to the
_strenuous_ a rich recompense above those who sit still at home."

The word rendered "_strenuous_" is originally "mojahid" (plural
"Mojahidin," from Jihad), which in classical Arabic and throughout the
Koran means to do one's utmost, to make effort, to strive, to exert, to
employ one's-self diligently, studiously, sedulously, earnestly,
zealously, or with energy, and does not mean fighting or warfare. It was
subsequently applied to religious war, but was never used in the Koran
in such a sense. (_Vide_ Appendix A.)

[Sidenote: 128. Sura XLVII, v. 5.]

The third instance quoted by Mr. Hughes is also a mistranslation of a
sentence in verse 5, Sura XLVII. The original word is "_kotelu_," which
means "those who are _killed_," and not "those who _fight_," as
explained and translated by the author. The correct rendering of the
sentence is this: "And those who are killed, their work God will not
suffer to miscarry."

Some read the word "_katalu_," which means "those who fought," but the
general and authorized reading is "_kotelu_," _i.e._, "those who are
killed." Even if it be taken for granted that the former is the correct
reading, it will be explained by several other verses which mean
fighting in defence, and not fighting aggressively, which not only has
been never taught in the Koran but is always prohibited (II, 186). The
verse to that effect runs thus:--

"And fight for the cause of God against those who fight against you; but
commit not the injustice of attacking them first. Verily God loveth not
the unjust."--(II, 186.)

This verse permitted only defensive war and prohibited every aggressive
measure. All other verses mentioned in connection with fighting on the
part of the Moslems must be interpreted in conformity with this.

[Sidenote: 129. The Rev. Mr. Malcolm MacColl quoted.]

The Rev. Malcolm MacColl writes:--

"The Koran divides the earth into parts: Dar-ul-Islam, or the House of
Islam; and Dar-ul-Harb, or the House of the enemy. All who are not of
Islam are thus against it, and it is accordingly the duty of the True
Believers to fight against the infidels till they accept Islam, or are
destroyed. This is called the Djihad or Holy War, which can only end
with the conversion or death of the last infidel on earth. It is thus
the sacred duty of the Commander of the Faithful to make war on the
non-Mussulman world as occasion may offer. But Dar-ul-Harb or the
non-Mussulman world, is subdivided into Idolaters and Ketabi, or 'People
of the Book,'--_i.e._, people who possess divinely inspired Scriptures,
namely, Jews, Samaritans, and Christians. All the inhabitants of
Dar-ul-Harb are infidels, and consequently outside the pale of
Salvation. But the Ketabi are entitled to certain privileges in this
world, if they submit to the conditions which Islam imposes. Other
infidels must make their choice between one of two alternatives--Islam
or the sword. The Ketabi are allowed a third alternative, namely,
submission and the payment of tribute. But if they refuse to submit, and
presume to fight against the True Believers, they lapse at once into the
condition of the rest of Dar-ul-Harb and may be summarily put to death
or sold as slaves."[319]

I am very sorry the Rev. gentleman is altogether wrong in his assertions
against the Koran. There is neither such a division of the world in the
Koran, nor such words as "Dar-ul-Islam" and "Dar-ul-Harb" are to be
found anywhere in it. There is no injunction in the Koran to the True
Believers to fight against the infidels till they accept Islam, failing
which they are to be put to death. The words "Dar-ul-Islam" and
"Dar-ul-Harb" are only to be found in the Mohammadan Common Law, and are
only used in the question of jurisdiction. No Moslem magistrate will
pass a sentence in a criminal case against a criminal who had committed
an offence in a foreign country. The same is the case in civil
courts[320]. All the inhabitants of Dar-ul-Harb are not necessarily
infidels. Mohammadans, either permanently or temporarily by obtaining
permission from the sovereign of the foreign land, can be the
inhabitants of a Dar-ul-Harb, a country out of the Moslem jurisdiction,
or at war with it.

[Sidenote: 130. The untenable theories of the Common Law and
conclusion.]

It is only a theory of our Common Law, in its military and political
chapters, which allow waging unprovoked war with non-Moslems, exacting
tribute from "the people of the Book," and other idolaters, except those
of Arabia, for which the Hanafi Code of the Common Law has nothing short
of conversion to Islam or destruction by the sword. As a rule, our
canonical legists support their theories by quotations from the
Mohammadan Revealed Law, _i.e._, the Koran, as well as from the Sonnah,
or the traditions from the Prophet, however absurd and untenable may be
their process of reasoning and argumentative deductions. In this theory
of waging war with, and exacting tribute or the capitation-tax from, the
non-Moslem world, they quote the 9th and other Suras. These verses have
been copied and explained elsewhere in this book. The casuistic
sophistry of the canonical legists in deducing these war theories from
the Koran is altogether futile. These verses relate only to the wars
waged by the Prophet and his followers purely in their self-defence.
Neither these verses had anything to do with waging unprovoked war and
exacting tributes during Mohammad's time, nor could they be made a law
for future military conquest. These were only temporary in their
operations and purely defensive in their nature. The Mohammadan Common
Law is by no means divine or superhuman. It mostly consists of uncertain
traditions, Arabian usages and customs, some frivolous and fortuitous
analogical deductions from the Koran, and a multitudinous array of
casuistical sophistry of the canonical legists. It has not been held
sacred or unchangeable by enlightened Mohammadans of any Moslem country
and in any age since its compilation in the fourth century of the
Hejira. All the _Mujtahids_, _Ahl Hadis_, and other non-Mokallids had
had no regard for the four schools of Mohammadan religious
jurisprudence, or the Common Law.

[Sidenote: Sura XLVII, 16, and Sura XLVII, 4 and 5.]

Sura XLVIII, 16, is not generally quoted by the canonical legists in
support of their theory of Jehad, but by some few. It is not in the
shape of a command or injunction; it is in a prophetical tone:--

"Say to those Arabs of the desert who stayed behind, Ye shall be called
forth against a people of mighty valour; Ye shall do battle with them,
or they shall submit (_Yoslemoon_)[321]...."

The verses 4 and 5 of Sura XLVII, like all other verses on the subject,
appertain to the wars of defence, and no one has ever quoted them for
wars of aggression. These verses have already been quoted at page 85.
The abolition of the future slavery as enjoined in the 5th verse has
been treated separately in Appendix B. The Arabs, like other barbarous
nations round them, used either to kill the prisoners of war or to
enslave them; but this injunction of the Koran abolished both of these
barbarous practices. The prisoners henceforward were neither to be
killed nor enslaved, but were to be set at liberty with or without
ransom.

[Footnote 289: Ata, a learned legist of Mecca, who flourished at the end
of the first century of the Hegira, and held a high rank there as a
juris-consult, (_vide_ para. 112) held, that Jihad was only incumbent on
the Companions of the Prophet, and was not binding on any one else after
them. See para. 112, and _Tafsir Majma-ul-Bayan_ by Tabrasee under Sura
II. 212.]

[Footnote 290: The _Hedaya_ or Guide; or, A Commentary on the Mussulman
Laws, translated by Charles Hamilton; Vol. II, Book IX, Ch. I, page 140
London, MDCCXCI.]

[Footnote 291: The _Hedaya_ or Guide; or, A Commentary on the Mussulman
Laws, translated by Charles Hamilton; Vol. II, Book IX, Ch. I, page
141.]

[Footnote 292: "Arab _Kattal_; meaning war in its _operation_, such as
_fighting_, _slaying_," &c.]

[Footnote 293: The _Hedaya_, Vol. II, 141.]

[Footnote 294: Sura II, 187.]

[Footnote 295: The Hedaya, with its commentary called Kifaya, Vol. II,
p. 708. Calcutta Medical Press, 1834.

As a general rule the Mohammadan authors do not refer to the verses of
the Koran by their number. They generally quote the first sentence, or
even a portion of it. The No. of verses are mine. I have followed
Fluegel and Rodwell's numbers of verses in their editions and
translations of the Koran.]

[Footnote 296: Kifaya as before.]

[Footnote 297: _Binayah_, a commentary of the _Hedaya_, by Ainee. Vol.
II, Part II, page 789.]

[Footnote 298: Part. III, page 219.]

[Footnote 299: _Tuhfatul Muhtaj fi Sharah-al-Minhaj_, Part IV, page
137.]

[Footnote 300: _Insan-ul-Oyoon_, Part II, pp. 289, 291. Chapter on
"Campaign."]

[Footnote 301: Sura IX, 5 and 12. These verses have been discussed at
pages 51-55.]

[Footnote 302: "The Jihad will last till the day of the Resurrection."

"I have been enjoined to fight the people until they confess there is no
god but the God." For these traditions see the next para.]

[Footnote 303: _Vide_ Ainee's Commentary of the _Hedaya_, Vol. II, Part
II, p. 790.]

[Footnote 304: _Vide_ Ainee's Commentary of the _Hedaya_, Vol. II, Part
II, p. 798.]

[Footnote 305: _Vide_ Kazee Budrudeen Mahmood bin Ahmed Ainee's (who
died in 855 A.H.) Commentary on the _Hedaya_ called _Binayah_, and
generally known by the name of Ainee, Vol. II, pp. 789-90, "Book of
Institute."]

[Footnote 306: The Modern Egyptians, by Edward William Lane; Vol. I, p.
117, _note_: fifth edition, London, 1871.]

[Footnote 307: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 251-252.]

[Footnote 308: The Early Caliphate and Rise of Islam, being the Rede
Lecture for 1881, delivered before the University of Cambridge by Sir
William Muir, K.C.S.I., LL.D., page 5, London, 1881.]

[Footnote 309: The History and Conquests of the Saracens, by Edward. A.
Freeman, D.C.L., LL.D., pp. 41-42; London, 1877.]

[Footnote 310: Christianity and Islam; The Bible and the Koran; by the
Rev. W.R.W. Stephens, London, 1877, pp. 98-99.]

[Footnote 311: _Vide_ paras. 17, 29, 126.]

[Footnote 312: Mohammed and Mohammedanism. Lectures delivered at the
Royal Institution of Great Britain in February and March 1874, by R.
Bosworth Smith, M.A., Second Edition, page 137; London, 1876.]

[Footnote 313: The Koran, by George Sale. The "_Chandos Classics_." The
Preliminary Discourse, Section II, pp. 37-38.]

[Footnote 314: London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1876, pp. 46-54.]

[Footnote 315: A Comprehensive Commentary on the Quran; comprising
Sale's Translation and Preliminary Discourse, with additional Notes and
Emendations, by the Revd. E.M. Wherry, M.A., page 220; London: Truebner &
Co., 1882.]

[Footnote 316: An Introduction to the Critical Study and Knowledge of
the Holy Scripture, by Thomas Hartwell Horne, Esq., M.A. Vol. II, page
524; London. 1828.]

[Footnote 317: Commentary on the Quran by the Revd. Wherry, page 358.]

[Footnote 318: Notes on Muhammadanism; being outlines of the Religious
System of Islam, by the Revd. T.P. Hughes, M.R.A.S., C.M.S., Missionary
to the Afghans, page 206; Second Edition, 1877.]

[Footnote 319: The Nineteenth Century; London, December 1877, page 832.]

[Footnote 320: This subject has been fully treated in my "The Proposed
Political, Legal, and Social Reforms in Moslem States," pp. 22-25:
Bombay Education Society Press, 1883.]

[Footnote 321: Sir W. Muir, with other European translators of the
Koran, translates the word "they shall profess Islam" (The Life of
Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 39, _footnote_). It ought to be translated "they
shall submit." There is a difference of opinion among the commentators
and canonical legists in this word. Some translate the word _Yoslemoon_
"shall profess Islam," and others "shall submit." This difference in the
interpretation of the same word is merely of a sectarian nature, each
party wishing to serve their own purpose. Those legists who held that
the polytheists and idolaters may either be fought against or be
submitted to the authority of Islam by being tributaries, took the word
in its proper sense of submission. Those who held that "the people of
the Book" ought only to be made tributaries, while all other idolaters
and polytheists should be compelled either to perish or to embrace
Islam, interpret the word technically to mean the religion of Islam. But
as the verse is not a legal command, we condemn at once the casuistic
sophistry of the legists.]




Appendix A

ON THE WORD "JIHAD" AS OCCURRING IN THE KORAN AND WRONGLY TRANSLATED
"WARFARE."


[Sidenote: Jihad or Jihd does not mean war or crusade.]

1. The popular word _Jihad_ or _Jihd_, occurring in several passages of
the Koran, and generally construed by Christians and Moslems alike as
meaning hostility or the waging of war against infidels, does not
classically or literally signify war, warfare, hostility or fighting,
and is never used in such a sense in the Koran. The Arabic terms for
warfare or fighting are _Harab_ and _Kital_.

[Sidenote: Classical meaning of Jihad, &c.]

2. The words _Jahada_, and _Jahada_ signify that a person strove,
laboured or toiled; exerted himself or his power, or efforts, or
endeavours, or ability employed himself vigorously, diligently,
studiously, sedulously, earnestly or with energy; was diligent or
studious, took pains or extraordinary pains[322]; for example, the term
_Jahada fil-amr_ signifies that a person did his utmost or used his
utmost powers, or efforts, or endeavours, or ability in prosecuting an
affair.[323] The infinitive noun _Jihadan_ also means difficulty or
embarrassment, distress, affliction, trouble, inconvenience, fatigue, or
weariness.[324] Jauharce, a lexicologist of great repute, whose work is
confined to classical terms and their significations, says in his Sihah
that _Jahada fi Sabeelillah_ or _Mojahadatan_ and _Jihadan_ and also
_Ajtahada_ and _Tajahada_ mean expending power and effort. Fayoomee,
author of _Misbahel Moneer_, which contains a very large collection of
classical words and phrases of frequent occurrence, also says that
_Jahada fi Sabeelillah Jihadan_ and _Ajtahada fil Amr_ mean he expended
his utmost efforts and power in seeking to attain an object.

[Sidenote: Post-classical or technical meaning of Jihad.]

3. It is only a post-classical and technical meaning of _Jihad_ to use
the word as signifying fighting against an enemy. Mr. Lane says,
"_Jahada_ came to be used by the Moslems to signify generally _he
fought_, _warred_ or waged war against _unbelievers_ and _the like_."
This signification is now given by those lexicologists who do not
restrict themselves to the definition of classical terms or
significations, like the author of Kamoos. Mr. Lane, the celebrated
author of _Maddool Kamoos_ an Arabic-English lexicologist, clearly shows
that the definition of _Jihad_, as the act of waging war, is only of
Moslem origin and is not classical. And I will show in sequence that the
Moslem usage of _Jihad_, as signifying the waging of war, is a
post-Koranic usage, and that in the Koran it is used classically and
literally in its natural sense.

[Sidenote: The Classical tongue and Arabian poets.]

4. What is called the classical language of Arabia or the _loghat_, and
is an authority for the genuineness of the Arabic terms and their
significations, is the language which was spoken throughout the whole of
the Peninsula previous to the appearance of Mohammad. After the death of
Mohammad the language was rapidly corrupted by the introduction of
foreign words. This was doubtless owing to the great extension of the
Mohammadan power at this period. The classical poets are those who died
before these great conquests were effected, and are the most reliable
authorities for Arabic words and their significations, and they are
called _Jahili_. Next to the classical poets are the post-classical, or
_Mokhadrams_, _Islami_ and _Mowallads_. Mokhadram is a poet who lived
partly before and partly after Mohammad, and who did not embrace
Islamism during the life of the Prophet. The Islami poets are the
Mohammadan poets of the first and second centuries of the Hejira, and
Mowallads, the poets of the fourth rank, followed the Islamis. The
earliest classical poets date only a century before the birth of
Mohammad, and the latest, about a century after his death. The period of
the Islami poets is the first and second centuries,--_i.e._, those who
lived after the first corruption of the Arabic language, but before the
corruption had become extensive.

The Mowallads co-existed with the general and rapid corruption of the
language from the beginning or middle of the second century.

[Sidenote: The conjugation and declension of _Jahd_ and _Jihad_]

5. The words _Jahd_ and _Jihad_ and their derivations, amounting to
fourteen in number, occur in the following passages in the Koran:--

     1. "Jahada"           Chapter xxix, 5; ix, 19.
     2. "Jahadaka"            Do.  xxxi, 14, xxix, 7.
     3. "Jahadoo"             Do.  ii, 215; viii, 73, 75,
                                     76; ix, 16, 20, 89;
                                     xlix, 15; iii, 136;
                                     xvi, 111; xxix, 69.
     4. "Yojahido"            Do.  xxix, 5.
     5. "Yojahidoona"         Do.  v, 59.
     6. "Yojahidoo"           Do.  ix, 44, 82.
     7. "Tojahidoona"         Do.  lxi, 11.
     8. "Jihad"               Do.  xxv, 54; xxii, 77;
                                     ix, 24; lx, 1.
     8.* "Jahd"               Do.  v, 58; vi, 109;
                                     xvi, 40; xxiv, 52;
                                     xxxv, 40.
     9.* "Johd"               Do   ix, 80.
     10. "Jahid"              Do.  ix, 74; lxvi, 9.
     11. "Jahidhoom"          Do.  xxv, 54.
     12. "Mojahidina"         Do.  iv, 97; bis. xlvii, 33.
     13. "Mojahidoona"        Do.  iv, 97.
     14. "Jahidoo"            Do.  v, 39; ix, 41, 87; xxii, 77.

[Sidenote: The number of instances in which they occur in the Koran.]

6. There are altogether 36 verses in the Koran containing the words
noted above, in the following chapters and verses:--

         Chapter ii, 215.
            Do.  iii, 136.
            Do.  iv, 97.
            Do.  v, 39, 58, 59.
            Do.  vi, 109.
            Do.  viii, 73, 75, 76.
            Do.  ix, 16, 19, 20, 24, 41, 44, 74, 80, 82, 87, 89.
            Do.  xvi, 40, 111.
            Do.  xxii, 77.
            Do.  xxiv, 52.
            Do.  xxv, 54.
            Do.  xxix, 5, 7, 69.
            Do.  xxxi, 14.
            Do.  xxxv, 40.
            Do.  xlvii, 33.
            Do.  xlix, 15.
            Do.  xl, 1.
            Do.  xli, 11.
            Do.  xlvi, 9.

[Sidenote: In what sense they are used in the Koran.]

7. Out of the above, the verses containing the words "Jahd" and
"Johd,"--_i.e._, v, 58; vi, 109; xvi, 40; xxiv, 52; xxxv, 40; and ix,
80, marked *, are altogether out of dispute, as in all the former
passages, except the last one, its obvious meaning is _most_ or _utmost_
solemn oaths,[325] or most _energetic_ oaths or _strongest_ or most
forcible oaths,[326] and the latter signifies small provisions upon
which a man possessing a little property can live with difficulty. The
rest are of two kinds--_first_, the verses occurring in the Meccan
Suras. As then the Moslems had not resorted to arms in their defence,
though suffering from persecutions, Mohammadan commentators and jurists
and Christian writers are unanimous in construing _Jihad_ in its natural
sense of exertion, effort, energy, and painstaking. Secondly, the verses
containing the same words occurring in the Medina Suras, which were
revealed or published when the Moslems had taken arms in their defence.
As regards this period, the words are considered to have an entirely new
and an altogether fortuitous meaning, _viz._, a religious war of
aggression. Even some verses of this period are rendered by Mohammadans
and Christians in the literal sense of the word.

[Sidenote: Conventional significations of _Jihad_.]

8. I fully admit that in the post-classical language of the
Arabs,--_i.e._, that in use subsequent to the time of Mohammad, when the
language was rapidly corrupted, the word "Jihad" was used to signify
"warfare" or fighting, but this was in a military sense. Since that
period the word has come to be used as meaning the waging of a war or a
crusade only in military tactics, and more recently it found its way in
the same sense into the Mohammadan law-books and lexicons of later
dates. But the subsequent corrupt or post-classical language cannot be
accepted as a final or even a satisfactory authority upon the point.

     "It was decided by common consent," says Mr. Edward William Lane,
     in his Arabic-English Lexicon (Preface, pp. viii and ix), "that no
     poet, nor any other person, should be taken as an absolute and
     unquestionable authority with respect to the words or their
     significations, the grammar, or the prosody of the classical
     language, unless he were one who had died before the promulgation
     of El-Islam, or who had lived partly before and partly after that
