It is true that slavery existed under Pagan civilization, but there it
represented a phase of social development, while Christian slavery stood
for a deliberate retrogression in social life. It was Seneca who said,
"Live gently and kindly with your slave, and admit him to conversation
with you, to council with you, and to share in your meals."

Think of what would have occurred if one of our philosophers had
admonished a slave-holding Christian in the above manner.

"We are apt to think of the ancient slave as being identical with the
miserable and degraded being that disgraced Christian countries less
than a century ago. This, however, is far from the truth. The Roman
slave did not, of necessity, lack education. Slaves were to be found who
were doctors, writers, poets, philosophers, and moralists. Plautus,
Phaedrus, Terence, Epictetus, were slaves. Slaves were the intimates of
men of all stations of life, even the emperor. Certainly, it never
dawned on the Roman mind to prohibit education to the slave. That was
left for the Christian world, and almost within our own time." (For a
good account of the close association of Christianity with slavery see,
"_Christianity, Slavery, and Labor," Chapman Cohen._)

In Rome, the slave kept his individuality, and outwardly there was no
distinction in color and clothing; there was very little sound barrier
between the slave and the freeman. The slave attended the same games as
the freeman, participated in the affairs of the municipality, and
attended the same college. The ancients kept the bodies of their slaves
in bondage, but they placed no restraint upon the mind and no check upon
his education. It has even been said that the slave class of antiquity
really corresponded to our free laboring class. It is also well known
that a well-conducted slave, by his own earnings, was able to purchase
his freedom in the course of a few years.

There can be no comparison, therefore, between Pagan and Christian
slavery, except to the detriment of the latter. The Christian slave
trade represents one of the most frightful and systematic brutalities
the world has ever known. The contrast between the Pagan and Christian
slavery is even more marked when the dependence of the Christian slave
upon the good nature of his master is considered. Compare this with the
decrees of the Roman emperors:

"Masters were prohibited sending their slaves into the arena without a
judicial sentence. Claudius punished as a murderer any master who killed
his slave. Nero appointed judges to hear the complaints of slaves as to
ill-treatment or insufficient feeding. Domitian forbade the mutilation
of slaves; Hadrian forbade the selling of slaves to gladiators,
destroyed private prisons for them, and ordered that they who were
proved to have ill-treated their slaves be forced to sell them.
Caracalla forbade the selling of children into slavery."

"All that need be added to this is that the later Christian slavery
represented a distinct retrogression, deliberately revived from motives
of sheer cupidity, and accompanied by more revolting features than the
slavery of ancient times." (_Chapman Cohen._)

In the "History of Ethics Within Organized Christianity" is recorded,
"The Church, as such, never contemplated doing away with slavery as
such, even though Stoicism had denounced it as 'Contra Mundum.' Nowhere
does the early Church condemn slavery as an institution. Kindness to the
slave is frequently recommended, but this was done quite as forcibly,
and upon a much broader ground by the pagan writers. It would be indeed
nearer the truth to say that the Christians who wrote in favor of the
mitigation of the lot of the slave were far more indebted to pagans than
to Christian influence."

The Church itself owned many slaves, advised its adherents to will their
slaves to her, and was the last to liberate the slaves which she owned.
Yet, the apologists for the Church would have us believe that she was
instrumental in the destruction of slavery, when it is a fact that there
is nowhere a clear condemnation of slavery on the part of the Church.

H. C. Lea in his "Studies of the Church History" says, "The Church held
many slaves, and while their treatment was in general sufficiently
humane to cause the number to grow by voluntary accretions, yet it had
no scruple to assert vigorously their claim to ownership. When the Papal
Church granted a slave to a monastery, the dread anathema, involving
eternal perdition, was pronounced against anyone daring to interfere
with the gift; and those who were appointed to take charge of the lands
and farms of the Church, were especially instructed that it was part of
their duty to pursue and recapture fugitive bondsmen."

It must not be assumed that the Catholic Church was the only
ecclesiastical body to condone slavery, or that it was only the traffic
in black slaves that flourished a few hundred years ago.

"In the seventeenth century, thousands of Irish men, women and children,
were seized by the order or under the license of the English government,
and sold as slaves for use in the West Indies. In the Calendar of State
Papers, under various dates, between 1653-1656, the following entries
occur: 'For a license to Sir John Clotworthy to transport to America 500
natural Irishmen.' A slave dealer, named Schlick, is granted a license
to take 400 children from Ireland for New England, and Virginia. Later,
100 Irish girls and a like number of youths are sold to the planters in
Jamaica.

"Had the Church been against slavery it would have branded it as a
wrong, and have set the example of liberating its own slaves. It did
neither. Nay, the Church not only held slaves itself, not only protected
others who held slaves, but it thundered against all who should despoil
its property by selling or liberating slaves belonging to the Church.
The whole history of the Christian Church shows that it has never felt
itself called upon to fight any sound institution, no matter what its
character, so long as it favored the Church. Slavery and serfdom, war,
piracy, child labor, have all been in turn sanctioned." (_Chapman Cohen:
"Christianity, Slavery, and Labor."_)

In Abyssinia, the influence of Christianity has been dominant for a
longer period of time than anywhere else in the world. The population of
Abyssinia is at least ten million, and of this population not less than
one-fifth, probably more, are slaves. In 1929, Lady Kathleen Simon
published her book entitled, "Slavery," dealing with the slave trade of
the world. In this work it is pointed out that slave-owning is an
integral part of the religion of the country, and that opposition to the
abolition of slavery comes principally from the priesthood which
considers itself the guardian of the Mosaic law, and regards slavery as
an institution ordered by Jehovah.

Slave raids are constant in this country, and are accompanied by the
greatest brutality and cruelty. Vast areas are depopulated by these
raids and even at this date, gangs of slaves may be seen by travelers,
with the dead and dying bodies of those that have fallen strewn along
the roadside. "The slave trade in Abyssinia is open, its horrors are
well known, and it is supported by the Christian Church of the country.
Such is slavery in the most Christian country in the world today, the
country which has the longest Christian history of any nation in the
world. Its existence helps us to realize the value of the statement that
the power of Christianity in the world destroyed the slave trade.
Slavery flourishes in the oldest of Christian countries in the world,
backed up by the Church, the Old Bible, and the New Testament. It has
all the horrors, all the brutalities, all the degradations of the slave
trade at its worst. Such is Christian Abyssinia, and such, but for the
saving grace of secular civilization, would be the rest of the world."
(_Chapman Cohen._)

The slave system that arose in Christian times, created by and continued
by Christians in the most Christian of countries, provides the final and
unanswerable indictment of the Christian Church.

Slavery was unknown to the Africans until it was introduced by the
Christian Portuguese. In 1517 the Spaniards began to ship negro slaves
to Hispaniola, Cuba, Jamaica, and Porto Rica. John Hawkins was the first
Englishman of note to engage in the traffic, and Queen Elizabeth loaned
this virtuous and pious gentleman the ship _Jesus_. English companies
were licensed to engage in this trade and during the reign of William
and Mary it was thrown open to all.

Between 1680 and 1700, it has been said that 140,000 Negroes were
imported by the English-African Company, and about 160,000 more by
private traders. Between 1700 and 1786, as many as 610,000 were
transported to Jamaica alone. In the hundred years ending 1776, the
English carried into the Spanish, French, and English Colonies three
million slaves.

The cruelty experienced by these human cargoes on their transportation
defies description. The chaining, the branding, the mutilation, the
close quarters, the deaths by suffocation and disease, are a sterling
example of man's inhumanity to man when his conscience is relieved by
finding support of his inhumane actions sanctioned in that most holy of
holies, the Bible. Exclusive of the slaves who died before leaving
Africa, not more than fifty out of a hundred lived to work on the
plantations. Ingram's "History of Slavery" calculates that although
between 1690 and 1820 no less than 800,000 Negroes had been imported to
Jamaica, yet, at the latter date, only 340,000 were on the island.

Slavery in America received the same sanction by the religionists which
it received on the continent. George Whitefield, the great Methodist
preacher, was an earnest supporter of slavery. When the importation of
slaves finally ceased the states began the new industry of breeding
slaves; the leading state for this breeding, and the one which contained
the largest number of stud farms, was Virginia. Lord Macaulay, in a
speech delivered before the House of Commons on February 26, 1845, said:
"The slave states of the Union are of two classes, the breeding states,
where the human beast of burden increases, and multiplies, and becomes
strong for labor; and the sugar and cotton states to which these beasts
of burden are sent to be worked to death. Bad enough it is that
civilized man should sail to an uncivilized quarter of the world where
slavery existed, should buy wretched barbarians, and should carry them
away to labor in a distant land; bad enough! But that a civilized man, a
baptized man, a man proud of being a citizen of a free state, a man
frequenting a Christian Church, should breed slaves for exportation, and
if the whole horrible truth must be told, should even beget slaves for
exportation, should see children, sometimes his own children, gambolling
from infancy, should watch their growth, should become familiar with
their faces, and should sell them for $400 or $500 a head, and send them
to lead in a remote country a life which is a lingering death, a life
about which the best thing that can be said is that it is sure to be
short; this does, I own, excite a horror exceeding even the horror
excited by that slave trade which is the curse of the African coast. And
mark, I am speaking of a trade as regular as the trade in pigs between
Dublin and Liverpool, or as the trade in coals between the Tyne and the
Thames."

It has been estimated that the members and ministers of the Orthodox
churches in the South owned no less than 660,000 slaves.

Thomas Paine, in 1775, when he wrote his article on "Justice and
Humanity," was the first to demand emancipation in a lucid manner. The
campaign for liberation of the slaves was therefore inaugurated by a
freethinker, and triumphantly closed by another freethinker, Abraham
Lincoln. In this manner did the Church abolish slavery. With
characteristic disregard for the truth, the religionists have laid claim
to Lincoln, which claim has been amply refuted; but we are still
awaiting the Church's claim to Paine as one of her devotees.

"And, truly, the case against Christianity is plain and damning. Never,
during the whole of its history has it spoken in a clear voice against
slavery; always, as we have seen, its chief supporters have been
pronounced believers. They have cited religious teaching in its defence,
they have used all the power of the Church for its maintenance.
Naturally, in a world in which the vast majority are professing
Christians, believers are to be found on the side of humanity and
justice. But to that the reply is plain. Men are human before they are
Christians; both history and experience point to the constant lesson of
the many cases in which the claims of a developing humanity override
those of an inculcated religious teaching.

"But the damning fact against Christianity is, not that it found slavery
here when it arrived, and accepted it as a settled institution, not even
that it is plainly taught in its 'sacred' books, but, that it
deliberately created a new form of slavery, and for hundreds of years
invested it with a brutality greater than that which existed centuries
before. A religion which could tolerate this slavery, argue for it, and
fight for it, cannot by any stretch of reasoning be credited with an
influence in forwarding emancipation. Christianity no more abolished
slavery than it abolished witchcraft, the belief in demonism, or
punishment for heresy. It was the growing moral and social sense of
mankind that compelled Christians and Christianity to give up these and
other things." (_C. Cohen: "Christianity, Slavery, and Labor."_)




CHAPTER XVI

CHRISTIANITY AND LABOR

    _The mortgage which the peasant has on heavenly property guarantees
    the mortgage of the bourgeois on the farms._

    MARX.

    _The same Christ, the same Buddha, the same Isaiah, can stand at
    once for capitalism and communism, for liberty and slavery, for
    peace and war, for whatever opposed or clashing ideals you will. For
    the life and the power of a church is in the persistent identity of
    its symbols and properties. Meanings change anyhow, but things
    endure. The rock upon which a church is founded is not the word of
    God; the rock upon which a church is founded is the wealth of men._

    HORACE M. KALLEN, "Why Religion?"



During the Middle Ages the heads of the Church exercised all the rights
of a feudal lord, and were even more tenacious of their privileges. The
serfs were prohibited from migrating from one part of the country to
another. The daughter of a serf could not marry without the consent of
the lord, who frequently demanded payment for permission; or, worse
still, the infamous "Right of the First Night." The serf was bonded in a
hundred different ways, and it is significant of the esteem in which the
Church was held that in every peasant revolt which occurred, there was
always a direct attack on the Church.

Professor Thorold Rogers, writing of the twelfth century, gives the
following picture of the poorer classes:

"The houses of these villagers were mean and dirty. Brickmaking was a
lost art, stone was found only in a few places. The wood fire was on a
hob of clay. Chimneys were unknown, except in castles and manor houses,
and the smoke escaped through the door or whatever other aperture it
could reach. The floor of the homestead was filthy enough, but the
surroundings were filthier still. Close by the door stood the mixen, a
collection of every abomination--streams from which, in rainy weather,
fertilized the lower meadows, generally the lord's pasture, and polluted
the stream. The house of the peasant cottager was poorer still. Most of
them were probably built of posts wattled and plastered with clay or
mud, with an upper storey of poles reached by a ladder."

"What the lord took he held by right of force; what the Church had it
held by force of cunning. And as, in the long run, the cunning of the
Church was more powerful than the force of the robber-lord, the
priesthood grew in riches until its wealth became a threat to the whole
of the community. In England, in the thirteenth century, the clergy
numbered one in fifty-two of the population, and the possessions of the
Church included a third of the land of England. No opportunity was lost
by the Church to drain money from the people whether they were rich or
poor. The trade done in candles, and sales of indulgences brought in
large sums of money, and there were continuous disputes between the
clergy and the king and the Pope as to the divisions of the spoil. The
picture of the Church watching over the poor, sheltering them from
wrong, tending them in sickness, and relieving them in their poverty
will not do. It is totally without historic foundation. When the poor
revolted, and apart from the great revolts, there were many small and
local outbreaks, the anger of the poor was directed as much against the
Church as it was against the nobles." (_C. Cohen: "Christianity,
Slavery, and Labor."_)

When the downtrodden masses of Spain, Mexico, and Russia revolted
against the tyranny which had held them in the slough of medieval
degradation, they likewise, in recent times, proved that they realized
that their submission was as much caused by the Church, allied as it is
with the state, as by the government itself.

The Church did attend the sick, but its trade was in the miracle cures
and prayers, and so they very much resembled men hawking their own
goods, and attending to their own business. And there is the plain,
historic fact, that in defense of its miracle cures it did what it could
to obstruct the growth of both medical and sanitary science. It did give
alms but these constituted but a small part of what it had previously
taken.

Through all the changes of the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth
centuries, it is impossible to detect anxiety on the part of the
Churches, Roman Catholic or Protestant, to better the status of, or
improve the condition of, the working classes. Whatever improvements may
have come about, and they were few enough, came independently of
Christianity, organized or unorganized. Controversies about religious
matters might, and did, grow more acute; controversies about bettering
the position of the working classes only began with the breaking down of
Christianity. And when, as in Germany, there occurred a peasants'
revolt, and the peasants appealed to Luther for assistance, he wrote,
after exhorting the peasants to resignation, to the nobles:

"A rebel is outlawed of God and Kaiser, therefore who can and will first
slaughter such a man does right well, since upon such a common rebel
every man is alike the judge and executioner. Therefore, who can shall
openly or secretly smite, slaughter and stab, and hold that there is
