clothing, awaking and discovering that only a few bushes were
interposed between him and a group of young maidens, whom, by
their deportment and attire, he discovered to be not mere peasant
girls, but of a higher class.  Sadly needing help, how could he
yet venture, naked as he was, to discover himself and make his
wants known?  It certainly was a case worthy of the interposition
of his patron goddess Minerva, who never failed him at a crisis.
Breaking off a leafy branch from a tree, he held it before him
and stepped out from the thicket.  The virgins, at sight of him,
fled in all directions, Nausicaa alone excepted, for Minerva
aided and endowed her with courage and discernment.  Ulysses,
standing respectfully aloof, told his sad case, and besought the
fair object (whether queen or goddess he professed he knew not)
for food and clothing.  The princess replied courteously,
promising present relief and her father's hospitality when he
should become acquainted with the facts.  She called back her
scattered maidens, chiding their alarm, and reminding them that
the Phaeacians had no enemies to fear.  This man, she told them,
was an unhappy wanderer, whom it was a duty to cherish, for the
poor and stranger are from Jove.  She bade them bring food and
clothing, for some of her brothers' garments were among the
contents of the wagon.  When this was done, and Ulysses, retiring
to a sheltered place, had washed his body free from the sea-foam,
clothed and refreshed himself with food, Pallas dilated his form
and diffused grace over his ample chest and manly brows.

The princess, seeing him, was filled with admiration, and
scrupled not to say to her damsels that she wished the gods would
send her such a husband.  To Ulysses she recommended that he
should repair to the city, following herself and train so far as
the way lay through the fields; but when they should approach the
city she desired that he would no longer be seen in her company,
for she feared the remarks which rude and vulgar people might
make on seeing her return accompanied by such a gallant stranger;
to avoid which she directed him to stop at a grove adjoining the
city, in which were a farm and garden belonging to the king.
After allowing time for the princess and her companions to reach
the city, he was then to pursue his way thither, and would be
easily guided by any he might meet to the royal abode.

Ulysses obeyed the directions, and in due time proceeded to the
city, on approaching which he met a young woman bearing a pitcher
forth for water.  It was Minerva, who had assumed that form.
Ulysses accosted her, and desired to be directed to the palace of
Alcinous the king.  The maiden replied respectfully, offering to
be his guide; for the palace, she informed him, stood near her
father's dwelling.  Under the guidance of the goddess, and by her
power enveloped in a cloud which shielded him from observation,
Ulysses passed among the busy crowd, and with wonder observed
their harbor, their ships, their forum (the resort of heroes),
and their battlements, till they came to the palace, where the
goddess, having first given him some information of the country,
king, and people he was about to meet, left him.  Ulysses, before
entering the courtyard of the palace, stood and surveyed the
scene.  Its splendor astonished him.  Brazen walls stretched from
the entrance to the interior house, of which the doors were gold,
the door-posts silver, the lintels silver ornamented with gold.
On either side were figures of mastiffs wrought in gold and
silver, standing in rows as if to guard the approach.  Along the
walls were seats spread through all their length with mantles of
finest texture, the work of Phaeacian maidens.  On these seats
the princes sat and feasted, while golden statues of graceful
youths held in their hands lighted torches, which shed radiance
over the scene.  Full fifty female menials served in household
offices, some employed to grind the corn, others to wind off the
purple wool or ply the loom.  For the Phaeacian women as far
exceeded all other women in household arts as the mariners of
that country did the rest of mankind in the management of ships.
Without the court a spacious garden lay, in which grew many a
lofty tree, pomegranate, pear, apple, fig, and olive.  Neither
winter's cold nor summer's drought arrested their growth, but
they flourished in constant succession, some budding while others
were maturing.  The vineyard was equally prolific.  In one
quarter you might see the vines, some in blossom, some loaded
with ripe grapes, and in another observe the vintagers treading
the wine-press.  On the garden's borders flowers of every hue
bloomed all the year round, arranged with neatest art.  In the
midst two fountains poured forth their waters, one flowing by
artificial channels over all the garden, the other conducted
through the courtyard of the palace, whence every citizen might
draw his supplies.

Ulysses stood gazing in admiration, unobserved himself, for the
cloud which Minerva spread around him still shielded him.  At
length, having sufficiently observed the scene, he advanced with
rapid step into the hall where the chiefs and senators were
assembled, pouring libation to Mercury, whose worship followed
the evening meal.  Just then Minerva dissolved the cloud and
disclosed him to the assembled chiefs.  Advancing toward the
queen, he knelt at her feet and implored her favor and assistance
to enable him to return to his native country.  Then withdrawing,
he seated himself in the manner of suppliants, at the hearth-
side.

For a time none spoke.  At last an aged statesman, addressing the
king, said, "It is not fit that a stranger who asks our
hospitality should be kept waiting in suppliant guise, none
welcoming him.  Let him therefore be led to a seat among us and
supplied with food and wine."  At these words the king rising
gave his hand to Ulysses and led him to a seat, displacing thence
his own son to make room for the stranger.  Food and wine were
set before him and he ate and refreshed himself.

The king then dismissed his guests, notifying them that the next
day he would call them to council to consider what had best be
done for the stranger.

When the guests had departed and Ulysses was left alone with the
king and queen, the queen asked him who he was and whence he
came, and (recognizing the clothes which he wore as those which
her maidens and herself had made) from whom he received his
garments.  He told them of his residence in Calypso's isle and
his departure thence; of the wreck of his raft, his escape by
swimming, and of the relief afforded by the princess.  The
parents heard approvingly, and the king promised to furnish him a
ship in which he might return to his own land.

The next day the assembled chiefs confirmed the promise of the
king.  A bark was prepared and a crew of stout rowers selected,
and all betook themselves to the palace, where a bounteous repast
was provided.  After the feast the king proposed that the young
men should show their guest their proficiency in manly sports,
and all went forth to the arena for games of running, wrestling,
and other exercises.  After all had done their best, Ulysses
being challenged to show what he could do, at first declined, but
being taunted by one of the youths, seized a quoit of weight far
heavier than any the Phaeacians had thrown, and sent it farther
than the utmost throw of theirs.  All were astonished, and viewed
their guest with greatly increased respect.

After the games they returned to the hall, and the herald led in
Demodocus, the blind bard,

  "Dear to the Muse,
  Who yet appointed him both good and ill,
  Took from him sight, but gave him strains divine."

He took for his theme the wooden horse, by means of which the
Greeks found entrance into Troy.  Apollo inspired him, and he
sang so feelingly of the terrors and the exploits of that
eventful time that all were delighted, but Ulysses was moved to
tears.  Observing which, Alcinous, when the song was done,
demanded of him why at the mention of troy his sorrows awaked.
Had he lost there a father or brother, or any dear friend?
Ulysses in reply announced himself by his true name, and at their
request, recounted the adventures which had befallen him since
his departure from Troy.  This narrative raised the sympathy and
admiration of the Phaeacians for their guest to the highest
pitch.  The king proposed that each chief should present him with
a gift, himself setting the example.  They obeyed, and vied with
one another in loading the illustrious stranger with costly
gifts.

The next day Ulysses set sail in the Phaeacian vessel, and in a
short time arrived safe at Ithaca, his own island.  When the
vessel touched the strand he was asleep.  The mariners, without
waking him, carried him on shore, and landed with him the chest
containing his presents, and then sailed away.

But Neptune was displeased at the conduct of the Phaeacians in
thus rescuing Ulysses from his hands.  In revenge, on the return
of the vessel to port, he transformed it into a rock, right
opposite the mouth of the harbor.

Homer's description of the ships of the Phaeacians has been
thought to look like an anticipation of the wonders of modern
steam navigation.  Alcinous says to Ulysses,

  "Say from what city, from what regions tossed,
  And what inhabitants those regions boast?
  So shalt thou quickly reach the realm assigned,
  In wondrous ships, self-moved, instinct with mind;
  No helm secures their course, no pilot guides;
  Like man intelligent they plough the tides,
  Conscious of every coast and every bay
  That lies beneath the sun's all-seeing ray."
  Odyssey, Book VIII

Lord Carlisle, in his Diary in the Turkish and Greek Waters, thus
speaks of Corfu, which he considers to be the ancient Phaeacian
island:

"The sites explain the Odyssey.  The temple of the sea-god could
not have been more fitly placed, upon a grassy platform of the
most elastic turf, on the brow of a crag commanding harbor, and
channel, and ocean.  Just at the entrance of the inner harbor
there is a picturesque rock with a small convent perched atop it,
which by one legend is the transformed pinnace of Ulysses.

"Almost the only river in the island is just at the proper
distance from the probable site of the city and palace of the
king, to justify the princess Nausicaa having had resort to her
chariot and to luncheon when she went with the maidens of the
court to wash their garments."


FATE OF THE SUITORS

It was now twenty years that Ulysses had been away from Ithaca,
and when he awoke he did not recognize his native land.  But
Minerva, appearing to him in the form of a young shepherd,
informed him where he was, and told him the state of things at
his palace.  More than a hundred nobles of Ithaca and of the
neighboring islands had been for years suing for the hand of
Penelope, his wife, imagining him dead, and lording it over his
palace and people, as if they were owners of both.  That he might
be able to take vengeance upon them, it was important that he
should not be recognized.  Minerva accordingly metamorphosed him
into an unsightly beggar, and as such he was kindly received by
Eumaeus, the swine-herd, a faithful servant of his house.

Telemachus, his son, was absent in quest of his father.  He had
gone to the courts of the other kings, who had returned from the
Trojan expedition.  While on the search, he received counsel from
Minerva to return home.  Arriving at Ithaca, he sought Eumaeus to
learn something of the state of affairs at the palace before
presenting himself among the suitors.  Finding a stranger with
Eumaeus, he treated him courteously, though in the garb of a
beggar, and promised him assistance.  Eumaeus was sent to the
palace to inform Penelope privately of her son's arrival, for
caution was necessary with regard to the suitors, who, as
Telemachus had learned, were plotting to intercept and kill him.
When Eumaeus was gone, Minerva presented herself to Ulysses, and
directed him to make himself known to his son.  At the same time
she touched him, removed at once from him the appearance of age
and penury, and gave him the aspect of vigorous manhood that
belonged to him.  Telemachus viewed him with astonishment, and at
first thought he must be more than mortal.  But Ulysses announced
himself as his father, and accounted for the change of appearance
by explaining that it was Minerva's doing.

  "Then threw Telemachus
  His arms around his father's neck and wept,
  Desire intense of lamentation seized
  On both; soft murmurs uttering, each indulged
  His grief."

The father and son took counsel together how they should get the
better of the suitors and punish them for their outrages.  It was
arranged that Telemachus should proceed to the palace and mingle
with the suitors as formerly; that Ulysses should go also, as a
beggar, a character which in the rude old times had different
privileges from those we concede to it now.  As traveller and
story-teller, the beggar was admitted in the halls of chieftains,
and often treated like a guest; though sometimes, also, no doubt,
with contumely.  Ulysses charged his son not to betray, by any
display of unusual interest in him, that he knew him to be other
than he seemed, and even if he saw him insulted, or beaten, not
to interpose otherwise than he might do for any stranger.

At the palace they found the usual scene of feasting and riot
going on.  The suitors pretended to receive Telemachus with joy
at his return, though secretly mortified at the failure of their
plots to take his life.  The old beggar was permitted to enter,
and provided with a portion from the table.  A touching incident
occurred as Ulysses entered the court-yard of the palace.  An old
dog lay in the yard almost dead with age, and seeing a stranger
enter, raised his head, with ears erect.  It was Argus, Ulysses'
own dog, that he had in other days often led to the chase.

  "Soon he perceived
  Long-lost Ulysses nigh, down fell his ears
  Clapped close, and with his tail glad signs he gave
  Of gratulation, impotent to rise,
  And to approach his master as of old.
  Ulysses, noting him, wiped off a tear
  Unmarked.
  . . .  Then his destiny released
  Old Argus, soon as he had lived to see
  Ulysses in the twentieth year restored."

As Ulysses sat eating his portion in the hall, the suitors soon
began to exhibit their insolence to him.  When he mildly
remonstrated, one of them raised a stool and with it gave him a
blow.  Telemachus had hard work to restrain his indignation at
seeing his father so treated in his own hall, but remembering his
father's injunctions, said no more than what became him as master
of the house and protector of his guests.

Penelope had protracted her decision in favor of any one of her
suitors so long, that there seemed to be no further pretence for
delay.  The continued absence of her husband seemed to prove that
his return was no longer to be expected.  Meanwhile her son had
grown up, and was able to manage his own affairs.  She therefore
consented to submit the question of her choice to a trial of
skill among the suitors.  The test selected was shooting with the
bow.  Twelve rings were arranged in a line, and he whose arrow
was sent through the whole twelve, was to have the queen for his
prize.  A bow that one of his brother heroes had given to Ulysses
in former times, was brought from the armory, and with its quiver
full of arrows was laid in the hall.  Telemachus had taken care
that all other weapons should be removed, under pretence that in
the heat of competition, there was danger, in some rash moment,
of putting them to an improper use.

All things being prepared for the trial, the first thing to be
done was to bend the bow in order to attach the string.
Telemachus endeavored to do it, but found all his efforts
fruitless; and modestly confessing that he had attempted a task
beyond his strength, he yielded the bow to another.  HE tried it
with no better success, and, amidst the laughter and jeers of his
companions, gave it up.  Another tried it and another; they
rubbed the bow with tallow, but all to no purpose; it would not
bend.  Then spoke Ulysses, humbly suggesting that he should be
permitted to try; for, said he, "beggar as I am, I was once a
soldier, and there is still some strength in these old limbs of
mine."  The suitors hooted with derision, and commanded to turn
him out of the hall for his insolence.  But Telemachus spoke up
for him, and merely to gratify the old man, bade him try.
Ulysses took the bow, and handled it with the hand of a master.
With ease he adjusted the cord to its notch, then fitting an
arrow to the bow he drew the string and sped the arrow unerring
through the rings.

Without allowing them time to express their astonishment, he
said, "Now for another mark!" and aimed direct at the most
insolent one of the suitors. The arrow pierced through his throat
and he fell dead.  Telemachus, Eumaeus, and another faithful
follower, well armed, now sprang to the side of Ulysses.  The
suitors, in amazement, looked round for arms but found none,
neither was there any way of escape, for Eumaeus had secured the
door.  Ulysses left them not long in uncertainty; he announced
himself as the long-lost chief, whose house they had invaded,
whose substance they had squandered, whose wife and son they had
persecuted for ten long years; and told them he meant to have
ample vengeance.  All the suitors were slain, except Phemius the
bard and Medon the herald, and Ulysses was left master of his own
palace and possessor of his kingdom and his wife.

Among Schiller's works is the following epigram on Ulysses:

  "To gain his home all oceans he explored;
  Here Scylla frowned, and there Charybdis roared;
  Horror on sea, and horror on the land,
  In hell's dark boat he sought the spectre land,
  Till borne a slumberer to his native spot,
  He woke, and sorrowing, knew his country not."
  Sir Edward Bulwer"s translation

Tennyson's poem of Ulysses represents the old hero, after his
dangers past and nothing left but to stay at home and be happy,
growing tired of inaction and resolving to set forth again in
quest of new adventures.

  "Come my friends,
  'Tis not too late to seek a newer world.
  Push off, and sitting well in order smite
  The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds
  To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths
  Of all the western stars, until I die.
  It may be that the gulfs will wash us down;
  It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,
  And see the great Achilles whom we knew,
  Tho' much is taken, much abides; and tho'
  We are not now that strength which in old days
  Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;
  One equal temper of heroic hearts,
  Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will
  To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield."



Chapter XXIV

Adventures of AEneas   The Harpies   Dido   Palinurus

We have followed one of the Grecian heroes, Ulysses, in his
wanderings, on his return home from Troy, and now we propose to
share the fortunes of the remnant of the conquered people, under
their chief AEneas, in their search for a new home, after the
ruin of their native city.  On that fatal night when the wooden
horse disgorged its contents of armed men, and the capture and
conflagration of the city were the result, Aeneas made his escape
from the scene of destruction with his father, and his wife, and
young son.  The father, Anchises, was woo old to walk with the
speed required, and AEneas took him upon his shoulders.  Thus
burdened, leading his son and followed by his wife, he made the
best of his way out of the burning city; but in the confusion,
his wife was swept away and lost.

On arriving at the place of rendezvous, numerous fugitives, of
both sexes, were found, who put themselves under the guidance of
Aeneas.  Some months were spent in preparation and at length they
embarked.  They first landed on the neighboring shores of Thrace,
and were preparing to build a city, but AEneas was deterred by a
prodigy.  Preparing to offer sacrifice, he tore some twigs from
one of the bushes.  To his dismay the wounded part dropped blood.
When he repeated the act, a voice from the ground cried out to
him, "Spare me, AEneas; I am your kinsman, Polydore, here
murdered with many arrows, from which a bush has grown, nourished
with my blood."  These words recalled to the recollection of
AEneas that Polydore was a young prince of Troy, whom his father
had sent with ample treasures to the neighboring land of Thrace,
to be there brought up, at a distance from the horrors of war.
The king to whom he was sent had murdered him, and seized his
treasures.  AEneas and his companions hastened away, considering
the land to be accursed by the stain of such a crime.

They next landed on the island of Delos, which was once a
floating island, till Jupiter fastened it by adamantine chains to
the bottom of the sea.  Apollo and Diana were born there, and the
island was sacred to Apollo.  Here AEneas consulted the oracle of
Apollo, and received an answer, as ambiguous as usual   "Seek
your ancient mother; there the race of AEneas shall dwell, and
reduce all other nations to their sway."  The Trojans heard with
joy, and immediately began to ask one another, "Where is the spot
intended by the oracle?"  Anchises remembered that there was a
tradition that their forefathers came from Crete, and thither
they resolved to steer.  They arrived at Crete, and began to
build their city, but sickness broke out among them, and the
fields that they had planted failed to yield a crop.  In this
gloomy aspect of affairs, AEneas was warned in a dream to leave
the country, and seek a western land, called Hesperia, whence
Dardanus, the true founder of the Trojan race, had originally
migrated.  To Hesperia, now called Italy, therefore, they
directed their future course, and not till after many adventures
and the lapse of time sufficient to carry a modern navigator
several times round the world, did they arrive there.

Their first landing was at the island of the Harpies:

  "----The daughters of the earth and sea,
  The dreadful snatchers, who like women were
  Down to the breast, with scanty coarse black hair
  About their heads, and dim eyes ringed with red,
  And bestial mouths set round with lips of lead,
  But from their gnarled necks there began to spring
  Half hair, half feathers, and a sweeping wing
  Grew out instead of arm on either side,
  And thick plumes underneath the breast did hide
  The place where joined the fearful natures twain.
  Gray-feathered were they else, with many a stain
  Of blood thereon, and on birds' claws they went.
  Morris: Life and Death of Jason

The Harpies had been sent by the gods to torment a certain
Phineus, whom Jupiter had deprived of his sight in punishment of
his cruelty; and whenever a meal was placed before him, the
Harpies darted down from the air and carried it off.  They were
driven away from Phineus by the heroes of the Argonautic
expedition, and took refuge in the island where AEneas now found
them.

When they entered the port the Trojans saw herds of cattle
roaming over the plain.  They slew as many as they wished, and
prepared for a feast.  But no sooner had they seated themselves
at the table, than a horrible clamor was heard in the air, and a
flock of odious Harpies came rushing down upon them, seizing in
their talons the meat from the dishes, and flying away with it.
AEneas and his companions drew their swords and dealt vigorous
blows among the monsters, but to no purpose, for they were so
nimble it was almost impossible to hit them, and their feathers
were like armor impenetrable to steel.  One of them, perched on a
neighboring cliff, screamed out, "Is it thus, Trojans, you treat
us innocent birds, first slaughter our cattle, and then make war
on ourselves?"  She then predicted dire sufferings to them in
their future course, and having vented her wrath flew away.  The
Trojans made haste to leave the country, and next found
themselves coasting along the shore of Epirus.  Here they landed,
and to their astonishment learned that certain Trojan exiles, who
had been carried there as prisoners, had become rulers of the
country.  Andromache, the widow of Hector, became the wife of one
of the victorious Grecian chiefs, to whom she bore a son.  Her
husband dying, she was left regent of the country, as guardian of
her son, and had married a fellow-captive, Helenus, of the royal
race of Troy.  Helenus and Andromache treated the exiles with the
utmost hospitality, and dismissed them loaded with gifts.

From hence AEneas coasted along the shore of Sicily, and passed
the country of Cyclopes.  Here they were hailed from the shore by
a miserable object, whom by his garments, tattered as they were,
they perceived to be a Greek.  He told them he was one of
Ulysses' companions, left behind by that chief in his hurried
departure.  He related the story of Ulysses' adventure with
Polyphemus, and besought them to take him off with them, as he
had no means of sustaining his existence where he was, but wild
berries and roots, and lived in constant fear of the Cyclopes.
While he spoke Polyphemus made his appearance; a terrible
monster, shapeless, vast, whose only eye had been put out.  He
walked with cautious steps, feeling his way with a staff, down to
the sea-side, to wash his eye-socket in the waves.  When he
reached the water, he waded out towards them, and his immense
height enabled him to advance far into the sea, so that the
Trojans, in terror, took to their oars to get out of his way.
Hearing the oars, Polyphemus shouted after them, so that the
shores resounded, and at the noise the other Cyclopes came forth
from their caves and woods, and lined the shore, like a row of
lofty pine trees.  The Trojans plied their oars, and soon left
them out of sight.

AEneas had been cautioned by Helenus to avoid the strait guarded
by the monsters Scylla and Charybdis.  There Ulysses, the reader
will remember, had lost six of his men, seized by Scylla, while
the navigators were wholly intent upon avoiding Charybdis.
AEneas, following the advice of Helenus, shunned the dangerous
pass and coasted along the island of Sicily.

Juno, seeing the Trojans speeding their way prosperously towards
their destined shore, felt her old grudge against them revive,
for she could not forget the slight that Paris had put upon her,
in awarding the prize of beauty to another.  In heavenly minds
can such resentments dwell!  Accordingly she hastened to AEolus,
the ruler of the winds,   the same who supplied Ulysses with
favoring gales, giving him the contrary ones tied up in a bag.
AEolus obeyed the goddess and sent forth his sons, Boreas, Typhon
and the other winds, to toss the ocean.  A terrible storm ensued,
and the Trojan ships were driven out of their course towards the
coast of Africa.  They were in imminent danger of being wrecked,
and were separated, so that AEneas thought that all were lost
except his own.

At this crisis, Neptune, hearing the storm raging, and knowing
that he had given no orders for one, raised his head above the
waves, and saw the fleet of AEneas driving before the gale.
Knowing the hostility of Juno, he was at no loss to account for
it, but his anger was not the less at this interference in his
province.  He called the winds, and dismissed them with a severe
reprimand.  He then soothed the waves, and brushed away the
clouds from before the face of the sun.  Some of the ships which
had got on the rocks he pried off with his own trident, while
Triton and a sea-nymph, putting their shoulders under others, set
them afloat again.  The Trojans, when the sea became calm, sought
the nearest shore, which was the coast of Carthage, where AEneas
was so happy as to find that one by one the ships all arrived
safe, though badly shaken.

Waller, in his Panegyric to the Lord Protector (Cromwell),
alludes to this stilling of the storm by Neptune:

  "Above the waves, as Neptune showed his face,
  To chide the winds and save the Trojan race,
  So has your Highness, raised above the rest,
  Storms of ambition tossing us repressed.."


DIDO

Carthage, where the exiles had now arrived, was a spot on the
coast of Africa opposite Sicily, where at that time a Tyrian
colony under Dido their queen, were laying the foundations of a
state destined in later ages to be the rival of Rome itself.
Dido was the daughter of Belus, king of Tyre, and sister of
Pygmalion who succeeded his father on the throne.  Her husband
was Sichaeus, a man of immense wealth, but Pygmalion, who coveted
his treasures, caused him to be put to death.  Dido, with a
numerous body of followers, both men and women, succeeded in
effecting their escape from Tyre in several vessels, carrying
with them the treasures of Sichaeus.  On arriving at the spot
which they selected as the seat of their future home, they asked
of the natives only so much land as they could enclose with a
bull's hide.  When this was readily granted, she caused the hide
to be cut into strips, and with them enclosed a spot on which she
built a citadel, and called it Byrsa (a hide).  Around this fort
the city of Carthage rose, and soon became a powerful and
flourishing place.

Such was the state of affairs when AEneas with his Trojans
arrived there.  Dido received the illustrious exiles with
friendliness and hospitality.  "Not unacquainted with distress,"
she said, "I have learned to succor the unfortunate."  The
