was shaped by paganism is nowhere clearer than in the orientation of
great cathedral churches (almost without exception in England), for all
of the more famous ones have their altars eastward; and Roman Catholics
in prayer in their church services, and Anglicans in repeating the
Creed, turn to the east, as the Hindu does. St. Augustine says:--'When
we stand at prayer, we turn to the east, where the heaven arises, not as
though God were only there, and had forsaken all other parts of the
world, but to admonish our mind to turn to a more excellent nature, that
is, to the Lord.'[493] Though the Jews came to be utterly opposed to
sun-worship in their later history, they were sun-worshippers at first,
as their temples opening eastward testify. This was the vision of
Ezekiel:--'And, behold, at the door of the temple of Jehovah, between
the porch and the Altar, were about five and twenty men, with their
backs toward the temple of Jehovah, and their faces toward the east, and
they worshipped the sun toward the east.'[494]

All this illustrates the once world-wide religion of our race; and shows
that sun-cults and sun-symbols are derived from a universal doctrine
regarding the two states of existence--the one in Hades or the invisible
lower world where the Sun-god goes at night, and the other in what we
call the visible realm which the Sun-god visits daily.[495] The relation
between life and death--symbolically figured in this fundamental
conception forming the background of every sun-cult--is the foundation
of all ancient mysteries. Thus we should expect the correspondences
which we believe do exist between New Grange and the Great Pyramid. Both
alike, in our opinion, were the greatest places in the respective
countries for the celebration of the Mysteries. High up in the body of
the Great Pyramid, after he had performed the long underground journey,
typical of the journey of Osiris or the Sun to the Otherworld or the
World of the Dead, we may suppose (knowing what we do of the Ancient
Mysteries and their shadows in modern Masonic initiations[496]) that the
royal or priestly neophyte laid himself in that strange stone coffin
without a lid, for a certain period of time--probably for three days and
three nights. Then, the initiation being complete, he arose from the
mystic death to a real resurrection, a true child of Osiris. In New
Grange we may suppose that the royal or priestly neophyte, while he
'fasted on the Tuatha De Danann for three days with their nights', sat
in that strange stone basin after the manner of the Orient.[497]

The Great Pyramid seems to be the most ancient of the Egyptian pyramids,
and undoubtedly was the model for all the smaller ones, which 'always
betray profound ignorance of their noble model's chiefest internal
features, as well as of all its niceties of angle and cosmic harmonies
of linear measurement'.[498] Dr. Flinders Petrie says:--'The Great
Pyramid at Gizeh (of Khufu, fourth dynasty) unquestionably takes the
lead, in accuracy and in beauty of work, as well as in size. Not only is
the fine work of it in the pavement, casing, King's and Queen's chambers
quite unexcelled; but the general character of the core masonry is
better than that of any other pyramid in its solidity and
regularity.'[499] And of the stone coffers he says:--'Taking most of its
dimensions at their maximum, they agree closely with the same theory as
that which is applicable to the chambers; for when squared they are all
even multiples of a square fifth of a cubit.... There is no other theory
applicable to every lineal dimension of the coffer; but having found the
[Greek: pi] proportion in the form of the Pyramid, and in the King's
Chamber, there is some ground for supposing that it was intended also in
the coffer, on just one-fifth the scale of the chamber.'[499] And here
is apparent the important fact we wish to emphasize; the Great Pyramid
does not seem to have been intended primarily, if at all, for the
entombment of dead bodies or mummies while 'the numerous quasi-copies'
were 'for sepulchral purposes'[500] without doubt. There appears to have
been at first a clear understanding of the esoteric usage of the Great
Pyramid as a place for the mystic burial of Initiates, and then in the
course of national decadence the exoteric interpretation of this usage,
the interpretation now popular with Egyptologists, led to the erection
of smaller pyramids for purposes of actual burial. And may we not see in
such pyramid-like tumuli as those of Mont St. Michel, Gavrinis, and New
Grange copies of these smaller funeral pyramids;[501] or, if not direct
copies, at least the result of a similar religious decadence from the
unknown centuries since the Great Pyramid was erected by the Divine
Kings of prehistoric Egypt as a silent witness for all ages that Great
Men, Initiates, have understood Universal Law, and have solved the
greatest of all human problems, the problem of Life and Death?


GAVRINIS AND NEW GRANGE COMPARED

In conclusion, and in support of the arguments already advanced, I offer
a few observations of my own, made at Gavrinis itself, the most famous
tumulus in Continental Europe. After a very careful examination of the
interior and exterior of the tumulus, an examination extending over more
than twelve hours, I am convinced that its curious rock-carvings and
those in New Grange are by the same race of people, whoever that race
may have been; and that there is sufficient evidence in its construction
to show that, like New Grange, it was quite as religious as funereal in
its nature and use. The facts which bear out this view are the
following. First, there are three strange cavities cut into the body of
the stone on the south side of the inner chamber, communicating
interiorly with one another, and large enough to admit human hands; if
used as places in which to offer sacrifice to the dead or fairies, small
objects could have been placed in them. In the oldest extant authentic
records of them which I have found it is said of their probable
purpose:--'Some people look on them as a double noose intended to
strangle the [animal] victims which the priest sacrificed; for others
they are two rings behind which the hands of the betrothed met each
other to be married.'[502] Their purpose is certainly difficult enough
to decipher, perhaps is undecipherable; but one thing about them is
certain, namely, that a close examination round their exterior edges and
within them also shows the rock-surface worn smooth as though by ages
of handling and touching; and it is incontestable that this wearing of
the rock-surface by human hands could not have taken place had the inner
chamber been sealed up and used solely as a tomb. We suggest here, as
Sir James Fergusson in his _Rude Stone Monuments_ (p. 366) has
suggested, that the inner chamber of Gavrinis was probably a place for
the celebration of religious rites: he advances the opinion that the
strange cavities were used to contain holy oil or holy water. There is
this second curious fact connected with the tumulus of Gavrinis. On
entering it--and it opens like New Grange to the sunrise, being oriented
43 deg. 60" to the south-east[503]--one finds placed across the floor of
the narrow passage-way as slightly inclined steps rising to the inner
chamber three or four stones. Two of them, now very prominent, form
veritable stumbling-blocks, and the one at the threshold of the inner
chamber is carved quite like the lintel stone above the entrance at New
Grange.[504] From what we know of ancient mystic cults, there was a
darkened chamber approached by a narrow passage-way so low that the
neophyte must stoop in traversing it to show symbolically his humility;
and as symbolic of his progress to the Chamber of Death, the _Sanctum
Sanctorum_ of the spirit-temple, there were steps, often purposely
placed as stumbling-blocks. The Great Pyramid, evidently, conforms to
this mystical plan; and strikes one, therefore, all the more forcibly as
the most remarkable structure for initiatory ceremonies ever constructed
on our planet. Thus, Dr. Flinders Petrie says:--'But we are met then by
an extraordinary idea, that all access to the King's chamber after its
completion must have been by climbing over the plug-blocks, as they lay
in the gallery, or by walking up the ramps on either side of them. Yet,
as the blocks cannot physically have been lying in any other place
before they were let down we are shut up to this view.'[505] And as
Egyptian tombs represented the mansions of the dead,[506] just so Celtic
or pre-Celtic spirit-temples and place for initiations were always
connected with the Underworld of the Dead; and save for such symbolical
arrangements as we see in Gavrinis, and New Grange also, they were
undistinguishable from tombs used for interments only.

It seems to us most reasonable to suppose that if, as the old Irish
manuscripts show, there were spirit-temples or places for pagan funeral
rites, or rites of initiation, in Ireland, constructed like other tumuli
which were used only as tombs for the dead (because the ancient cult was
one of ancestor worship and worship of gods like the Tuatha De Danann,
and spirits), then there must have been others in Brittany also, where
we find the same system of rock-inscriptions. Further, in view of all
the definite provable relations between Gavrinis and New Grange, we are
strongly inclined to regard them both as having the same origin and
purpose, Gavrinis being for Armorica what New Grange was for Ireland,
the royal or principal spirit-temple.




SECTION III

THE CULT OF GODS, SPIRITS, FAIRIES, AND THE DEAD




CHAPTER IX

THE TESTIMONY OF PAGANISM

     'The cult of forests, of fountains, and of stones is to be
     explained by that primitive naturalism which all the Church
     Councils held in Brittany united to proscribe.'--ERNEST RENAN.

     Edicts against pagan cults--Cult of Sacred Waters and its
     absorption by Christianity--Celtic Water Divinities--Druidic
     influence on Fairy-Faith--Cult of Sacred Trees--Cult of Fairies,
     Spirits, and the Dead--Feasts of the Dead--Conclusion.


The evidence of paganism in support of our Psychological Theory
concerning the Fairy-Faith is so vast that we cannot do more than point
to portions of it--especially such portions as are most Celtic in their
nature. Perhaps most of us will think first of all about the ancient
cults rendered to fountains, rivers, lakes, trees, and, as we have seen
(pp. 399 ff.), to stones. There can be no reasonable doubt that these
cults were very flourishing when Christianity came to Europe, for kings,
popes, and church councils issued edict after edict condemning
them.[507] The second Council of Arles, held about 452, issued the
following canon:--'If in the territory of a bishop, infidels light
torches, or venerate trees, fountains, or stones, and he neglects to
abolish this usage, he must know that he is guilty of sacrilege. If the
director of the act itself, on being admonished, refuses to correct it,
he is to be excluded from communion.'[507] The Council of Tours, in 567,
thus expressed itself:--'We implore the pastors to expel from the Church
all those whom they may see performing before certain stones things
which have no relation with the ceremonies of the Church, and also
those who observe the customs of the Gentiles.'[508] King Canute in
England and Charlemagne in Europe conducted a most vigorous campaign
against all these pagan worships. This is Charlemagne's edict:--'With
respect to trees, stones, and fountains, where certain foolish people
light torches or practise other superstitions, we earnestly ordain that
that most evil custom detestable to God, wherever it be found, should be
removed and destroyed.'[509]

The result of these edicts was a curious one. It was too much to expect
the eradication of the old cults after their age-long existence, and so
one by one they were absorbed by the new religion. In a sacred tree or
grove, over a holy well or fountain, on the shore of a lake or river,
there was placed an image of the Virgin or of some saint, and
unconsciously the transformation was made, as the simple-hearted
country-folk beheld in the brilliant images new and more glorious
dwelling-places for the spirits they and their fathers had so long
venerated.


THE CULT OF SACRED WATERS

In Brittany, perhaps better than in other Celtic countries to-day, one
can readily discern this evolution from paganism to Christianity. Thus,
for example, in the Morbihan there is the fountain of St. Anne d'Auray,
round which centres Brittany's most important Pardon; a fountain near
Vannes is dedicated to St. Peter; at Carnac there is the far-famed
fountain of St. Cornely with its niche containing an image of Carnac's
patron saint, and not far from it, on the roadside leading to Carnac
Plage, an enclosed well dedicated to the Holy Virgin; and, less than a
mile away, the beautiful fountain of St. Columba. Near Ploermel, Canton
of Ploermel (Morbihan), there is the fountain of Recourrance or St.
Laurent, in which sailors perform divinations to know the future state
of the weather by casting on its waters a morsel of bread. If the bread
floats, it is a sure sign of fair weather, but if it sinks, of weather
so bad that no one should take risks by going out in the fishing-boats.
In some wells, pins are dropped by lovers. If the pins float, the
water-spirits show favourable auspices, but if the pins sink, the maiden
is unhappy, and will hesitate in accepting the proposal of marriage.
Long after their conversion, the inhabitants of Concoret (Arrondissement
de Ploermel, Morbihan) paid divine honours to the fountain of Baranton
in the druidical forest of Broceliande, so famous in the Breton legends
of Arthur and Merlin:--'For a long time the inhabitants of Concoret ...
in place of addressing themselves to God or to his Saints in their
maladies, sought the remedy in the fountain of Baranton, either by
praying to it, after the manner of the Gauls, or by drinking of its
waters.'[510] In the month of August 1835, when there was an unusual
drought in the land, all the inhabitants of Concoret formed in a great
procession with banners and crucifix at their head, and with chants and
ringing of church bells marched to this same fountain of Baranton and
prayed for rain.[511] This curious bit of history was also reported to
me in July 1909 by a peasant who lives near the fountain, and who heard
it from his parents; and he added that the foot of the crucifix was
planted in the water to aid the rain-making. We have here an interesting
combination of paganism and Christianity.

Gregory of Tours says that the country-folk of Gevaudan rendered divine
honours to a certain lake, and as offerings cast on its waters linen,
wool, cheese, bees'-wax, bread, and other things;[512] and Mahe adds
that gold was sometimes offered,[512] quite after the manner of the
ancient Peruvians, who cast gold and silver of great value into the
waters of sacred Lake Titicaca, high up in the Andes. To absorb into
Christianity the worship paid to the lake near Gevaudan, the bishop
ordered a church to be built on its shore, and to the people he
said:--'My children, there is nothing divine in this lake: defile not
your souls by these vain ceremonies; but recognize rather the true
God.'[513] The offerings to the lake-spirits then ceased, and were made
instead on the altar of the church. As Canon Mahe so consistently sets
forth, other similar means were used to absorb the pagan cults of sacred
waters:--'Other pastors employed a similar device to absorb the cult of
fountains into Christianity; they consecrated them to God under the
invocation of certain saints; giving the saints' names to them and
placing in them the saints' images, so that the weak and simple-hearted
Christians who might come to them, struck by these names and by these
images, should grow accustomed to addressing their prayers to God and to
his saints, in place of honouring the fountains themselves, as they had
been accustomed to do. This is the reason why there are seen in the
stonework of so many fountains, niches and little statues of saints who
have given their names to these springs.'[514]

Procopius reports that the Franks, even after having accepted
Christianity, remained attached to their ancient cults, sacrificing to
the River Po women and children of the Goths, and casting the bodies
into its waters to the spirits of the waters.[514] Well-worship in the
Isle of Man, not yet quite extinct, was no doubt once very general. As
A. W. Moore has shown, the sacred wells in the Isle of Man were visited
and offerings made to them to secure immunity from witches and fairies,
to cure maladies, to raise a wind, and for various kinds of
divination.[515] And no doubt the offerings of rags on bushes over
sacred wells, and the casting of pins, coins, buttons, pebbles, and
other small objects into their waters, a common practice yet in Ireland
and Wales, as in non-Celtic countries, are to be referred to as
survivals of a time when regular sacrifices were offered in divination,
or in seeking cures from maladies, and equally from obsessing demons who
were thought to cause the maladies. In the prologue to Chretien's _Conte
du Graal_ there is an account, seemingly very ancient, of how dishonour
to the divinities of wells and springs brought destruction on the rich
land of Logres. The damsels who abode in these watery places fed
travellers with nourishing food until King Amangons wronged one of them
by carrying off her golden cup. His men followed his evil example, so
that the springs dried up, the grass withered, and the land became
waste.[516]

According to Mr. Borlase, 'it was by passing under the waters of a well
that the _Sidh_, that is, the abode of the spirits called _Sidhe_, in
the tumulus or natural hill, as the case might be, was reached.'[517]
And it is evident from this that the well-spirits were even identified
in Ireland with the Tuatha De Danann or Fairy-Folk. I am reminded of a
walk I was privileged to take with Mr. William B. Yeats on Lady
Gregory's estate at Coole Park, near Gort (County Galway); for Mr. Yeats
led me to the haunts of the water-spirits of the region, along a strange
river which flows underground for some distance and then comes out to
the light again in its weird course, and to a dark, deep pool hidden in
the forest. According to tradition, the river is the abode of
water-fairies; and in the shaded forest-pool, whose depth is very great,
live a spirit-race like the Greek nymphs. More than one mortal while
looking into this pool has felt a sudden and powerful impulse to plunge
in, for the fairies were then casting their magic spell over him that
they might take him to live in their under-water palace for ever.

One of the most beautiful passages in _The Tripartite Life of Patrick_
describes the holy man at the holy well called Cliabach:--'Thereafter
Patrick went at sunrise to the well, namely Cliabach on the sides of
Cruachan. The clerics sat down by the well. Two daughters of Loegaire
son of Niall went early to the well to wash their hands, as was a custom
of theirs, namely, Ethne the Fair, and Fedelm the Ruddy. The maidens
found beside the well the assembly of the clerics in white garments,
with their books before them. And they wondered at the shape of the
clerics, and thought that they were men of the elves or apparitions.
They asked tidings of Patrick: "Whence are ye, and whence have ye come?
Are ye of the elves or of the gods?" And Patrick said to them: "It were
better for you to believe in God than to inquire about our race." Said
the girl who was elder: "Who is your god? and where is he? Is he in
heaven, or in earth, or under earth, or on earth? Is he in seas or in
streams, or in mountains or in glens? Hath he sons and daughters? Is
there gold and silver, is there abundance of every good thing in his
kingdom? Tell us about him, how he is seen, how he is loved, how he is
found? if he is in youth, or if he is in age? if he is ever-living; if
he is beautiful? if many have fostered his son? if his daughters are
dear and beautiful to the men of the world?"'[518]

And in another place it is recorded that 'Patrick went to the well of
Findmag. Slan is its name. They told Patrick that the heathen honoured
the well as if it were a god.'[519] And of the same well it is said,
'that the magi, i. e. wizards or Druids, used to reverence the well Slan
and "offer gifts to it as if it were a god."'[519] As Whitley Stokes
pointed out, this is the only passage connecting the Druids with
well-worship; and it is very important, because it establishes the
relation between the Druids as magicians and their control of spirits
like fairies.[519] As shown here, and as seems evident in Columba's
relation with Druids and exorcism in Adamnan's _Life of St.
Columba_,[520] the early Celtic peoples undoubtedly drew many of their
fairy-traditions from a memory of druidic rites of divination. Perhaps
the most beautiful description of a holy well and a description
illustrative of such divination is that of Ireland's most mystical well,
Connla's Well:--'Sinend, daughter of Lodan Lucharglan, son of Ler, out
of Tir Tairngire ("Land of Promise, Fairyland"), went to Connla's Well
which is under sea, to behold it. That is a well at which are the hazels
and inspirations (?) of wisdom, that is, the hazels of the science of
poetry, and in the same hour their fruit, and their blossom and their
foliage break forth, and these fall on the well in the same shower,
which raises on the water a royal surge of purple. Then the [sacred]
salmon chew the fruit, and the juice of the nuts is apparent on their
purple bellies. And seven streams of wisdom spring forth and turn there
again.'[521]

To these cults of sacred waters numerous non-Celtic parallels could
easily be offered, but they seem unnecessary with Celtic evidence so
clear. And this evidence which is already set forth shows that the
origin of worship paid to sacred wells, fountains, lakes, or rivers, is
to be found in the religious practices of the Celts before they became
christianized. They believed that certain orders of spirits, often
called fairies, and to be identified with them, inhabited, or as was the
case with Sinend, who came from the Otherworld, visited these places,
and must be appeased or approached through sacrifice by mortals seeking
their favours. Canon Mahe puts the matter thus:--'The Celts recognized a
supreme God, the principle of all things; but they rendered religious
worship to the genii or secondary deities who, according to them, united
themselves to different objects in nature and made them divine by such
union. Among the objects were rivers, the sea, lakes and
fountains.'[522]


THE CULT OF SACRED TREES

The things said of sacred waters can also be said of sacred trees among
the Celts; and, in the case of sacred trees, more may be added about the
Druids and their relation to the Fairy-Faith, for it is well known that
the Druids held the oak and its mistletoe in great religious veneration,
and it is generally thought that most of the famous Druid schools were
in the midst of sacred oak-groves or forests. Pliny has recorded that
'the Druids, for so they call their magicians, have nothing which they
hold more sacred than the mistletoe[523] and the tree on which it
grows, provided only it be an oak (_robur_). But apart from that, they
select groves of oak, and they perform no sacred rite without leaves
from that tree, so that the Druids may be regarded as even deriving from
it their name interpreted as Greek'[524] (a disputed point among modern
philologists). Likewise of the Druids, Maximus Tyrius states that the
image of their chief god, considered by him to correspond to Zeus, was a
lofty oak tree;[525] and Strabo says that the principal place of
assembly for the Galatians, a Celtic people of Asia Minor, was the
Sacred Oak-grove.[526]

Just as the cult of fountains was absorbed by Christianity, so was the
cult of trees. Concerning this, Canon Mahe writes:--'One sees sometimes,
in the country and in gardens, trees wherein, by trimming and bending
together the branches, have been formed niches of verdure, in which have
been placed crosses or images of certain saints. This usage is not
confined to the Morbihan. Our Lady of the Oak, in Anjou, and Our Lady of
the Oak, near Orthe, in Maine, are places famous for pilgrimage. In this
last province, says a historian, "One sees at various cross-roads the
most beautiful rustic oaks decorated with figures of saints. There are
seen there, in five or six villages, chapels of oaks, with whole trunks
of that tree enshrined in the wall, beside the altar. Such among others
is that famous chapel of Our Lady of the Oak, near the forge of Orthe,
whose celebrity attracts daily, from five to six leagues about, a very
great gathering of people."'[527]

Saint Martin, according to Canon Mahe, tried to destroy a sacred
pine-tree in the diocese of Tours by telling the people there was
nothing divine in it. The people agreed to let it be cut down on
condition that the saint should receive its great trunk on his head as
it fell; and the tree was not cut down.[527] Saint Germain caused a
great scandal at Auxerre by hanging from the limbs of a sacred tree the
heads of wild animals which he had killed while hunting.[527] Saint
Gregory the Great wrote to Brunehaut exhorting him to abolish among his
subjects the offering of animals' heads to certain trees.[528]

In Ireland fairy trees are common yet; though throughout Celtdom sacred
trees, naturally of short duration, are almost forgotten. In Brittany,
the Forest of Broceliande still enjoys something of the old veneration,
but more out of sentiment than by actual worship. A curious survival of
an ancient Celtic tree-cult exists in Carmarthen, Wales, where there is
still carefully preserved and held upright in a firm casing of cement
the decaying trunk of an old oak-tree called Merlin's Oak; and local
prophecy declares on Merlin's authority that when the tree falls
Carmarthen will fall with it. Perhaps through an unconscious desire on
the part of some patriotic citizens of averting the calamity by inducing
the tree-spirit to transfer its abode, or else by otherwise hoodwinking
the tree-spirit into forgetting that Merlin's Oak is dead, a vigorous
and now flourishing young oak has been planted so directly beside it
that its foliage embraces it. And in many parts of modern England, the
Jack-in-the-Green, a man entirely hidden in a covering of green foliage
who dances through the streets on May Day, may be another example of a
very ancient tree (or else agricultural) cult of Celtic origin.


THE CULT OF FAIRIES, SPIRITS, AND THE DEAD

There was also, as we already know, more or less of direct worship
offered to fairies like the Tuatha De Danann; and sacrifice was made to
them even as now, when the Irish or Scotch peasant pours a libation of
milk to the 'good people' or to the fairy queen who presides over the
flocks. In _Fiacc's Hymn_[529] it is said, 'On Ireland's folk lay
darkness: the tribes worshipped elves: They believed not the true
godhead of the true Trinity.' And there is a reliable legend concerning
Columbkille which shows that this old cult of elves was not forgotten
among the early Irish Christians, though they changed the original good
reputation of these invisible beings to one of evil. It is said that
Columbkille's first attempts to erect a church or monastery on Iona were
rendered vain by the influence of some evil spirit or else of demons;
for as fast as a wall was raised it fell down. Then it was revealed to
the saint that the walls could not stand until a human victim should be
buried alive under the foundations. And the lot fell on Oran,
Columbkille's companion, who accordingly became a sacrifice to appease
the evil spirit, fairies, or demons of the place where the building was
to be raised.[530]

As an illustration of what the ancient practice of such sacrifice to
place-spirits, or to gods, must have been like in Wales, we offer the
following curious legend concerning the conception of Myrddin (Merlin),
as told by our witness from Pontrhydfendigaid, Mr. John Jones (see p.
147):--'When building the Castle of Gwrtheyrn, near Carmarthen, as much
as was built by day fell down at night. So a council of the _Dynion
Hysbys_ or "Wise Men" was called, and they decided that the blood of a
fatherless boy had to be used in mixing the mortar if the wall was to
stand. Search was thereupon made for a fatherless boy (cf. p. 351), and
throughout all the kingdom no such boy could be found. But one day two
boys were quarrelling, and one of them in defying the other wanted to
know what a fatherless boy like him had to say to him. An officer of the
king, overhearing the quarrel, seized the boy thus tauntingly addressed
as the one so long looked for. The circumstances were made known to the
king, and the boy was taken to him. "Who is your father?" asked the
king. "My mother never told me," the boy replied. Then the boy's mother
was sent for, and the king asked her who the father of the boy was, and
she replied: "I do not know; for I have never known a man. Yet, one
night, it seemed to me that a man noble and majestic in appearance slept
with me, and I awoke to find that I had been in a dream. But when I grew
pregnant afterwards, and this wonderful boy whom you now see was
delivered, I considered that a divine being or an angel had visited me
in that dream, and therefore I called his child Myrddin the Magician,
for such I believe my son to be." When the mother had thus spoken, the
king announced to the court and wise men, "Here is the fatherless boy.
Take his blood and use it in mixing the mortar. The walling will not
hold without it." At this, Myrddin taunted the king and wise men, and
said they were no better than a pack of idiots. "The reason the walling
falls down," Myrddin went on to say, "is because you have tried to raise
it on a rock which covers two large sea-serpents. Whenever the wall is
raised over them its weight presses on their backs and makes them
uneasy. Then during the night they upheave their backs to relieve
themselves of the pressure, and thus shake the walling to a fall."' The
story ends here, but presumably Merlin's statements were found to be
true; and Merlin was not sacrificed, for, as we know, he became the
great magician of Arthur's court.

There are two hills in the Highlands of Aberdeenshire where travellers
had to propitiate the banshee by placing barley-meal cakes near a well
on each hill; and if the traveller neglected the offering, death or some
dire calamity was sure to follow.[531] It is quite certain that the
banshee is almost always thought of as the spirit of a dead ancestor
presiding over a family, though here it appears more like the tutelary
deity of the hills. But sacrifice being thus made, according to the
folk-belief, to a banshee, shows, like so many other examples where
there is a confusion between divinities or fairies and the souls of the
dead, that ancestral worship must be held to play a very important part
in the complex Fairy-Faith as a whole. A few non-Celtic parallels
determine this at once. Thus, exactly as to fairies here, milk is
offered to the souls of saints in the Panjab, India, as a means of
propitiating them.[532] M. A. Lefevre shows that the Roman Lares, so
frequently compared to house-haunting fairies, are in reality quite like
the Gaelic banshee; that originally they were nothing more than the
unattached souls of the dead, akin to Manes; that time and custom made
distinctions between them; that in the common language Lares and Manes
had synonymous dwellings; and that, finally, the idea of death was
little by little divorced from the worship of the Lares, so that they
became guardians of the family and protectors of life.[533] On all the
tombs of their dead the Romans inscribed these names: _Manes_, _inferi_,
_silentes_,[534] the last of which, meaning _the silent ones_, is
equivalent to the term 'People of Peace' given to the fairy-folk of
Scotland.[535] Nor were the Roman Lares always thought of as inhabiting
dwellings. Many were supposed to live in the fields, in the streets of
cities, at cross-roads, quite like certain orders of fairies and demons;
and in each place these ancestral spirits had their chapels and received
offerings of fruit, flowers, and of foliage. If neglected they became
spiteful, and were then known as Lemures.

All these examples tend to show what the reviewer of Curtin's _Tales of
the Fairies and of the Ghost World_ states, that 'The attributes of a
ghost--that is to say, the spirit of a dead man--are indistinguishable
from those of a fairy. And it is well known how world-wide is the
worship of the dead and the offering of food to them, among uncivilized
tribes like those of Africa, Australia, and America, as well as among
such great nations as China, Corea, India, and Japan; and in ancient
times it was universal among the masses of the people in Egypt, Greece,
and Rome.


CELTIC AND NON-CELTIC FEASTS OF THE DEAD

_Samain_, as we already know, was the great Celtic feast of the dead
when offerings or sacrifice of various kinds were made to ancestral
spirits, and to the Tuatha De Danann and the spirit-hosts under their
control; and _Beltene_, or the first of May, was another day anciently
dedicated to fetes in honour of the dead and fairies. Chapter ii has
shown us how November Eve, the modern _Samain_, and like it, All Saints
Eve or _La Toussaint_, are regarded among the Celtic peoples now; and
the history of _La Toussaint_ seems to indicate that Christianity, as in
the case of the cult of trees and fountains, absorbed certain Celtic
cults of the dead which centred around the pagan _Samain_ feast of the
dead, and even adopted the date of _Samain_ (see p. 453).

Among the ancient Egyptians, so much like the ancient Celts in their
innate spirituality and clear conceptions of the invisible world, we
find a parallel feast which fell on the seventeenth _Athyr_ of the year.
This day was directly dependent upon the progress of the sun; and, as we
have throughout emphasized, the ancient symbolism connected with the
yearly movements of the Great God of Light and Life cannot be divorced
from the ancient doctrines of life and death. To the pre-Christian
Celts, the First of November, or the Festival of _Samain_, which marked
the end of summer and the commencement of winter, was symbolical of
death.[536] _Samain_ thus corresponds with the Egyptian fete of the
dead, for the seventeenth _Athyr_ of the year marks the day on which
Sitou (the god of darkness) killed in the midst of a banquet his brother
Osiris (the god of light, the sun), and which was therefore thought of
as the season when the old sun was dying of his wounds. It was a time
when the power of good was on the decline, so that all nature, turning
against man, was abandoned to the divinities of darkness, the
inhabitants of the Realms of the Dead. On this anniversary of the death
of Osiris, an Egyptian would undertake no new enterprise: should he go
down to the Nile, a crocodile would attack him as the crocodile sent by
Sitou had attacked Osiris, and even as the Darkness was attacking the
Light to devour it;[537] should he set out on a journey, he would part
from his home and family never to return. His only course was to remain
locked in his house, and there await in fear and inaction the passing of
the night, until Osiris, returning from death, and reborn to a new
existence, should rise triumphant over the forces of Darkness and
Evil.[538] It is clear that this last part of the Egyptian belief is
quite like the Celtic conception of _Samain_ as we have seen Ailill and
Medb celebrating that festival in their palace at Cruachan.

There is a great resemblance between the christianized Feast of
_Samain_, when the dead return to visit their friends and to be
entertained, for example as in Brittany, and the beautiful festivals
formerly held in the Sinto temples of Japan. Thus at Nikko thousands of
lanterns were lighted, 'each one representing the spirit of an
ancestor,' and there was masquerading and revelry for the entertainment
of the visiting spirits.[539] It shows how much religions are alike.

Each year the Roman peoples dedicated two days (February 21-2) to the
honouring of the Dead. On the first day, called the _Feralia_, all
Romans were supposed to remain within their own homes. The sanctuaries
of all the gods were closed and all ceremony suspended. The only
sacrifices made at such a time were to the dead, and to the gods of the
dead in the underworld; and all manes were appeased by food-offerings of
meats and cakes. The second day was called _Cara Cognatio_ and was a
time of family reunions and feasting. Of it Ovid has said (_Fasti_, ii.
619), 'After the visit to the tombs and to the ancestors who are no
longer [among us], it is pleasant to turn towards the living; after the
loss of so many, it is pleasant to behold those who remain of our blood
and to reckon up the generations of our descendants.' And the Greeks
also had their feasts for the dead.[540]


CONCLUSION

The fact of ancient Celtic cults of stones, waters, trees, and fairies
still existing under cover of Christianity directly sustains the
Psychological Theory; and the persistence of the ancient Celtic cult of
the dead, as illustrated in the survival of _Samain_ in its modern
forms, and perhaps best seen now among the Bretons, goes far to sustain
the opinion of Ernest Renan, who declared in his admirable _Essais_ that
of all peoples the Celts, as the Romans also recorded, have most precise
ideas about death. Thus it is that the Celts at this moment are the most
spiritually conscious of western nations. To think of them as
materialists is impossible. Since the time of Patrick and Columba the
Gaels have been the missionaries of Europe; and, as Caesar asserts, the
Druids were the ancient teachers of the Gauls, no less than of all
Britain. And the mysteries of life and death are the key-note of all
things really Celtic, even of the great literature of Arthur,
Cuchulainn, and Finn, now stirring the intellectual world.




SECTION III

THE CULT OF GODS, SPIRITS, FAIRIES, AND THE DEAD




CHAPTER X

THE TESTIMONY OF CHRISTIANITY

     'The Purgatory of St. Patrick became the framework of another
     series of tales, embodying the Celtic ideas concerning the other
     life and its different states. Perhaps the profoundest instinct of
     the Celtic peoples is their desire to penetrate the unknown. With
     the sea before them, they wish to know what is to be found beyond
     it; they dream of the Promised Land. In the face of the unknown
     that lies beyond the tomb, they dream of that great journey which
     the pen of Dante has celebrated.'--ERNEST RENAN.

     Lough Derg a sacred lake originally--Purgatorial rites as
     christianized survivals of ancient Celtic rites--Purgatory as
     Fairyland--Purgatorial rites parallel to pagan initiation
     ceremonies--The Death and Resurrection Rite--Breton Pardons
     compared--Relation to Aengus Cult and Celtic cave-temples--Origin
     of Purgatorial doctrine pre-Christian--Celtic and Roman feasts of
     dead shaped Christian ones--Fundamental unity of Mythologies,
     Religions, and the Fairy-Faith.


The best evidence offered by Christianity with direct bearing on the
Fairy-Faith comes from what may be designated survivals of transformed
paganism within the Church itself. Various pagan cults, which also came
to be more or less christianized, have been considered under Paganism;
and in this chapter we propose to examine the famous Purgatory of St.
Patrick and the Christian rites in honour of the dead.


ST. PATRICK'S PURGATORY

In the south of County Donegal, in Ireland, amid treeless mountains and
moorlands, lies Lough Derg or the Red Lake, containing an island which
has long been famous throughout Christendom as the site of St. Patrick's
Purgatory. Even to-day more than in the Middle Ages it is the goal of
thousands of pious pilgrims who repair thither to be purified of the
accumulated sins of a lifetime. In this age of commercialism the picture
is an interesting and a happy one, no matter what the changing voices of
the many may have to say about it.

The following weird legends, which during the autumn of 1909 I found
surviving among the Lough Derg peasantry, explain how the lough received
its present name, and seem to indicate that long before Patrick's time
the lough was already considered a strange and mysterious place,
apparently an Otherworld preserve. The first legend, based on two
complementary versions, one from James Ryan, of Tamlach Townland, who is
seventy-five years old, the other from Arthur Monaghan, a younger man,
who lives about three miles from James Ryan, is as follows:--'In his
flight from County Armagh, Finn Mac Coul took his mother on his
shoulder, holding her by the legs, but so rapidly did he travel that on
reaching the shores of the lake nothing remained of his mother save the
two legs, and these he threw down there. Some time later, the Fenians,
while searching for Finn, passed the same spot on the lake-shore, and
Cinen Moul(?), who was of their number, upon seeing the shin-bones of
Finn's mother and a worm in one, said: "If that worm could get water
enough it would come to something great." "I'll give it water enough,"
said another of the followers, and at that he flung it into the lake
(later called Finn Mac Coul's lake).[541] Immediately the worm turned
into an enormous water-monster. This water-monster it was that St.
Patrick had to fight and kill; and, as the struggle went on, the lake
ran red with the blood of the water-monster, and so the lake came to be
called Loch Derg (Red Lake).' The second legend, composed of
folk-opinions, was related by Patrick Monaghan, the caretaker of the
Purgatory, as he was rowing me to Saints' Island--the site of the
original purgatorial cave; and this legend is even more important for
us than the preceding one:--'I have always been hearing it said that
into this lough St. Patrick drove all the serpents from Ireland, and
that with them he had here his final battle, gaining complete victory.
The old men and women in this neighbourhood used to believe that Lough
Derg was the last stronghold of the Druids in Ireland; and from what I
have heard them say, I think the old legend means that this is where St.
Patrick ended his fight with the Druids, and that the serpents represent
the Druids or paganism.'

These and similar legends, together with what we know about the
purgatorial rites, lead us to believe that in pre-Christian times Finn
Mac Coul's Lake, later called Lough Derg, was venerated as sacred, and
that the cave which then undoubtedly existed on Saints' Island was used
as a centre for the celebration of pagan mysteries similar in character
to those supposed to have been celebrated in New Grange. Evidently, in
the ordeals and ceremonies of the modern Christian Purgatory of St.
Patrick, we see the survivals of such pagan initiatory rites. Just as
the cults of stones, trees, fountains, lakes, and waters were absorbed
by the new religion, so, it would seem, were all cults rendered in
prehistoric times to Finn Mac Coul's Lake and within the island cave.
Though the present location of the Purgatory is not the original place
of the old Celtic cults, there having been a transfer from Saints'
Island to Station Island, the present place of pilgrimage, where instead
of the cave there is the 'Prison Chapel', the practices, though
naturally much modified and corrupted, retain their primitive outlines.
Patrick in his time ordered the observance of the following ceremonies
by all penitents before their entrance into the original cave on Saints'
Island;[542] and for a long time they were strictly carried out:--'The
visitor must first go to the bishop of the diocese, declare to him that
he came of his own free will, and request of him permission to make the
pilgrimage. The bishop warned him against venturing any further in his
design, and represented to him the perils of his undertaking; but if the
pilgrim still remained steadfast in his purpose, he gave him a
recommendatory letter to the prior of the island. The prior again tried
to dissuade him from his design by the same arguments that had been
previously urged by the bishop. If, however, the pilgrim still remained
steadfast, he was taken into the church to spend there fifteen days in
fasting and praying. After this the mass was celebrated, the holy
communion administered to him and holy water sprinkled over him, and he
was led in procession with reading of litanies to the entrance of the
purgatory, where a third attempt was made to dissuade him from entering.
If he still persisted, the prior allowed him to enter the cave, after he
had received the benediction of the priests, and, in entering, he
commended himself to their prayers, and made the sign of the cross on
his forehead with his own hand. The prior then made fast the door, and
opened it not again till the next morning, when, if the penitent were
there, he was taken out and led with great joy to the church, and, after
fifteen days' watching and praying, was dismissed. If he was not found
when the door was opened, it was understood that he had perished in his
pilgrimage through purgatory; the door was closed again, and he was
never afterwards mentioned'.

An enormous mass of literary and historical material was recorded during
the mediaeval period, in various European vernaculars and in Latin,
concerning St. Patrick's Purgatory; and all of it testifies to the
widespread influence of the rites which already then as now attracted
thousands of pilgrims from all parts of Christendom. In the poem of
_Owayne Miles_,[543] which forms part of this material, we find a
poetical description of the purgatorial initiatory rites quite
comparable to Virgil's account of Aeneas on his initiatory journey to
Hades. The poem records how Sir Owain was locked in the cave, and how,
after a short time, he began to penetrate its depths. He had but little
light, and this by degrees disappeared, leaving him in total darkness.
Then a strange twilight appeared. He went on to a hall and there met
fifteen men clad in white and with heads shaven after the manner of
ecclesiastics. One of them told Owain what things he would have to
