

In the family of a missionary pastor in Kansas, was a daughter of twelve
years of age, seriously afflicted with chronic rheumatism. For three
years she suffered, until the leg was shrunken, stiff at the knee,
shorter by some two inches than, the other, and the hip joint was being
gradually drawn from its socket. The child read of Mrs. Miller's cure by
prayer, originally published in _The Advance_, and wondered why she
could not also be cured by the same means. She repeated to her mother
some of the promised answers to prayer, and asked: "Don't Jesus mean
what he says, and isn't it just as true now as then?" The mother
endeavored to divert her attention by representing the affliction as a
blessing. The physician also called and left another prescription, and
encouraged the child to hope for benefit from it. The child could not,
however, be diverted from the thought that Jesus could and would heal
her. After the doctor's departure she said: "_Mamma, I cannot have that
plaster put on."_

"Why, dear."

"_Because, mother, Jesus is going to cure me, and he must have all the
glory. Dr. ---- doesn't believe in God; if we put the plaster on, he
will say it was that which helped me; and it must be all Jesus_." So
earnest was she, that her mother at length placed the package, just as
she had received it, on a shelf, and said no more about it.

The little girl and her mother were alone that day, the father being
absent from home. When the household duties were done she called her
mother to her.

"Mother, will you pray now to Jesus to cure me_? I have got the faith; I
know he will if you will ask him_." The mother, overcome, yielded to her
daughter's request, and commenced praying. She was blest with unusual
consciousness of the presence of God, and became insensible of all
outward surroundings, pleading for the child. She remained in this state
of intercession for more than an hour, when she was aroused by her
daughter, who with her hand on the mother's shoulder was joyfully
exclaiming, "_Mother, dear mother, wake up! Don't you see Jesus has
cured me? O, I am well! I am all well!" and she danced about the room,
literally healed._

One week from that day, the girl was seen by the writer in the
"_Advance,"_ who says she was _out sliding on the ice with her
companions_. From that day to this she has had no further trouble; _the
limb is full, round and perfect_; there is _no difference between it and
the other_.

To every question asked she replies, with the overflowing gratitude of a
loving heart, "Jesus cured me!"


THE LITTLE BOY WHO WANTED HIS SISTER TO READ THE BIBLE.


Rev. Mr. Spurgeon, of London, tells of the excellent faith of a little
boy in one of the schools of Edinburgh, who had attended a
prayer-meeting, and at the last said to his teacher who conducted it:

"Teacher, I wish my sister could be got to read the Bible; she never
reads it."

"Why, Johnny, should your sister read the Bible?"

"Because if she once read it I am sure it would do her good, and she
would he converted and saved."

"Do you think so, Johnny?"

"Yes, I do, sir; and I wish the next time there was a prayer-meeting you
would ask the people to pray for my sister, that she may begin to read
the Bible."

"Well, well, it shall be done, John."

So the teacher gave out that a little boy was anxious that prayer should
be offered that his sister might read the Bible. John was observed to
get up and go out. The teacher thought it very rude of the boy to
disturb the people in a crowded room, and so the next day, when the lad
came, he said:

"John, I thought it very rude of you to get up in the prayer-meeting and
go out. You ought not to have done so."

"O, sir," said the boy, "I did not mean to be rude; _but I thought I
should like to go home and see my sister reading her Bible for the first
time_."

_True to his faith, when he reached his home, he found the little girl
reading her Bible_.


NETTIE'S DAILY BREAD.


A little girl in a wretched attic, whose sick mother had no bread, knelt
down by the bedside, and said slowly: "Give us this day our daily
bread." Then she went into the street and began to wonder where God kept
his bread. She turned around the corner and saw a large, well-filled
baker's shop.

"This," thought Nettie, "is the place." So she entered confidently, and
said to the big baker, "I've come for it."

"Come for what?"

"My daily bread," she said, pointing to the tempting loaves. "I'll take
two, if you please--one for mother and one for me."

"All right," said the baker, putting them into a bag, and giving them to
his little customer, who started at once into the street.

"Stop, you little rogue!" he said, roughly; "where is your money?"

"I haven't any," she said simply.

"Haven't any!" he repeated, angrily; "you little thief, what brought you
here, then?"

The hard words frightened the little girl, who, bursting into tears,
said: "Mother is sick, and I am so hungry. In my prayers I said, 'Give
us this day our daily bread,' and then I thought _God meant me to fetch
it, and so I came_."

The rough, but kind-hearted baker was softened by the child's simple
tale, and instead of chiding her or visiting threats of punishment, as
is usually the case, he said: "_You poor, dear girl; here, take this to
your mother_," and he filled a large basketful and gave it to her.


THE BROTHER'S PRAYER.


A physician, who for many years practiced his profession in the State of
California, was called once to see the child of Mr. Doak, of Calveras
County, living on the road between San Andreas and Stockton, and not far
from the mining town of Campo Seco, or Dry Camp. He says: The patient
was a little girl about ten years of age, bright and intelligent and one
of twins, the other being a boy, equally bright and well-disposed. The
primary symptoms had indicated inflammation of the stomach, which the
attending physician had hopelessly combated, and finally, when by
metastasis it attacked the brain, with other unfavorable symptoms, he
was inclined to abandon the case in despair.

It was at this juncture I was called in. The symptoms were exceedingly
unfavorable, and my own opinion coincided with my professional
brother's. However, we determined to go to work. A day and night of
incessant watching, and the state of the patient caused us both to feel
the case hopeless, and we only continued our attendance at the earnest
solicitation of the child's mother. The anxious, care-worn and restless
sorrow of the little brother, his deep grief as he saw his sister given
over to the power of the King of Terrors, had attracted our attention.
He would creep up to the bedside of his sister silently, with pale and
tearful face, controlling his emotion with great effort, and then steal
away again and weep bitterly. With a vague, indefinite idea of
comforting the little fellow, I took him to my knee, and was about to
utter some platitude, when the little fellow, looking me in the face,
his own the very picture of grief, burst out with--

"Oh, Doctor, must sister die?"

"Yes," I replied, "but,"--

Before I could go farther he again interrupted me: "Oh, Doctor, is there
nothing, nothing that will save her? Can nobody, nobody save my sister?"

For an instant the teachings of a tender and pious mother flashed over
my mind. They had been long neglected, were almost forgotten.
California, in those days, was not well calculated to fasten more deeply
on the mind home teachings. There were very few whose religious training
survived the ordeal, and for a long time I had hardly thought of prayer.
But the question brought out with the vividness of a flash of lightning,
and as suddenly, all that had been obscured by my course of life, and,
hardly knowing what I did, I spoke to him of the power that might reside
in prayer. I said, God had promised to answer prayer. I dared not allow
the skeptical doubt, that came to my own mind, meet the ear of that
innocent boy, and told him, more as my mother had often told me than
with any thought of impressing a serious subject on his mind, "_That the
prayers of little boys, even, God would hear_." I left that night with
some simple directions, that were given more to satisfy the mother than
from having the slightest hope of eventual recovery, promising to return
next day.

In the morning, as I rode to the door, the little boy was playing round
with a bright and cheerful countenance, and looked so happy that
involuntarily I asked:

"Is your sister better?"

"Oh, no, Doctor," he replied, "but she is going to get well."

"How do you know," I asked.

"_Because I prayed to God_" said he, "and _he told me she would."_

"How did he tell you?"

The little fellow looked at me for an instant, and reverently placing
his hand on the region of his heart, said:

"_He told me in my heart_."

Going to the room where my patient was lying, I found no change
whatever, but in spite of my own convictions there had sprung up a hope
within me. The medical gentleman with whom I was in consultation came to
the room, and as he did, _a thought of a very simple remedy_ I had seen
used by an old negro woman, in a very dissimilar case, _occurred to my
mind._ It became so _persistently present_ that I mentioned it to my
brother practitioner. He looked surprised, but merely remarked. "It can
do no harm." I applied it. In two hours we both felt the case was out of
danger.

The second day after that, as we rode from the house, my friend asked me
how I came to think, of so simple a remedy.

"_I think it was that boy's prayer_," I replied.

"Why, Doctor! you are not so superstitious as to connect that boy's
prayers with his sister's recovery," said he.

"Yes, I do," I replied; "for the life of me I cannot help thinking his
prayers were more powerful than our remedies."


LIGHT GIVEN TO A BLIND CHILD.


"A missionary visiting one of the mission schools of Brooklyn, was
introduced to a remarkable child. He was brought into the school from
the highways and hedges, and young as he was, he had been taught of God.
One day he was playing with powder, and putting his mouth to the match
to blow it, it exploded, and the whole charge went into his face and
eyes. He became totally blind, and the physician gave but little hope of
recovery. But the little sufferer was patient and calm, and even
hopeful; sitting through the dark days meditating on what he had learned
at the mission Sabbath-school, and repeating passages of Scripture and
many a beautiful hymn.

"One evening after the physician had spoken discouragingly, and his
parents, as he perceived, were in deep distress, he was absorbed on his
knees in a corner of the room in earnest prayer. His voice, though
subdued almost to a whisper, was indicative of intense feeling. His
parents inquired what he had been praying so earnestly for. Why, said
he, that _Jesus Christ would open my eyes. The doctor says he can't, and
so I thought I would ask the Savior to do it for me. God honored his
faith. In a few days his sight came to him; and the prayer was answered.
He can now see clearly_."


ASKING THE LORD TO HELP HIM IN HIS LESSONS.


"A little boy was at school, he was diligent, and determined to succeed,
but found that parsing was rather hard.

"One day he went to his mamma for a little help in analyzing some
sentences. She told him the proper manner of doing it, and he followed
her directions; but he was much troubled that he could not understand
the whys and wherefores himself.

"His mamma told him it was rather hard for him then, but that after he
had studied a little longer, it would be quite easy.

"Johnnie went into another room to study alone, but after a little came
back, his face perfectly radiant with joy. He said: 'O mamma, I want to
begin again. I asked Jesus to help me, and now I think I see just how it
is. He always helps us when we ask him;' and with unspeakable delight he
with his mamma went over his lesson again."


GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD.


"The _American Messenger_ tells the story of Johnny Hall, a poor boy.
His mother worked hard for their daily bread. 'Please give me something
to eat; I am very hungry,' he said one evening. His mother let the work
upon which she was sewing fall from her knee, and drew Johnny toward
her. Her tears fell fast as she said: 'Mamma is very poor, and cannot
give you any supper to-night.' 'Never mind, mamma; I shall soon be
asleep, and then I sha'n't feel hungry. But you will sit and sew, and be
so hungry and cold. Poor mamma,' he said, and kissed her many times to
comfort her.

"'Now, Johnny, you may say your prayers;' for dearly as his mother loved
him, she could ill afford to lose a moment from her work. He repeated
'Our Father' with her until they came to the petition, 'Give us this day
our daily bread.' The earnestness, almost agony, with which the mother
uttered these words, impressed Johnny strongly. He said them over again:
'_Give us this day our daily bread_.' Then opening his blue eyes, he
fixed them on his mother, and said: 'We shall never be hungry any more.
God is _our Father_, and he _will_ hear us.' The prayer was finished and
Johnny laid to rest. The mother sewed with renewed energy. Her heart was
sustained by the simple faith of her child. Many were the gracious
promises which came to her remembrance. Although tired and hungry, still
it was with a light heart she sank to rest.

"Early in the morning a gentleman called on his way to business. He
wished Johnny's mother to come to his home to take charge of his two
motherless boys. She immediately accepted the offer. They were thus
provided with all the comforts of a good home. Johnny is a man now, but
he has never forgotten the time when he prayed so earnestly for his
daily bread.

"_God will hear prayer_ is his firm belief. In many ways has he had the
faith of his childhood confirmed. He looks to God as his Father with the
same trust now as then.


GOD WILL TAKE CARE OF ME.


"When the yellow fever raged in New Orleans, the pestilence visited a
Christian household, and the father died. Then the mother was suddenly
seized, and knowing that she must die, she gathered the four children
around her bed, the oldest being only about ten years of age, and said
to them that God was about to take her home to heaven. She urged them to
have no fears, and assured them that the kind, heavenly Father who had
so long provided for them would surely come and take care of them. The
children, with almost breaking hearts, believed what the dying mother
had told them.

"She was buried. The three youngest soon followed her, although they
received every necessary attention from friends during their sickness.
The oldest, a boy, was also seized by the pestilence, and in an
unguarded moment, under the influence of delirium, wandered from his
sick-bed out into the suburbs of the city, and lying down in the tall
grass by the roadside, looked steadfastly up, murmuring, incoherently at
times, 'Mother said God would come and take care of me--would come and
take care of me!' A gentleman happening to pass at the time, and hearing
the unusual sounds, went where the lad was lying, and rousing him, asked
him what he was doing there. Said the little fellow in reply: '_Father
died; mother died; little brother and sisters died. But just before
mother went away into heaven, she told us to have no fear, for God would
come and take care of us, and I am now waiting for him to come down and
take me. I know he will come, for mother said so, and she always told us
the truth_.'

"'Well,' said the gentleman, whose kindliest sympathies were stirred by
the little fellow's sad condition and his implicit confidence in his
sainted mother's pious instructions, '_God has sent me, my son, to take
care of you_.' So he had him carried to his home, and kindly nursed and
cared for by his own family. He recovered, and to-day is one of the most
useful Christian young men in the far West, where he has fixed his
home."


LAURA HEALED.


"A Christian teacher, connected with a Southern Orphan Asylum, writes
_The Christian_, that often when the children were sick, and most of
them came to me more or less diseased, I cried to the Lord for help, and
He who 'bore our infirmities, and carried our sicknesses,' healed them.
Oh it is so good to trust in the Lord! How much better to rely on Him
'in whom we live, and move, and have our being,' than to put confidence
in man, even in the most skillful physician. To confirm and strengthen
the faith of the doubting, I send you the following account of the
healing of one of our orphans.

"Laura was one of a large orphan family, living on Port Royal Island,
S.C. When her mother died, she went to live with a colored woman who
made her work very hard, 'tote' wood and water, hoe cotton and corn, do
all manner of drudgery, rise at daybreak, and live on scanty food. Laura
suffered from want, exposure and abuse. The freed-women of the
plantation looked with pity into her eyes, and desired her to run away.
But she replied, 'Aunt Dora will run after me, and when she done cotch
me, she'll stripe me well with the lash; she done tell so already.'

"One morning, however, when Laura went to the creek for crabs, a good
aunty followed her, and throwing a shawl over the poor child's rags,
said, 'Now, Laura, put foot for Beaufort fast as ever you can, and when
you get there, inquire where Mrs. Mather lives: go straight to her; she
has a good home for jes sich poor creeters as you be.' Laura obeyed,
hastened to Beaufort, seven miles distant, found my home, was made
welcome, and her miserable rags exchanged for good clean clothes. In the
morning, I said, 'Laura, did you sleep well last night?' She replied,
'O, missis, my heart too full of joy to sleep. Me lay awake all night,
thinking how happy me is in dis nice, clean bed, all to myself. Me never
sleep in a bed before, missis.'

"Laura, then about thirteen years old, came to me with a hard cough, and
pain in her side. I put on flannels, gave her a generous diet, and
hoped, that with rest and cheerful surroundings, she would soon rally as
other children had, who came to me in a similar broken-down condition.
Still the cough and pain continued. I dosed her with various
restoratives, such as flax-seed, and slippery elm, etc., but all were of
no avail. She steadily grew worse. Every week I could see she declined.
Her appetite failed; night sweats came on; and she was so weak that most
of the day she lay in bed. The children, all of whom loved Laura, she
was so patient and gentle, whispered one to another, 'Laura is gwine to
die; dere is def in her eye."

"One evening in mid-winter, the poor child's short breath, fluttering
pulse, and cold, clammy sweat alarmed me, and I felt sure that unless
the dear Lord interposed in her behalf, her time with us was very short.
I lingered by her bed till near midnight in prayer for her recovery. I
could not give her up. Again in my own room I poured out my soul in
prayer for the child, and then slept. About two o'clock, I suddenly
awoke, and heard what seemed a voice saying to me, '_Go to Laura; I can
heal her now; the conditions are right; you are both calm and
trustful_.'

"I arose quickly, hastened to her room and said to her, 'Laura, do you
want to get well?' 'O, yes, missis, me wants to get well.' 'Do you
believe Jesus can cure you?' She replied, 'I know he can if he will.'
'Well, Laura,' I said, 'Jesus has just waked me out of a sound sleep,
and told me to go and tell you that he _will cure you now_. Do you
believe he will, Laura?' 'Yes, missis, me _do believe_,' she replied
earnestly. She then repeated this prayer. 'O, Jesus, do please to make
me well; let me live a long time, and be a good and useful woman.'

"The burden had rolled off my heart; I returned to my room and slept
sweetly. In the morning, Tamar, Laura's attendant, met me at the door,
exclaiming joyfully, 'O, I'se so glad! Laura is a heap better, Missis.
She wake me up long time before day and begged me to get her something
to eat, she so hungry.'

"From that night Laura rapidly recovered. Her cough abated, her appetite
was restored, her night sweats ceased, and in less than a month she was
strong and well."


A LITTLE SLAVE'S FAITH.


A missionary in India, passing one day through the school room, observed
a little boy engaged in prayer, and overheard him say, "O, Lord Jesus, I
thank thee for sending big ship into my country and wicked men to steal
me and bring me here, that I might hear about Thee and love Thee. And
now, Lord Jesus, I have one great favor to ask Thee. Please to send
wicked men with another big ship, and let them catch my father and my
mother, and bring them to this country, that they may hear the
missionaries preach and love Thee."

The missionary in a few days after saw him standing on the sea-shore,
looking very intently as the ships came in. "What are you looking at,
Tom?" "I am looking to see if Jesus Christ answers prayer."

For two years he was to be seen day after day watching the arrival of
every ship. One day, as the missionary was viewing him, he observed him
capering about and exhibiting the liveliest joy.

"Well, Tom, what gives you so much joy?" "_O, Jesus Christ answer
prayer. Father and mother come in that ship_," which was actually the
case.


A GOOD REASON FOR PRAYING.


A little girl about four years of age being asked, "Why do you pray to
God?" replied: "Because I know He hears me, and I love to pray to Him."

"But how do you know He hears you?"

Putting her little hand to her heart, she said, "I know He does, because
