A few years after the Paschal controversy the celebrated Tertullian
became entangled in the errors of Montanism, and in vindication of his
own principles published a tract "Concerning Fasts," in which there is a
passing reference to the subject of ecclesiastical convocations. "Among
the Greek nations," says he, "these councils of the whole Church are
held in fixed places, in which, whilst certain important questions are
discussed, the representation of the whole Christian name is also
celebrated with great solemnity. And how worthy is this of a faith which
expects to have its converts gathered from all parts to Christ? See how
good and how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in
unity! You do not well know how to sing this, except when you are
holding communion with many. But those conventions, after they have been
first employed in prayers and fasting, know how to mourn with the
mourners, and thus at length to rejoice with those that rejoice."
[612:2]

Greek was now spoken throughout a great part of the Roman Empire, and at
this period it continued to be used even by the chief pastors of the
Italian capital, so that when Tertullian here mentions _the Greek
nations_, [613:1] he employs an expression of somewhat doubtful
significance. But it is probable that he refers chiefly to the mother
country and its colonies on the other side of the Aegean Sea, or to
Greece and Asia Minor. It is apparent from the apostolic epistles, most
of which are addressed to Churches within their borders, that the
gospel, at an early date, spread extensively and rapidly in these
countries; and it is highly probable that, at least in some districts,
its adherents would have now made a considerable figure in any
denominational census. They were thus, perhaps, emboldened to erect
their ecclesiastical courts upon a broader basis, as well as to hold
their meetings with greater publicity, than heretofore; and, as these
assemblies were attended, not only by the pastors and the elders, but
also by many deacons and ordinary church members who were anxious to
witness their deliberations, Tertullian alleges, in his own rhetorical
style of expression, that in them "the representation of the whole
Christian name was celebrated with great solemnity." [613:2] These Greek
councils commenced with a period of _fasting_--a circumstance by which
they seem to have been distinguished from similar meetings convened
elsewhere, and as they thus supplied him with an argument in favour of
one of the grand peculiarities of the discipline of Montanism, it is
obviously for this reason they are here so prominently noticed. If, as
he contends, these fasts were kept so religiously by the representatives
of the Church when in attendance on some of their most solemn
assemblies, there might, after all, be a warrant for the observance of
that more rigid abstinence which he now inculcated. But though this
passage of Tertullian is the only authority adduced to prove that
councils originated in Greece, it is plain that it gives no sanction
whatever to any such theory. Neither does it afford the slightest
foundation for the inference that, at the time when it was written,
these ecclesiastical convocations were unknown in Africa and Italy. We
have direct proof that before this period they not only met in Rome, but
that the bishop of the great city had been in the habit of requesting
his brother pastors in other countries to hold such assemblies. [614:1]
There is, too, satisfactory evidence that they were now not unknown at
Carthage, [614:2] and Tertullian himself elsewhere apparently refers to
the proceedings of African synods. [614:3] He must have been well aware
that they had recently assembled in various parts of the West to
pronounce judgment in the Paschal controversy; for the decisions of the
Gallic and Roman synods mentioned by Eusebius seem to have been
published all over the Church; and the reason why he refers to the
convocations of the Greeks was, not because such meetings were not held
in other lands, but because these, from their peculiar method of
procedure in the way of fasting, [614:4] supplied, as he conceived, a
very apposite argument in support of the discipline which he was so
desirous to recommend.

If historians have erred in stating that synods commenced in Greece,
they have been still more egregiously mistaken in asserting that the
once famous Amphictyonic Council suggested their establishment, and
furnished the model for their construction. In the second century of the
Christian era the Council of the Amphictyons was shorn of its glory, and
though it then continued to meet, [615:1] it had long ceased to be
either an exponent of the national mind, or a free and independent
assembly. It is not to be imagined that the Christian community, in the
full vigour of its early growth, would all at once have abandoned its
apostolic constitution, and adopted a form of government borrowed from
an effete institute. Synods, which now formed so prominent a part of the
ecclesiastical polity, could claim a higher and holier original. They
were obviously nothing more than the legitimate development of the
primitive structure of the Church, for they could be traced up to that
meeting of the apostles and elders at Jerusalem which relieved the
Gentile converts from the observance of the rite of circumcision.

The most plausible argument in support of the theory that the
Amphictyonic Council suggested the establishment of synodical
conventions is based upon the alleged fact that these ecclesiastical
meetings were at first held in spring and autumn, or exactly at the
times when the Greek political deputies were accustomed to assemble.
[615:2] But this statement, when closely examined, is found to be quite
destitute of evidence. Tertullian does not say that the Greek synods met
twice a year, and we know that, at least half a century afterwards, they
assembled only annually. This fact is attested by Firmilian of
Cappadocia in his celebrated letter to Cyprian. "It is of necessity
arranged among us," says he, "that we elders and presidents meet _every
year_ [616:1] to set in order the things entrusted to our charge, that
if there be any matters of grave moment they may be settled by common
advice." [616:2] The author of this epistle lived in the very country
where synods are supposed to have assembled so much more frequently half
a century before, so that his evidence demonstrates the fallacy of the
hypothesis framed by some modern historians.

About the beginning of the third century, or at the time when Tertullian
wrote, it would seem that the members of the Greek synods had an
arrangement which was not then generally adopted. The Greek councils met
together "in fixed places." There is reason to believe that these "fixed
places" were, commonly speaking, the metropolitan cities of the
respective provinces. But still, as we have seen, the pastors and elders
had not yet generally agreed to the regulation that the chief pastor of
the metropolitan city should be the constant moderator of the provincial
synod. In the case of the bishop of Rome the rule was, no doubt, already
established; but, in other instances, the senior pastor present was, as
yet, invited to fill the office of president. The constant meeting of
the synod in the principal town of the province tended, however, to
increase the influence of its bishop; and he was at length almost
everywhere acknowledged as the proper chairman. [616:3] At the Council
of Nice in A.D. 325 his rights were formally secured by ecclesiastical
enactment. About the same date synods appear to have commenced to
assemble with greater frequency. "Let there be a meeting of the bishops
twice a year," says the thirty-seventh of the so-called Apostolical
Canons, "and let them examine amongst themselves the decrees concerning
religion, and settle the ecclesiastical controversies which may have
occurred. One meeting is to be held in the fourth week of the Pentecost,
and the other on the 12th day of the month of October." [617:1]

As soon as the light of historical records begins to illustrate the
condition of any portion of the ancient Church, its synodical government
may be discovered; and though the literary memorials of the third
century are comparatively few, they are abundantly sufficient to
demonstrate that, as early as the middle of that period, ecclesiastical
courts upon a tolerably extensive scale were everywhere established.
About that time the controversy relative to the propriety of rebaptizing
heretics created much agitation, and the subject was keenly discussed in
the synods which met for its consideration. Nowhere is any hint given
that these courts were of recent formation. Though meeting in so many
places in the East and West, and in countries so far apart, they are
invariably represented as the ancient order of ecclesiastical regimen.
They all appear, too, as co-ordinate and independent judicatories; and
though the Roman bishop, as the chief pastor of the Catholic Church,
endeavoured to induce them to adopt uniform decisions, his attempts to
dictate to the brethren in Spain, Africa, and other countries, were
firmly and indignantly repulsed. There were fundamental principles which
they were all understood to acknowledge; these principles were generally
embodied in the divine Statute-book; it was admitted that the decisions
of every council which adhered to them were entitled to universal
reverence; but, though the reservation was scarcely compatible with the
genius of catholicity, each provincial convention claimed the right of
forming its own judgment of the acts of other courts, and of adopting or
rejecting them accordingly.

The most influential synods which were held before the establishment of
Christianity by Constantine were those which met in the latter part of
the third century to try the case of the famous Paul of Samosata, the
bishop of Antioch. The charge preferred against him was the denial of
the proper deity of the Son of God, and as he was an individual of much
ability and address, as well as, in point of rank, one of the greatest
prelates in existence, his case awakened uncommon interest. Christianity
had recently obtained the sanction of a legal toleration, [618:1] and
therefore churchmen now ventured to travel from different provinces to
sit in judgment on this noted heresiarch. In the councils which
assembled at Antioch were to be found, not only the pastors of Syria,
but also those of various places in Palestine and Asia Minor. Even
Dionysius, bishop of the capital of Egypt, was invited to be present,
but he pleaded his age and infirmities as an apology for his
non-attendance. [618:2] In a council which assembled A.D. 269, [618:3]
Paul was deposed and excommunicated; and the sentence, which was
announced by letter to the chief pastors of Rome, Alexandria, and other
distinguished sees, was received with general approbation.

All the information we possess respecting the councils of the first
three centuries is extremely scanty, so that it is no easy matter
exactly to ascertain their constitution; but we have no reason to
question the correctness of the statement of Firmilian of Cappadocia,
who was himself a prominent actor in several of the most famous of these
assemblies, and who affirms that they were composed of "elders and
presiding pastors." [619:1] We have seen that bishops and elders
anciently united even in episcopal ordinations, and these ministers,
when assembled on such occasions, constituted ecclesiastical
judicatories. A modern writer, of high standing in connexion with the
University of Oxford, has affirmed that "bishops alone had a definitive
voice in synods," [619:2] but the testimonies which he has himself
adduced attest the inaccuracy of the assertion. The presbyter Origen, at
an Arabian synod held about A.D. 229, sat with the bishops, and was, in
fact, the most important and influential member of the convention. About
A.D. 230, Demetrius of Alexandria "gathered a council of bishops _and of
certain presbyters_, which _decreed_ that Origen should remove from
Alexandria." [619:3] About the middle of the third century, "during the
vacancy of the see of Rome, _the presbyters of the city_ took part in
the first Roman council on the lapsed." [619:4] At the council of
Eliberis, held about A.D. 305, no less than _twenty-six presbyters_ sat
along with the bishops. [619:5] In some cases deacons, [619:6] and even
laymen, were permitted to address synods, [619:7] but ancient documents
attest that they were never regarded as constituent members. Whilst the
bishops and elders _sat_ together, and thus proclaimed their equality as
ecclesiastical judges, [619:8] the people and even the deacons were
obliged to _stand_ at these meetings. The circular letter of the council
of Antioch announcing the deposition of Paul of Samosata is written in
the name of "bishops, and presbyters, _and deacons, and the Churches of
God_," [620:1] but there is reason to believe that the latter are added
merely as a matter of prudence, and in testimony of their cordial
approval of the ecclesiastical verdict. The heresiarch had left no art
unemployed to acquire popularity, and it was necessary to shew that he
had lost the influence upon which he had been calculating. It is obvious
that the pastors and elders alone were permitted to _adjudicate_, for
why were they assembled from various quarters to uphold the doctrine and
discipline of the Church, if the people who were themselves tainted with
heresy or guilty of irregularity, had the liberty of voting? Under such
circumstances, the decision would have been substantially, not the
decree of the Church rulers, but of the multitude of the particular city
in which they happened to congregate.

The theory of some modern ecclesiastical historians, who hold that all
the early Christian congregations were originally independent, cannot
bear the ordeal of careful investigation. Whilst it directly conflicts
with the testimony of Jerome, who declares that the churches were at
first "governed by the _common council of the presbyters_," it is
otherwise destitute of evidence. As soon as the light of ecclesiastical
memorials begins to guide our path, we find everywhere presbyteries and
synods in existence. Congregationalism has no solid foundation either in
Scripture or antiquity. The eldership, the most ancient court of the
Church, commenced with the first preaching of the gospel; and in the
account of the meeting of the Twelve to induct the deacons into office,
we have the record of the first ordination performed by the laying on of
the hands of the presbytery of Jerusalem. A few years afterwards the
representatives of several Christian communities assembled in the holy
city and "ordained decrees" for the guidance of the Jewish and Gentile
Churches. The continuous development of the same form of ecclesiastical
regimen has now been illustrated. This polity was obviously based upon
the principle that "in the multitude of counsellors there is safety."
[621:1] At the meetings of the elders, information was multiplied, the
intellect was sharpened, the brethren were made better acquainted with
each other, and the Christian cause enjoyed the benefit of the decisions
of their collective wisdom. The members had been previously elected to
office by the voice of the people, so that the Church had pre-eminently
a free constitution. And it is no mean proof as well of the intrepidity
as of the zeal of the early Christian ministers that, at a time when
their religion was proscribed, they sometimes undertook lengthened
journeys for the purpose of meeting in ecclesiastical judicatories. They
thus nobly asserted the principle that Christ has established in His
Church a government with which the civil magistrate has no right
whatever to intermeddle. It has been said that the early Christian
councils "changed nearly the whole form of the Church," and that by them
"the influence and authority of the bishops were not a little
augmented." [621:2] But this is obviously quite a mistaken view of their
native tendency. The face of the Church was, indeed, changed at an early
period, but it was simply because these councils yielded with too much
facility to the spirit of innovation. Had they been always conducted in
accordance with primitive arrangements, they could have crushed in the
bud the aspirations of clerical ambition. But when the city ministers
were rapidly accumulating wealth, their brethren in rural districts
remained poor; and when councils began to meet on a scale of increased
magnitude, the village and country pastors, who could not afford the
expenses of lengthened journeys, were unable to attend. Meanwhile
Prelacy established itself in the great towns, and the influence of the
city bishops began gradually to preponderate in all ecclesiastical
assemblies. When the prelates had once secured their ascendency in these
conventions, they made use of the machinery for their own purposes. The
people were deprived of many of their rights and privileges; the elders
were stripped of their proper status; the village and rural bishops were
extinguished; and at length the ancient presbytery itself disappeared.
The city dignitaries became the sole depositories of ecclesiastical
power, and the Church lost nearly every vestige of its freedom. But,
long after the beginning of the fourth century, many remnants of the
primitive polity still survived as memorials of its departed excellence.





CHAPTER XII.

THE CEREMONIES AND DISCIPLINE OP THE CHURCH AS ILLUSTRATED BY CURRENT
CONTROVERSIES AND DIVISIONS.


Whilst the Christian community was contending against the Gnostics, it
was not without other controversies which were fitted to prejudice its
claims in the sight of the heathen. The destruction of the temple of
Jerusalem by Titus had prevented the sticklers for the Mosaic law from
practising many of their ancient ceremonies: but there were parts of
their ritual, such as circumcision, to which they still adhered, as
these could be observed when the altar and the sanctuary no longer
existed. In the reign of Hadrian a division of sentiment relative to the
continued obligation of the Levitical code led to a great change in the
mother Church of Christendom. About A.D. 132, an adventurer, named
Barchochebas, pretending to be the Messiah and aiming at temporal
dominion, appeared in Palestine; the Jews, in great numbers, flocked to
his standard; and the rebel chief contrived for three years to maintain
a bloody war against the strength of the Roman legions. The Israelitish
race, by their conduct at this juncture, grievously provoked the
emperor; and when he had rebuilt Jerusalem, under the name of Aelia
Capitolina, he threatened them with the severest penalties should they
appear either in the city or the suburbs. Some of the Jewish Christians
of the place, anxious, no doubt, to escape the proscription, now
resolved to give up altogether the observance of circumcision. Others,
however, objected to this course, and persisted in maintaining the
permanent obligation of the Mosaic ritual. The dissentients, called
Nazarenes, formed themselves into a separate community, which obtained
adherents elsewhere, and which subsisted for several centuries. At first
they differed from other Christians chiefly in their adherence to the
initiatory ordinance of Judaism, but eventually they adopted erroneous
principles in regard to the person of our Lord, and were in consequence
ranked amongst heretics. [624:1]

In the history of the Church, the Nazarenes occupy a somewhat singular
and unique position. Their name was one of the earliest designations by
which the followers of our Saviour were known, [624:2] and though by
many they have been called the First Dissenters, they might have very
fairly pleaded that they were the lineal descendants of the most ancient
stock of Christians in the world. The rite for which they contended had
been practised in the Church of Jerusalem since its very establishment;
the ministers by whom they had been taught had probably been instructed
by the apostles themselves; and all the elders at the time connected
with the holy city seem to have joined the secession. It is alleged that
a number of Christians of Gentile origin, uniting with those of their
brethren of Jewish descent who now agreed to relinquish the Hebrew
ceremonies, chose an individual, named Marcus, for their chief pastor,
and that at this period the succession in the line of the circumcision
"failed." [624:3] This statement cannot signify that some dire calamity
had at once swept away all the old presbytery of Jerusalem. It obviously
indicates that none of its members had joined the party whose principles
had obtained the ascendency. And yet, though the adherents of Marcus
might have been charged with innovation, they acted under the sanction
of apostolical authority. They very properly refused to continue any
longer in bondage to the beggarly elements of a ritual which had long
since been superseded. Though the seceders might have urged that they
were of apostolical descent, and that they were supported by ancient
custom, it must be admitted, after all, that they were but a company of
deluded and narrow-minded bigots. The evangelical pastors of the
primitive Church repudiated their zeal for ritualism, and gave the right
hand of fellowship to Marcus and his newly-organized community. The
history of the mother Church of Christendom in the early part of the
second century is thus fraught with lessons of the gravest wisdom. We
may see from it that the true successors of the apostles were not those
who occupied their seats, or who were able to trace from them a
ministerial lineage, but those who inherited their spirit, who taught
their doctrines, and who imitated their example.

Though, in this instance, the disciples at Jerusalem nobly emancipated
themselves from the yoke of circumcision, it appears, from a controversy
which created much confusion about sixty years afterwards, that the
whole Church was disposed, to some extent, to conform to another Judaic
ordinance. The embers of this dispute had been for some time
smouldering, before they attracted much notice; but, about the
termination of the second century, they broke out into a flame which
spread from Rome to Jerusalem. The name of Easter [625:1] was yet
unknown, and the Paschal feast appears, at least in some places, to have
been then only recently established; but at an early period there was a
sprinkling of Jewish Christians in almost every Church throughout the
Empire, and they had at length induced their fellow-disciples to mark
the seasons of the Passover and Pentecost [626:1] by certain special
observances. The Passover was regarded as the more solemn feast, and,
strange as it may now appear, was kept at the time by the Christians in
much the same way in which it had been celebrated by the Jews before the
fall of Jerusalem. A lamb was shut up on a certain day; it was
afterwards roasted; and then eaten by the brotherhood. [626:2] The time
when this ceremony was to be observed, and some other circumstantials,
now formed topics of earnest and protracted discussion. One party, known
as the Quarto-decimans, or _Fourteenth Day Men_, held that the Paschal
feast was to be kept exactly at the time when the Jews had been
accustomed to eat the Passover, that is, on the fourteenth day of the
first month of the Jewish year; [626:3] and they celebrated the festival
of the resurrection on the seventeenth day of the month, that is, on the
third day after partaking of the Paschal lamb, whether that happened to
be the first day of the week or otherwise. The other party strenuously
maintained that the eating of the Paschal lamb ought to be postponed
until the night preceding the first Lord's day next following the
fourteenth day of the first month. They considered that this next Lord's
day should be recognized as the festival of our Saviour's resurrection,
and that the whole of the preceding week until the close should be kept
as a fast not to be interrupted by the eating of the Passover.

The most determined Quarto-decimans were to be found in Asia Minor, and
at their head was Polycrates, the chief pastor of Ephesus. At the head
of the other party was Victor, bishop of Rome. The Church over which he
presided did not originally observe any such appointment, [627:1] but
some of its members of Jewish extraction were probably, on that account,
dissatisfied; and about the time of the establishment of the Catholic
system, the matter seems to have been settled by a compromise. It
appears to have been then arranged that the festival should be kept; but
to avoid the imputation of symbolizing with the Jews, it was agreed that
the Friday of the Paschal week and the Lord's day following, or the day
on which our Saviour suffered and the day on which He rose from the
dead, should be the great days of observance. This arrangement was
pretty generally accepted by those connected with what now began to be
called the Catholic Church: but some parties pertinaciously refused to
conform. Victor, as the head of the Catholic confederation, no doubt
deemed it his duty to exact obedience from all its members; and, deeply
mortified because the Asiatic Churches persisted in their own usages,
shut them out from his communion. But it was soon evident that the
Church was not prepared for such an exercise of authority, for the
Asiatics refused to yield; and as some of Victor's best friends
protested against the imprudence of his procedure, the ecclesiastical
thunderbolt proved an impotent demonstration.

The Paschal controversy was far from creditable to any of the parties
concerned. The eating of a lamb on a particular day was a fragment of an
antiquated ceremonial, and as the ordinance itself had been superseded,
the time of its observance was not a legitimate question for debate.
Each party is said to have endeavoured to fortify its own position by
quoting the names of Paul or Peter or Philip or John; but had any one of
these apostles risen from the dead and appeared in the ecclesiastical
arena, he would, no doubt, have rebuked all the disputants for their
trivial and unholy wrangling. We have here a notable proof of the
absurdity of appealing to tradition. Within a hundred years after the
death of the last survivor of the Twelve its testimony was most
discordant, for the tradition of the Western Churches, as propounded by
Victor, expressly contradicted the tradition of the Eastern Churches, as
attested by Polycrates. It is clear that in this case the apostles must
have been misrepresented. Peter and Paul certainly never taught the
members of the Church of Rome to eat the Paschal lamb, for the Jewish
temple continued standing until after both these eminent ministers had
finished their career, and meanwhile the eating of the Passover was
confined to those who went up to worship at Jerusalem. Philip and John
may have continued to keep the feast according to the ancient ritual
until shortly before the ruin of the holy city; and if, afterwards, they
permitted the converts from Judaism to kill a lamb and to have a social
repast at the same season of the year, they could have attached no
religious importance to such an observance. But now that both parties
were heated by the spirit of rivalry and contention, they extracted from
tradition a testimony which it did not supply. Vague reports and
equivocal statements, handed down from ages preceding, were compelled to
convey a meaning very different from that which they primarily
communicated; and thus the voice of one tradition could be readily
employed to neutralize the authority of another.

It is a curious fact that the custom which now created such violent
excitement gradually passed into desuetude. At present there are few
places [629:1] where the eating of the Paschal lamb is continued. But
otherwise the practice for which Victor contended eventually prevailed,
as the Roman mode of celebration was established by the authority of the
Council of Nice. What is called Easter Sunday is still observed in many
Churches as the festival of the resurrection. But the institution of
such a festival is unnecessary, as each returning Lord's day should
remind the Christian that his Saviour has risen from the dead and become
the first-fruits of them that sleep. [629:2]

This Paschal controversy generated no schism, but other disputes, which
subsequently occurred, did not terminate so peacefully. About the middle
of the third century disagreements respecting matters of discipline rent
the Churches of Carthage and Rome. At Carthage, the malecontents sought
for greater laxity; at Rome, they contended for greater strictness. At
that time the _confessors_ and the _martyrs_, or those who had
persevered in their adherence to the faith under pains and penalties,
and those who had suffered for it unto death, were held in the highest
veneration. They had been even permitted in some places to dictate to
the existing ecclesiastical rulers by granting what were called _tickets
of peace_ [629:3] to the _lapsed_, that is, to those who had apostatized
in a season of persecution, and who had afterwards sought readmission to
Church communion. These certificates, or tickets of peace, were
understood to entitle the parties in whose favour they were drawn up to
be admitted forthwith to the Lord's Supper. But it sometimes happened
that a confessor or a martyr was himself far from a paragon of
excellence, [630:1] as mere obstinacy, or pride, or self-righteousness,
may occasionally hold out as firmly as a higher principle; and a man may
give his body to be burned who does not possess one atom of the grace of
Christian charity. There were confessors and martyrs in the third
century who held very loose views on the subject of Church discipline,
and who gave tickets of peace without much inquiry or consideration.
[630:2] In some instances they did not condescend so far as to name the
parties to whom they supplied recommendations, but directed that a
particular individual "and his friends" [630:3] should be restored to
ecclesiastical fellowship. Cyprian of Carthage at length determined to
set his face against this system of testimonials. He alleged that the
ticket of a martyr was no sufficient proof of the penitence of the party
who tendered it, and that each application for readmission to membership
should be decided on its own merits, by the proper Church authorities.
The bishop was already obnoxious to some of the presbyters and people of
Carthage; and, in the hope of undermining his authority, his enemies
eagerly seized on his refusal to recognize these certificates. They
endeavoured to create a prejudice against him by alleging that he was
acting dictatorially, and that he was not rendering due honour to those
who had so nobly imperilled or sacrificed their lives in the service of
the gospel. To a certain extent their opposition was successful; and, as
much sickness prevailed about the time, Cyprian was obliged to concede
so far as to consent to give the Eucharist, on the tickets of peace, to
those who had lapsed, and who were apparently approaching dissolution.
But, soon afterwards, strengthened by the decision of an African Synod,
he returned to his original position, and the parties now became
hopelessly alienated. The leader of the secession was a deacon of the
Carthaginian Church, named Felicissimus, and from him the schism which
now occurred has received its designation. The Separatists chose a
presbyter, named Fortunatus, as their bishop, and thus in the capital of
the Proconsular Africa a new sect was organized. But the secession,
which was based upon a principle thoroughly unsound, soon dwindled into
insignificance, and rapidly passed into oblivion.

The schism which occurred about the same time at Rome was of a more
formidable and permanent character. It had long been the opinion of a
certain party in the Church that persons who had committed certain
heinous sins should never again be readmitted to ecclesiastical
fellowship. [631:1] Those who held this principle did not pretend to say
that these transgressions were unpardonable; it was admitted that the
offenders might obtain forgiveness from God, but it was alleged that the
Church on earth could never feel warranted to receive them to communion.
Cornelius, who was then the bishop of Rome, supported a milder system
and contended that those who were not hopelessly excluded from the peace
of God should not be inexorably debarred from the visible pledges of His
affection. The leader of the stricter party was Novatian, a Roman
presbyter of pure morals and considerable ability, who has left behind
him one of the best treatises in defence of the Trinity which the
ecclesiastical literature of antiquity can supply. This individual was
ordained bishop in opposition to Cornelius; and, for a time, some of the
most distinguished pastors of the age found it difficult to decide
between these two claimants of the great bishopric. The high character
of Novatian, and the supposed tendency of his discipline to preserve the
credit and promote the purity of the Church, secured him considerable
support: the sect which derived its designation from him spread into
various countries; and, for several generations, the Novatians could
challenge comparison, as to soundness in the faith and propriety of
general conduct, with those who assumed the name of Catholics.

The agitation caused by the Novatian schism had not yet subsided when
another controversy respecting the propriety of rebaptizing those
designated heretics created immense excitement. Cyprian at the head of
one party maintained that the baptism of heretical ministers was not to
be recognized, and that the ordinance must again be dispensed to such
sectaries as sought admission to catholic communion; whilst Stephen of
Rome as strenuously affirmed that the rite was not to be repeated. It is
rather singular that the Italian prelate, on this occasion, pleaded for
the more liberal principle; but various considerations conspired to
prompt him to pursue this course. When heresies were only germinating,
and when what was afterwards called the Catholic Church was yet but in
process of formation, no question as to the necessity of rebaptizing
those to whom the ordinance had already been dispensed by any reputed
Christian minister, seems to have been mooted. In the time of Hyginus of
Rome, even the baptism of the leading ministers of the Gnostics was
acknowledged by the chief pastor of the Western metropolis. [633:1] The
Church of Rome had ever since continued to act upon the same system; and
her determination to adhere to it had been fortified, rather than
weakened, by recent occurrences. As the Novatians had set out on the
principle of rebaptizing all who joined them, [633:2] Stephen recoiled
from the idea of deviating from the ancient practice to follow in their
footsteps. But Cyprian, who was naturally of a very imperious temper,
and who had formed most extravagant notions of the dignity of the
Catholic Church, could not brook the thought that the ministers
connected with the schism of Felicissimus could dispense any baptism at
all. He imagined that the honour of the party to which he belonged would
be irretrievably compromised by such an admission, and he was sustained
in these views by a strong party of African and Asiatic bishops. On this
occasion Stephen repeated the experiment made about sixty years before
by his predecessor Victor, and attempted to reduce his antagonists to
acquiescence by excluding them from his fellowship. But this second
effort to enforce ecclesiastical conformity was equally unsuccessful. It
only provoked an outburst of indignation, as the parties in favour of
rebaptizing refused to give way. This controversy led, however, to the
broad assertion of a principle which might not otherwise have been
brought out so distinctly, for it was frequently urged during the course
of the discussion that all pastors stand upon a basis of equality, and
that the bishop of a little African village had intrinsically as good a
right to think and to act for himself as the bishop of the great capital
of the Empire.

It is very clear that at this time the unity of the Church did not
consist in the uniformity of its discipline and ceremonies. The
believers at Jerusalem continued to practise circumcision nearly a
century after the establishment of Gentile Churches in which such a rite
was unknown. On the question of rebaptizing heretics the Churches of
Africa and Asia Minor were diametrically opposed to the Church of Rome
and other communities in the West. As to the mode of observing the
Paschal feast a still greater diversity existed. According to the
testimony of Irenaeus there was nothing approaching to uniformity in the
practice of the various societies with which he was acquainted. "The
dispute," said he, "is not only respecting the _day_, but also
respecting the _manner_ of fasting. For some think that they ought to
fast only one day, some two, some more days; some compute their day as
consisting of forty hours night and day; [634:1] and this diversity
existing among those that observe it, is not a matter that has just
sprung up in our times, but long ago among those before us." [634:2]
When Cyprian refused to admit the lapsed to the Lord's Supper on the
strength of the tickets of peace furnished by the confessors and the
martyrs, he departed from the course previously adopted in Carthage; and
when Novatian excluded them altogether from communion, he acted on a
principle which was not then novel. There was at that time, in fact,
quite as much diversity in discipline and ceremonies among Christians as
is now to be found in evangelical Protestant Churches.

It must be admitted that, as we descend from the apostolic age, the
spirit of the dominant body in the Church betrays a growing want of
Christian charity. There soon appeared a disposition, on the part of
some, to monopolize religion, and to disown all who did not adopt their
ecclesiastical Shibboleth. When the great mass of Christians became
organized into what was called the Catholic Church, the chief pastors
branded with the odious name of heretics all who did not belong to their
association. The Nazarenes originally held all the great doctrines of
the gospel, but they soon found themselves in the list of the
proscribed, and they gradually degenerated into abettors of very corrupt
principles. Those members of the Church of Carthage who joined
Felicissimus acted upon principles which the predecessors even of
Cyprian had sanctioned, and yet the African prelate denounced them as
beyond the pale of divine mercy. Novatian was not less orthodox than
Cornelius; but because he contended for a system of discipline which,
though not unprecedented, was deemed by his rival too austere, and
because he organized a party to support him, he also was stigmatized
with the designation of heretic. The Quarto-decimans, as well as those
who contended for Catholic rebaptism, would doubtless have been classed
in the same list, had they not formed numerous and powerful
confederations. Thus it was that those called Catholics were taught to
cherish a contracted spirit, and to look upon all, except their own
party, as out of the reach of salvation. Their false conceptions of what
properly constituted the Church involved them in many errors and tended
to vitiate their entire theology. But this subject is too important to
be discussed in a few cursory remarks, and must be reserved for
consideration in a separate chapter.





CHAPTER XIII.

THE THEORY OF THE CHURCH, AND THE HISTORY OF ITS PERVERSION.

CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS.


"I am the good Shepherd," said Jesus: "the good Shepherd giveth his life
_for the sheep_.... My sheep _hear my voice_, and I know them, and
they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life, and _they shall never
perish_." [636:1] The sheep here spoken of are the true children of God.
They constitute that blessed community of which it is written--"Christ
loved _the Church_, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present
it to himself _a glorious Church_, not having _spot or wrinkle or any
such thing_, but that it should be holy and _without blemish_." [636:2]

The society thus described is, in the highest sense, "the holy Catholic
Church." Its members are to be found wherever genuine piety exists, and
they are all united to Christ by the bond of the Holy Spirit. Their
Divine Overseer has promised to be with them "alway unto the end of the
world," [636:3] to keep them "through faith unto salvation," [636:4] and
to sustain them even against the violence of "the gates of hell."
[636:5] Though they are scattered throughout different countries, and
separated by various barriers of ecclesiastical division, they have the
elements of concord. Could they be brought together, and divested of
their prejudices, and made fully acquainted with each other's
sentiments, they would speedily incorporate; for they possess "the unity
of the Spirit," [637:1] "the unity of the faith," [637:2] and "the unity
of the knowledge of the Son of God." [637:3] But these heirs of promise
cannot be distinguished by the eye of sense; their true character can be
known infallibly only to the Great Searcher of hearts; and for this,
among other reasons, the spiritual commonwealth to which they belong is
usually designated "_the Church invisible_." [637:4]

The _visible Church_ is composed, to a considerable extent, of very
different materials. It embraces the whole mixed multitude of nominal
Christians, including not a few who exhibit no evidence whatever of
vital godliness. Our Lord describes it in one of His parables when He
says--"The kingdom of heaven is like unto a net which was cast into the
sea, and gathered of every kind; which, when it was full, they drew to
shore, and sat down, and gathered the good into vessels, but cast the
bad away. So shall it be at the end of the world: the angels shall come
forth, and sever the wicked from among the just, and shall cast them
into the furnace of fire: there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth."
[637:5]

In the first century the profession of Christianity was perilous as well
as unpopular, so that the number of spurious disciples was comparatively
small; and so long as the brethren enjoyed the ministrations of inspired
teachers, all attempts to alienate them from each other, or to create
schisms, had little success. But still, even whilst the apostles were on
earth, some of the Churches planted and watered by themselves were
involved in error and agitated by the spirit of division. "It hath been
declared unto me of you," says Paul to the Corinthians, "that there are
contentions among you. Now this I say, that every one of you saith, I am
of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ." [638:1]
The same writer had occasion to mourn over the apostasy of the Churches
of Galatia. "I marvel," said he, "that ye are so soon removed from him
that called you into the grace of Christ unto another gospel.... O
foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you that ye should not obey the
truth?" [638:2] The Church of Sardis in the lifetime of the Apostle John
had sunk into an equally deplorable condition, and hence he was
commissioned to declare to it--"I know thy works, that thou hast a name
that thou livest, _and art dead_." [638:3]

The circumstances which led to the organization of the Catholic system
have already been detailed, and it has been shewn that the great design
of the arrangement was to secure the visible unity of the ecclesiastical
commonwealth. The Catholic confederation was supposed to comprehend all
the faithful; and it was, no doubt, expected that, not long after its
establishment, it would have rung the death knell of schism and
sectarianism. According to its fundamental principle, whoever was not in
communion with the bishop was out of the Church. To be out of the Church
was soon considered as tantamount to be without God and without hope, so
that this test condemned all who in any way dissented from the dominant
creed as beyond the pale of salvation. Its assumptions, involving a
decision of such grave importance and of such dubious authority, were
acknowledged with some difficulty; and the question as to the extent and
character of the Church seems to have led to considerable discussion;
[639:1] but the horror of heresy which so generally prevailed
strengthened the pretensions of the hierarchy, and at length every
candidate for baptism was required to declare, as one of the articles of
his faith--"I believe in the holy Catholic Church." [639:2]

According to one interpretation the sentiment embodied in this
profession was perfectly unobjectionable. If by the holy Catholic Church
we understand the Church invisible composed of all the true children of
God, it must be conceded that every devout student of the Scriptures is
bound to express his belief in its existence and its excellence. This
Church is precious in the eyes of the Lord; it is the habitation of His
Spirit; it is the heir of His great and glorious promises. But the holy
Catholic Church, in the current ecclesiastical phraseology of the third
century, had a very different signification. It denoted the great mass
of disciples associated under the care of the Catholic bishops, as
distinguished from all the minor sects throughout the Empire which made
a profession of Christianity. A sincere and intelligent believer might
well have scrupled to give such a title to the mixed society thus
claiming its application.

It is quite true that there is no salvation out of the Church, if by the
Church is meant that elect company which Christ died to redeem and
sanctify; but the Word of God does not warrant us to assert that the
eternal well-being of man depends on his connexion with any earthly
society. Even in the days of the apostles, some who were subjected to a
sentence of excommunication were the excellent of the earth. "I wrote
unto _the Church_," says John, "but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the
pre-eminence among them, _receiveth us not_. Wherefore, if I come, I
will remember his deeds which he doeth, prating against us with
malicious words, and not content therewith, neither doth he himself
receive _the brethren_, and forbiddeth them that would, and _casteth
them out of the Church_." [640:1] This Diotrephes seems to have been
some wayward and domineering presbyter who took the lead among his
fellow-elders, and who induced them by the influence of commanding
talent, combined, it may be, with superior worldly station, to support
him in his wilfulness. [640:2] But it would be very foolish to suppose
that the brethren who were thus _cast out of the Church_ were thereby
eternally undone, for such certainly was not the judgment of the beloved
disciple. Faith in Christ, and not a relation to any visible society,
secures a title to heaven. Thousands, as well as the thief on the cross,
have been admitted into paradise who have never been baptized, [640:3]
and we might point out numberless cases in which individuals, in the
wonderful providence of God, have been led to a saving knowledge of the
truth who have never had an opportunity of joining a congregation of
Christian worshippers. But those who now assumed the name of Catholics
were continually dwelling upon the importance of a connexion with their
own association; and, assuming that they were _the Church_, they
appropriated to themselves whatever they could find in Scripture in
commendation of its excellence. The promises addressed to the Church in
the book of inspiration refer, however, not to any local and visible
community, but to the "Church of the first-born which are written in
heaven;" [641:1] and the Catholics, by misapplying them, were led to
form very extravagant notions of the advantages of the position which
they occupied. The ascription of the attributes of the Church invisible
to their own association was, in fact, the fundamental misconception on
which a vast fabric of error was erected. By reason of the indwelling of
the Spirit in all believers the Church invisible is _catholic_, or
universal, that is, it is to be found wherever vital Christianity
exists; for the same reason it is _holy_, every member of it being a
living temple of Jehovah; it is also _one_, as one Spirit animates all
the saints and unites them to God and to each other; and it is
_perpetual_, or indestructible, for the Most High has promised never to
leave Himself without witnesses among men, and all His redeemed ones
shall remain as trophies of His grace throughout all eternity. But these
attributes were represented as belonging to the Church visible, and this
radical mistake became the parent of monstrous delusions. The
ecclesiastical writers who flourished towards the end of the second and
beginning of the third century exhibit a considerable amount of
inconsistency and vacillation when they touch upon the subject; [641:2]
but, half a century afterwards, the language currently employed is much
bolder and more decided. At that time Cyprian does not hesitate to
express himself in the strongest terms of high-church exclusiveness.
"_All_," says he, "_are adversaries of the Lord and antichrist_ who
are found to have departed from the charity and unity of the Catholic
Church." [641:3] "You ought to know that the bishop is in the Church and
the Church in the bishop, and _if any be not with the bishop_, that _he
is not in the Church_." [641:4] "The house of God is one, and there
cannot be salvation for any except in the Church." [641:5] "He can no
longer have God for a Father, who has not the Church for a mother."
[642:1]

Though the Catholics were a compact body, forming the bulk of the
Christian population, their system failed to absorb all the professors
of the gospel, or perhaps even greatly to check the tendency towards
ecclesiastical separation. In their controversies with seceders and
schismatics, their own principles were more distinctly defined; and, as
they soon found that they were quite an overmatch for any individual
sect, their tone gradually became more decided and dictatorial. But the
theological position from which they started was a sophism; and, like
the movements of a traveller who has mistaken his way, every step of
their progress was an advance in a wrong direction. Some of the more
prominent errors to which their theory led may here be enumerated.

I. The theory of the Catholic Church recognized an odious ecclesiastical
monopoly. Pastors and teachers are "for the perfecting of the saints,
for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ;"
[642:2] and yet a sinner may be saved without their instrumentality. The
truth when spoken by a layman, or when read in a private chamber, may
prove quite as efficacious as when proclaimed from the pulpit of a
cathedral. That kingdom of God which "cometh not with observation" is
built up by "the Word of His grace;" [642:3] and so long as the Word
exists, and so long as the Spirit applies it to enlighten and sanctify
and comfort God's children, the Church is imperishable. The evangelical
labours of the pious master of a merchant vessel have often been blessed
abundantly; and among the tens of thousands afloat upon the broad
waters, who seldom enjoy any ecclesiastical ministrations, may be found
some of the highest types of Christian excellence. Though regularly
ordained pastors are necessary to the growth and well-being of the
Church, such facts shew that they are not essential to its existence.
But, according to the Catholic system, they are the veins and arteries
through which its very life-blood circulates. All grace belongs to the
visible society called the Catholic Church, and of this grace the
Catholic ministers have the exclusive distribution. Without their
intervention, as the dispensers of divine ordinances, no one can hope to
inherit heaven. No other ministers whatever can be instrumental in
conferring any saving benefit. Was it extraordinary that individuals who
were supposed to be entrusted with such tremendous influence soon began
to be regarded with awful reverence? If the services which they rendered
were necessary to salvation, and if these services could be performed by
none else, they were possessed of absolute authority, and it was to be
expected that they would forthwith begin to act as "lords over God's
heritage."

Under the Mosaic economy none save the descendants of a single
individual were permitted to present the sacrifices or to enter the holy
place. In the celebration of the most solemn rites of their religion the
Jewish people were kept at a mysterious distance from the presence of
the Divine Majesty, and were taught to regard the officiating ministers
as mediators between God and themselves. This arrangement was
symbolical, as all the priests were types of the Great Intercessor. But
every believer may now enjoy the nearest access to his Maker, for the
Saviour has made all His people "kings and priests unto God." [643:1]
The ministers of the gospel do not constitute a privileged fraternity
entitled by birth to exercise certain functions and to claim certain
immunities. They should be appointed _by_ the people as well as _for_
them, and no service which they perform implies that they have nearer
access to the Divine Presence than the rest of the worshippers. In the
New Testament they are never designated _priests_, [644:1] neither is
their intervention between God and the sinner described as
indispensable. But Catholicism invested them with a factitious
consequence, representing them as inheriting peculiar rights and
privileges by ecclesiastical descent from the apostles. According to
Cyprian, "Christ says to the apostles, _and thereby to all prelates who
by vicarious ordination are successors of the apostles_. 'He that
heareth you, heareth me.'" [644:2] About the commencement of the third
century the pastors of the Church began to be called priests, [644:3]
and this change in the ecclesiastical nomenclature betokens the
influence of Catholic principles on the current theology. The Jewish
sacrificial system had now ceased, and the Hebrew Christians were
perhaps disposed to transfer to their new ministers the titles of the
sons of Levi; but, had not the alteration been in accordance with the
