alone, therefore, there is neither vanity nor affliction of
spirit. Yet, 'the way of a man is not his own,'[6] and sometimes
we find ourselves wishing for what dazzles. In that hour let us in
all humility take our place among the imperfect, and look upon
ourselves as little souls who at every instant need to be upheld
by the goodness of God. From the moment He sees us fully convinced
of our nothingness, and hears us cry out: 'My foot stumbles, Lord,
but Thy Mercy is my strength,'[7] He reaches out His Hand to us.
But, should we attempt great things, even under pretext of zeal,
He deserts us. It suffices, therefore, to humble ourselves, to
bear with meekness our imperfections. Herein lies--for us--true
holiness."

*   *   *   *   *   *

One day I was complaining of being more tired than my Sisters,
for, besides the ordinary duties, I had other work unknown to the
rest. Soeur Therese replied:

"I should like always to see you a brave soldier, never grumblng
at hardships, but considering the wounds of your companions as
most serious, and your own as mere scratches. You feel this
fatigue so much because no one is aware of it.

"Now the Blessed Margaret Mary, at the time she had two whitlows,
confessed that she really suffered from the hidden one only. The
other, which she was unable to hide, excited her Sisters' pity and
made her an object of compassion. This is indeed a very natural
feeling, the desire that people should know of our aches and
pains, but in giving way to it we play the coward."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"When we are guilty of a fault we must never attribute it to some
physical cause, such as illness or the weather. We must ascribe it
to our own imperfections, without being discouraged thereby.
'Occasions do not make a man frail, but show what he is.'"[8]

*   *   *   *   *   *

"God did not permit that our Mother should tell me to write my
poems as soon as I had composed them, and, fearful of committing a
sin against poverty, I would not ask leave. I had therefore to
wait for some free time, and at eight o'clock in the evening I
often found it extremely difficult to remember what I had composed
in the morning.

"True, these trifles are a species of martyrdom; but we must be
careful not to alleviate the pain of the martyrdom by permitting
ourselves, or securing permission for, a thousand and one things
which would tend to make the religious life both comfortable and
agreeable."

*   *   *   *   *   *

One day, as I was in tears, Soeur Therese told me to avoid the
habit of allowing others to see the trifles that worried me,
adding that nothing made community life more trying than
unevenness of temper.

"You are indeed right, I answered, "such was my own thought.
Henceforward my tears will be for God alone. I shall confide my
worries to One Who will understand and console me."

"Tears for God!" she promptly replied, "that must not be. Far less
to Him than to creatures ought you to show a mournful face. Our
Divine Master has only our monasteries where He may obtain some
solace for His Heart. He comes to us in search of rest--to forget
the unceasing complaints of His friends in the world, who, instead
of appreciating the value of the Cross, receive it far more often
with moans and tears. Would you then be as the mediocre souls?
Frankly, this is not disinterested love. . . . _It is for us to
console our Lord, and not for Him to console us._ His Heart is so
tender that if you cry He will dry your tears; but thereafter He
will go away sad, since you did not suffer Him to repose
tranquilly within you. Our Lord loves the glad of heart, the
children that greet Him with a smile. When will you learn to hide
your troubles from Him, or to tell Him gaily that you are happy to
suffer for Him?"

"The face is the mirror of the soul," she said once, "and yours,
like that of a contented little child, should always be calm and
serene. Even when alone, be cheerful, remembering always that you
are in the sight of the Angels."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I was anxious she should congratulate me on what, in my eyes, was
an heroic act of virtue; but she said to me:

"Compare this little act of virtue with what our Lord has the
right to expect of you! Rather should you humble yourself for
having lost so many opportunities of proving your love."

Little satisfied with this answer, I awaited an opportunity of
finding out how Soeur Therese herself would act under trial, and
the occasion was not long in coming. Reverend Mother asked us to
do some extremely tiring work which bristled with difficulties,
and, on purpose, I made it still more difficult for our Mistress.

Not for one second, however, could I detect her in fault, and,
heedless of the fatigue involved, she remained gracious and
amiable, eager throughout to help others at her own expense. At
last I could resist no longer, and I confessed to her what my
thoughts had been.

"How comes it," I said, "that you can be so patient? You are ever
the same--calm and full of joy." "It was not always the case with
me," she replied, "but since I have abandoned all thought of
self-seeking, I live the happiest life possible."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Our dear Mistress used to say that during recreation, more than at
any other time, we should find opportunities for practising virtue.

"If your desire be to draw great profit, do not go with the idea
of procuring relaxation, but rather with the intention of
entertaining others and practising complete detachment from self.
Thus, for instance, if you are telling one of the Sisters
something you think entertaining, and she should interrupt to tell
you something else, show yourself interested, even though in
reality her story may not interest you in the least. Be careful,
also, not to try to resume what you were saying. In this way you
will leave recreation filled with a great interior peace and
endowed with fresh strength for the practice of virtue, because
you have not sought to please yourself, but others. If only we
could realise what we gain by self-denial in all things!"

"You realise it, certainly, for you have always practised
self-denial."

"Yes, I have forgotten myself, and I have tried not to see myself
in anything."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"When some one knocks at our door, or when we are rung for, we
must practise mortification and refrain from doing even another
stitch before answering. I have practised this myself, and I
assure you that it is a source of peace."

After this advice, and according as occasion offered, I promptly
answered every summons. One day, during her illness, she was
witness of this, and said:

"At the hour of death you will be very happy to find this to your
account. You have just done something more glorious than if,
through clever diplomacy, you had procured the good-will of the
Government for all religious communities and had been proclaimed
throughout France as a second Judith."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Questioned as to her method of sanctifying meals, she answered:

"In the refectory we have but one thing to do: perform a lowly
action with lofty thoughts. I confess that the sweetest
aspirations of love often come to me in the refectory. Sometimes I
am brought to a standstill by the thought that were Our Lord in my
place He would certainly partake of those same dishes which are
served to me. It is quite probable that during His lifetime He
tasted of similar food--He must have eaten bread and fruit.

"Here are my little rubrics:

"I imagine myself at Nazareth, in the house of the Holy Family.
If, for instance, I am served with salad, cold fish, wine, or
anything pungent in taste, I offer it to St. Joseph. To our
Blessed Lady I offer hot foods and ripe fruit, and to the Infant
Jesus our feast-day fare, especially rice and preserves. Lastly,
when I am served a wretched dinner I say cheerfully: 'To-day, my
little one, it is all for you!'"

Thus in many pretty ways she hid her mortifications. One fast-day,
however, when our Reverend Mother ordered her some special food, I
found her seasoning it with wormwood because it was too much to
her taste. On another occasion I saw her drinking very slowly a
most unpleasant medicine. "Make haste," I said, "drink it off at
once!" "Oh, no!" she answered; "must I not profit of these small
opportunities for penance since the greater ones are forbidden me?"

Toward the end of her life I learned that, during her noviciate,
one of our Sisters, when fastening the scapular for her, ran the
large pin through her shoulder, and for hours she bore the pain
with joy. On another occasion she gave me proof of her interior
mortification. I had received a most interesting letter which was
read aloud at recreation, during her absence. In the evening she
expressed the wish to read it, and I gave it to her. Later on,
when she returned it, I begged her to tell me what she thought of
one of the points of the letter which I knew ought to have charmed
her. She seemed rather confused, and after a pause she answered:
"God asked of me the sacrifice of this letter because of the
eagerness I displayed the other day . . . so I have not read it."

*   *   *   *   *   *

When speaking to her of the mortifications of the Saints, she
remarked: "It was well that Our Lord warned us: 'In My Father's
House there are many mansions, otherwise I would have told
you.'[9] For, if every soul called to perfection were obliged to
perform these austerities in order to enter Heaven, He would have
told us, and we should have willingly undertaken them. But He has
declared that, 'there are many mansions in His House.' If there
are some for great souls, for the Fathers of the Desert and for
Martyrs of penance, there must also be one for little children.
And in that one a place is kept for us, if we but love Him dearly
together with Our Father and the Spirit of Love."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"While in the world, I used, on waking, to think of all the
pleasant or unpleasant things which might happen throughout the
day, and if I foresaw nothing but worries I got up with a heavy
heart. Now it is quite the reverse. I think of the pains and of
the sufferings awaiting me, and I rise, feeling all the more
courageous and light of heart in proportion to the opportunities I
foresee of proving my love for Our Lord, and of gaining--mother of
souls as I am--my children's livelihood. Then I kiss my crucifix,
and, laying it gently on my pillow, I leave it there while I
dress, and I say: 'My Jesus, Thou hast toiled and wept enough
during Thy three-and-thirty years on this miserable earth. Rest
Thee, to-day! It is my turn to suffer and to fight.'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

One washing-day I was sauntering towards the laundry, and looking
at the flowers as I passed. Soeur Therese was following, and
quickly overtook me: "Is that," she said quietly, "how people
hurry themselves when they have children, and are obliged to work
to procure them food?"

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Do you know which are my Sundays and feast-days? They are the
days on which God tries me the most."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I was distressed at my want of courage, and Soeur Therese said to
me: "You are complaining of what should be your greatest
happiness. If you fought only when you felt eagerness, where would
be your merit? What does it matter, even if you are devoid of
courage, provided you act as though you possessed it? If you feel
too lazy to pick up a bit of thread, and yet do so for love of
Jesus, you acquire more merit than for a much nobler action done
in a moment of fervour. Instead of grieving, be glad that, by
allowing you to feel your own weakness, Our Lord is furnishing you
with an opportunity of saving a greater number of souls."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I asked her whether Our Lord were not displeased at the sight of
my many failings. This was her answer: "Be comforted, for He Whom
you have chosen as your Spouse has every imaginable perfection;
but--dare I say it?--He has one great infirmity too--He is blind!
And there is a science about which He knows nothing--addition!
These two great defects, much to be deplored in an earthly
bridegroom, do but make ours infinitely more lovable. Were it
necessary that He should be clear-sighted, and familiar with the
science of figures, do you not think that, confronted with our
many sins, He would send us back to our nothingness? But His Love
for us makes him actually blind.

"If the greatest sinner on earth should repent at the moment of
his death, and draw His last breath in an act of love, neither the
many graces he had abused, nor the multiplied crimes he had
committed, would stand in his way. Our Lord would see nothing,
count nothing, but the sinner's last prayer, and without delay He
would receive him into the arms of His Mercy.

"But, to make Him thus blind and to prevent Him doing the smallest
sum of addition, we must approach Him through His Heart--on that
side He is vulnerable and defenceless."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I had grieved her, and had gone to ask her pardon: "If you but
knew what I feel!" she exclaimed. "Never have I more clearly
understood the love with which Jesus receives us when we seek His
forgiveness. If I, His poor little creature, feel so tenderly
towards you when you come back to me, what must pass through Our
Lord's Divine Heart when we return to Him? Far more quickly than I
have just done will He blot out our sins from His memory. . . .
Nay, He will even love us more tenderly than before we fell."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I had an immense dread of the judgments of God, and no argument of
Soeur Therese could remove it. One day I put to her the following
objection: "It is often said to us that in God's sight the angels
themselves are not pure. How, therefore, can you expect me to be
otherwise than filled with fear?"

She replied: "There is but one means of compelling God not to
judge us, and it is--to appear before Him empty-handed." "And how
can that be done?" "It is quite simple: lay nothing by, spend your
treasures as you gain them. Were I to live to be eighty, I should
always be poor, because I cannot economise. All my earnings are
immediately spent on the ransom of souls.

"Were I to await the hour of death to offer my trifling coins for
valuation, Our Lord would not fail to discover in them some base
metal, and they would certainly have to be refined in Purgatory.
Is it not recorded of certain great Saints that, on appearing
before the Tribunal of God, their hands laden with merit, they
have yet been sent to that place of expiation, because in God's
Eyes all our justice is unclean?"

"But," I replied, "if God does not judge our good actions, He will
judge our bad ones." "Do not say that! Our Lord is Justice itself,
and if He does not judge our good actions, neither will He judge
our bad ones. It seems to me, that for Victims of Love there will
be no judgment. God will rather hasten to reward with eternal
delights His own Love which He will behold burning in their
hearts."

"To enjoy such a privilege, would it suffice to repeat that Act of
Oblation which you have composed?" "Oh, no! words do not suffice.
To be a true Victim of Love we must surrender ourselves entirely.
. . . _Love will consume us only in the measure of our
self-surrender."_

*   *   *   *   *   *

I was grieving bitterly over a fault I had committed. "Take your
Crucifix," she said, "and kiss it." I kissed the Feet.

"Is that how a child kisses its father? Throw your arms at once
round His Neck and kiss His Face." When I had done so, she
continued: "That is not sufficient--He must return your caress." I
had to press the Crucifix to both my cheeks, whereupon she added:
"Now, all is forgiven."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I told her one day that if I must be reproached I preferred
deserving it to being unjustly accused. "For my part," she
replied, "I prefer to be charged unjustly, because, having nothing
to reproach myself with, I offer gladly this little injustice to
God. Then, humbling myself, I think how easily I might have
deserved the reproach. The more you advance, the fewer the
combats; or rather, the more easy the victory, because the good
side of things will be more visible. Then your soul will soar
above creatures. As for me, I feel utterly indifferent to all
accusations because I have learned the hollowness of human
judgment."

She added further: "When misunderstood and judged unfavourably,
what benefit do we derive from defending ourselves? Leave things
as they are, and say nothing. It is so sweet to allow ourselves to
be judged anyhow, rightly or wrongly.

"It is not written in the Gospel that Saint Mary Magdalen put
forth excuses when charged by her sister with sitting idle at Our
Lord's Feet. She did not say: 'Martha, if you knew the happiness
that is mine and if you heard the words that I hear, you too would
leave everything to share my joy and my repose.' No, she preferred
to keep silent. . . . Blessed silence which giveth such peace to
the soul!"

*   *   *   *   *   *

At a moment of temptation and struggle I received this note: "'The
just man shall correct me in mercy and shall reprove me; but let
not the oil of the sinner perfume my head.'[10] It is only by the
just that I can be either reproved or corrected, because all my
Sisters are pleasing to God. It is less bitter to be rebuked by a
sinner than by a just man; but through compassion for sinners, to
obtain their conversion, I beseech Thee, O my God, to permit that
I may be well rebuked by those just souls who surround me. I ask
also that the _oil of praise,_ so sweet to our nature, _may not
perfume my head,_ that is to say, my mind, by making me believe
that I possess virtues when I have merely performed a few good
actions.

"Jesus! 'Thy Name is as oil poured out,'[11] and it is into this
divine perfume that I desire wholly to plunge myself, far from the
gaze of mankind."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"It is not playing the game to argue with a Sister that she is in
the wrong, even when it is true, because we are not answerable for
her conduct. We must not be _Justices of the peace,_ but _Angels
of peace_ only."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"You give yourselves up too much to what you are doing," she used
to say to us; "you worry about the future as though it were in
your hands. Are you much concerned at this moment as to what is
happening in other Carmelite convents, and whether the nuns there
are busy or otherwise? Does their work prevent you praying or
meditating? Well, just in the same way, you ought to detach
yourselves from your own personal labours, conscientiously
spending on them the time prescribed, but with perfect freedom of
heart. We read that the Israelites, while building the walls of
Jerusalem, worked with one hand and held a sword in the other.[12]
This is an image of what we should do: avoid being wholly absorbed
in our work."

*   *   *   *   *   *

