principal or capital vices.

Obj. 2: Further, the passions of the soul are causes of sin, as
stated above (Q. 77). But there are four principal passions of the
soul; two of which, viz. hope and fear, are not mentioned among the
above sins, whereas certain vices are mentioned to which pleasure and
sadness belong, since pleasure belongs to gluttony and lust, and
sadness to sloth and envy. Therefore the principal sins are
unfittingly enumerated.

Obj. 3: Further, anger is not a principal passion. Therefore it
should not be placed among the principal vices.

Obj. 4: Further, just as covetousness or avarice is the root of sin,
so is pride the beginning of sin, as stated above (A. 2). But avarice
is reckoned to be one of the capital vices. Therefore pride also
should be placed among the capital vices.

Obj. 5: Further, some sins are committed which cannot be caused
through any of these: as, for instance, when one sins through
ignorance, or when one commits a sin with a good intention, e.g.
steals in order to give an alms. Therefore the capital vices are
insufficiently enumerated.

_On the contrary,_ stands the authority of Gregory who enumerates
them in this way (Moral. xxxi, 17).

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), the capital vices are those
which give rise to others, especially by way of final cause. Now this
kind of origin may take place in two ways. First, on account of the
condition of the sinner, who is disposed so as to have a strong
inclination for one particular end, the result being that he
frequently goes forward to other sins. But this kind of origin does
not come under the consideration of art, because man's particular
dispositions are infinite in number. Secondly, on account of a
natural relationship of the ends to one another: and it is in this
way that most frequently one vice arises from another, so that this
kind of origin can come under the consideration of art.

Accordingly therefore, those vices are called capital, whose ends
have certain fundamental reasons for moving the appetite; and it is
in respect of these fundamental reasons that the capital vices are
differentiated. Now a thing moves the appetite in two ways. First,
directly and of its very nature: thus good moves the appetite to seek
it, while evil, for the same reason, moves the appetite to avoid it.
Secondly, indirectly and on account of something else, as it were:
thus one seeks an evil on account of some attendant good, or avoids a
good on account of some attendant evil.

Again, man's good is threefold. For, in the first place, there is a
certain good of the soul, which derives its aspect of appetibility,
merely through being apprehended, viz. the excellence of honor and
praise, and this good is sought inordinately by _vainglory._
Secondly, there is the good of the body, and this regards either the
preservation of the individual, e.g. meat and drink, which good is
pursued inordinately by _gluttony,_ or the preservation of the
species, e.g. sexual intercourse, which good is sought inordinately
by _lust._ Thirdly, there is external good, viz. riches, to which
_covetousness_ is referred. These same four vices avoid inordinately
the contrary evils.

Or again, good moves the appetite chiefly through possessing some
property of happiness, which all men seek naturally. Now in the first
place happiness implies perfection, since happiness is a perfect
good, to which belongs excellence or renown, which is desired by
_pride_ or _vainglory._ Secondly, it implies satiety, which
_covetousness_ seeks in riches that give promise thereof. Thirdly, it
implies pleasure, without which happiness is impossible, as stated in
_Ethic._ i, 7; x, 6, 7, 8 and this _gluttony_ and _lust_ pursue.

On the other hand, avoidance of good on account of an attendant evil
occurs in two ways. For this happens either in respect of one's own
good, and thus we have _sloth,_ which is sadness about one's
spiritual good, on account of the attendant bodily labor: or else it
happens in respect of another's good, and this, if it be without
recrimination, belongs to _envy,_ which is sadness about another's
good as being a hindrance to one's own excellence, while if it be
with recrimination with a view to vengeance, it is _anger._ Again,
these same vices seek the contrary evils.

Reply Obj. 1: Virtue and vice do not originate in the same way: since
virtue is caused by the subordination of the appetite to reason, or
to the immutable good, which is God, whereas vice arises from the
appetite for mutable good. Wherefore there is no need for the
principal vices to be contrary to the principal virtues.

Reply Obj. 2: Fear and hope are irascible passions. Now all the
passions of the irascible part arise from passions of the
concupiscible part; and these are all, in a way, directed to pleasure
or sorrow. Hence pleasure and sorrow have a prominent place among the
capital sins, as being the most important of the passions, as stated
above (Q. 25, A. 4).

Reply Obj. 3: Although anger is not a principal passion, yet it has a
distinct place among the capital vices, because it implies a special
kind of movement in the appetite, in so far as recrimination against
another's good has the aspect of a virtuous good, i.e. of the right
to vengeance.

Reply Obj. 4: Pride is said to be the beginning of every sin, in the
order of the end, as stated above (A. 2): and it is in the same order
that we are to consider the capital sin as being principal. Wherefore
pride, like a universal vice, is not counted along with the others,
but is reckoned as the "queen of them all," as Gregory states (Moral.
xxxi, 27). But covetousness is said to be the root from another point
of view, as stated above (AA. 1, 2).

Reply Obj. 5: These vices are called capital because others, most
frequently, arise from them: so that nothing prevents some sins from
arising out of other causes. Nevertheless we might say that all the
sins which are due to ignorance, can be reduced to sloth, to which
pertains the negligence of a man who declines to acquire spiritual
goods on account of the attendant labor; for the ignorance that can
cause sin, is due to negligence, as stated above (Q. 76, A. 2). That
a man commit a sin with a good intention, seems to point to
ignorance, in so far as he knows not that evil should not be done
that good may come of it.
________________________

QUESTION 85

OF THE EFFECTS OF SIN, AND, FIRST, OF THE CORRUPTION OF THE GOOD OF
NATURE
(In Six Articles)

We must now consider the effects of sin; and (1) the corruption of
the good of nature; (2) the stain on the soul; (3) the debt of
punishment.

Under the first head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the good of nature is diminished by sin?

(2) Whether it can be taken away altogether?

(3) Of the four wounds, mentioned by Bede, with which human nature is
stricken in consequence of sin.

(4) Whether privation of mode, species and order is an effect of sin?

(5) Whether death and other bodily defects are the result of sin?

(6) Whether they are, in any way, natural to man?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 85, Art. 1]

Whether Sin Diminishes the Good of Nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin does not diminish the good of
nature. For man's sin is no worse than the devil's. But natural good
remains unimpaired in devils after sin, as Dionysius states (Div.
Nom. iv). Therefore neither does sin diminish the good of human
nature.

Obj. 2: Further, when that which follows is changed, that which
precedes remains unchanged, since substance remains the same when its
accidents are changed. But nature exists before the voluntary action.
Therefore, when sin has caused a disorder in a voluntary act, nature
is not changed on that account, so that the good of nature be
diminished.

Obj. 3: Further, sin is an action, while diminution is a passion. Now
no agent is passive by the very reason of its acting, although it is
possible for it to act on one thing, and to be passive as regards
another. Therefore he who sins, does not, by his sin, diminish the
good of his nature.

Obj. 4: Further, no accident acts on its subject: because that which
is patient is a potential being, while that which is subjected to an
accident, is already an actual being as regards that accident. But
sin is in the good of nature as an accident in a subject. Therefore
sin does not diminish the good of nature, since to diminish is to act.

_On the contrary,_ "A certain man going down from Jerusalem to
Jericho (Luke 10:30), i.e. to the corruption of sin, was stripped of
his gifts, and wounded in his nature," as Bede [*The quotation is
from the _Glossa Ordinaria_ of Strabo] expounds the passage. Therefore
sin diminishes the good of nature.

_I answer that,_ The good of human nature is threefold. First, there
are the principles of which nature is constituted, and the properties
that flow from them, such as the powers of the soul, and so forth.
Secondly, since man has from nature an inclination to virtue, as
stated above (Q. 60, A. 1; Q. 63, A. 1), this inclination to virtue
is a good of nature. Thirdly, the gift of original justice, conferred
on the whole of human nature in the person of the first man, may be
called a good of nature.

Accordingly, the first-mentioned good of nature is neither destroyed
nor diminished by sin. The third good of nature was entirely
destroyed through the sin of our first parent. But the second good of
nature, viz. the natural inclination to virtue, is diminished by sin.
Because human acts produce an inclination to like acts, as stated
above (Q. 50, A. 1). Now from the very fact that thing becomes
inclined to one of two contraries, its inclination to the other
contrary must needs be diminished. Wherefore as sin is opposed to
virtue, from the very fact that a man sins, there results a
diminution of that good of nature, which is the inclination to virtue.

Reply Obj. 1: Dionysius is speaking of the first-mentioned good of
nature, which consists in "being, living and understanding," as
anyone may see who reads the context.

Reply Obj. 2: Although nature precedes the voluntary action, it has
an inclination to a certain voluntary action. Wherefore nature is not
changed in itself, through a change in the voluntary action: it is
the inclination that is changed in so far as it is directed to its
term.

Reply Obj. 3: A voluntary action proceeds from various powers, active
and passive. The result is that through voluntary actions something
is caused or taken away in the man who acts, as we have stated when
treating of the production of habits (Q. 51, A. 2).

Reply Obj. 4: An accident does not act effectively on its subject,
but it acts on it formally, in the same sense as when we say that
whiteness makes a thing white. In this way there is nothing to hinder
sin from diminishing the good of nature; but only in so far as sin is
itself a diminution of the good of nature, through being an
inordinateness of action. But as regards the inordinateness of the
agent, we must say that such like inordinateness is caused by the
fact that in the acts of the soul, there is an active, and a passive
element: thus the sensible object moves the sensitive appetite, and
the sensitive appetite inclines the reason and will, as stated above
(Q. 77, AA. 1, 2). The result of this is the inordinateness, not as
though an accident acted on its own subject, but in so far as the
object acts on the power, and one power acts on another and puts it
out of order.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 85, Art. 2]

Whether the Entire Good of Human Nature Can Be Destroyed by Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that the entire good of human nature can
be destroyed by sin. For the good of human nature is finite, since
human nature itself is finite. Now any finite thing is entirely taken
away, if the subtraction be continuous. Since therefore the good of
nature can be continually diminished by sin, it seems that in the end
it can be entirely taken away.

Obj. 2: Further, in a thing of one nature, the whole and the parts
are uniform, as is evidently the case with air, water, flesh and all
bodies with similar parts. But the good of nature is wholly uniform.
Since therefore a part thereof can be taken away by sin, it seems
that the whole can also be taken away by sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the good of nature, that is weakened by sin, is
aptitude for virtue. Now this aptitude is destroyed entirely in some
on account of sin: thus the lost cannot be restored to virtue any
more than the blind can to sight. Therefore sin can take away the
good of nature entirely.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Enchiridion xiv) that "evil does
not exist except in some good." But the evil of sin cannot be in the
good of virtue or of grace, because they are contrary to it.
Therefore it must be in the good of nature, and consequently it does
not destroy it entirely.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the good of nature, that is
diminished by sin, is the natural inclination to virtue, which is
befitting to man from the very fact that he is a rational being; for
it is due to this that he performs actions in accord with reason,
which is to act virtuously. Now sin cannot entirely take away from
man the fact that he is a rational being, for then he would no longer
be capable of sin. Wherefore it is not possible for this good of
nature to be destroyed entirely.

Since, however, this same good of nature may be continually
diminished by sin, some, in order to illustrate this, have made use
of the example of a finite thing being diminished indefinitely,
without being entirely destroyed. For the Philosopher says (Phys. i,
text. 37) that if from a finite magnitude a continual subtraction be
made in the same quantity, it will at last be entirely destroyed, for
instance if from any finite length I continue to subtract the length
of a span. If, however, the subtraction be made each time in the same
proportion, and not in the same quantity, it may go on indefinitely,
as, for instance, if a quantity be halved, and one half be diminished
by half, it will be possible to go on thus indefinitely, provided
that what is subtracted in each case be less than what was subtracted
before. But this does not apply to the question at issue, since a
subsequent sin does not diminish the good of nature less than a
previous sin, but perhaps more, if it be a more grievous sin.

We must, therefore, explain the matter otherwise by saying that the
aforesaid inclination is to be considered as a middle term between
two others: for it is based on the rational nature as on its root,
and tends to the good of virtue, as to its term and end. Consequently
its diminution may be understood in two ways: first, on the part of
its root, secondly, on the part of its term. In the first way, it is
not diminished by sin, because sin does not diminish nature, as
stated above (A. 1). But it is diminished in the second way, in so
far as an obstacle is placed against its attaining its term. Now if
it were diminished in the first way, it would needs be entirely
destroyed at last by the rational nature being entirely destroyed.
Since, however, it is diminished on the part of the obstacle which is
placed against its attaining its term, it is evident that it can be
diminished indefinitely, because obstacles can be placed
indefinitely, inasmuch as man can go on indefinitely adding sin to
sin: and yet it cannot be destroyed entirely, because the root of
this inclination always remains. An example of this may be seen in a
transparent body, which has an inclination to receive light, from the
very fact that it is transparent; yet this inclination or aptitude is
diminished on the part of supervening clouds, although it always
remains rooted in the nature of the body.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection avails when diminution is made by
subtraction. But here the diminution is made by raising obstacles,
and this neither diminishes nor destroys the root of the inclination,
as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: The natural inclination is indeed wholly uniform:
nevertheless it stands in relation both to its principle and to its
term, in respect of which diversity of relation, it is diminished on
the one hand, and not on the other.

Reply Obj. 3: Even in the lost the natural inclination to virtue
remains, else they would have no remorse of conscience. That it is
not reduced to act is owing to their being deprived of grace by
Divine justice. Thus even in a blind man the aptitude to see remains
in the very root of his nature, inasmuch as he is an animal naturally
endowed with sight: yet this aptitude is not reduced to act, for the
lack of a cause capable of reducing it, by forming the organ
requisite for sight.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 85, Art. 3]

Whether Weakness, Ignorance, Malice and Concupiscence Are Suitably
Reckoned As the Wounds of Nature Consequent Upon Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that weakness, ignorance, malice and
concupiscence are not suitably reckoned as the wounds of nature
consequent upon sin. For one same thing is not both effect and cause
of the same thing. But these are reckoned to be causes of sin, as
appears from what has been said above (Q. 76, A. 1; Q. 77, AA. 3, 5;
Q. 78, A. 1). Therefore they should not be reckoned as effects of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, malice is the name of a sin. Therefore it should
have no place among the effects of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, concupiscence is something natural, since it is an
act of the concupiscible power. But that which is natural should not
be reckoned a wound of nature. Therefore concupiscence should not be
reckoned a wound of nature.

Obj. 4: Further, it has been stated (Q. 77, A. 3) that to sin from
weakness is the same as to sin from passion. But concupiscence is a
passion. Therefore it should not be condivided with weakness.

Obj. 5: Further, Augustine (De Nat. et Grat. lxvii, 67) reckons "two
things to be punishments inflicted on the soul of the sinner, viz.
ignorance and difficulty," from which arise "error and vexation,"
which four do not coincide with the four in question. Therefore it
seems that one or the other reckoning is incomplete.

_On the contrary,_ The authority of Bede suffices [*Reference not
known].

_I answer that,_ As a result of original justice, the reason had
perfect hold over the lower parts of the soul, while reason itself
was perfected by God, and was subject to Him. Now this same original
justice was forfeited through the sin of our first parent, as already
stated (Q. 81, A. 2); so that all the powers of the soul are left, as
it were, destitute of their proper order, whereby they are naturally
directed to virtue; which destitution is called a wounding of nature.

Again, there are four of the soul's powers that can be subject of
virtue, as stated above (Q. 61, A. 2), viz. the reason, where
prudence resides, the will, where justice is, the irascible, the
subject of fortitude, and the concupiscible, the subject of
temperance. Therefore in so far as the reason is deprived of its
order to the true, there is the wound of ignorance; in so far as the
will is deprived of its order of good, there is the wound of malice;
in so far as the irascible is deprived of its order to the arduous,
there is the wound of weakness; and in so far as the concupiscible is
deprived of its order to the delectable, moderated by reason, there
is the wound of concupiscence.

Accordingly these are the four wounds inflicted on the whole of human
nature as a result of our first parent's sin. But since the
inclination to the good of virtue is diminished in each individual on
account of actual sin, as was explained above (AA. 1, 2), these four
wounds are also the result of other sins, in so far as, through sin,
the reason is obscured, especially in practical matters, the will
hardened to evil, good actions become more difficult and
concupiscence more impetuous.

Reply Obj. 1: There is no reason why the effect of one sin should not
be the cause of another: because the soul, through sinning once, is
more easily inclined to sin again.

Reply Obj. 2: Malice is not to be taken here as a sin, but as a
certain proneness of the will to evil, according to the words of Gen.
8:21: "Man's senses are prone to evil from his youth" [*Vulgate: 'The
imagination and thought of man's heart are prone to evil from his
youth.'].

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 82, A. 3, ad 1), concupiscence is
natural to man, in so far as it is subject to reason: whereas, in so
far as it is goes beyond the bounds of reason, it is unnatural to man.

Reply Obj. 4: Speaking in a general way, every passion can be called
a weakness, in so far as it weakens the soul's strength and clogs the
reason. Bede, however, took weakness in the strict sense, as contrary
to fortitude which pertains to the irascible.

Reply Obj. 5: The "difficulty" which is mentioned in this book of
Augustine, includes the three wounds affecting the appetitive powers,
viz. "malice," "weakness" and "concupiscence," for it is owing to
these three that a man finds it difficult to tend to the good.
"Error" and "vexation" are consequent wounds, since a man is vexed
through being weakened in respect of the objects of his concupiscence.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 85, Art. 4]

Whether Privation of Mode, Species and Order Is the Effect of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that privation of mode, species and order
is not the effect of sin. For Augustine says (De Natura Boni iii)
that "where these three abound, the good is great; where they are
less, there is less good; where they are not, there is no good at
all." But sin does not destroy the good of nature. Therefore it does
not destroy mode, species and order.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing is its own cause. But sin itself is the
"privation of mode, species and order," as Augustine states (De
Natura Boni iv). Therefore privation of mode, species and order is
not the effect of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, different effects result from different sins. Now
since mode, species and order are diverse, their corresponding
privations must be diverse also, and, consequently, must be the
result of different sins. Therefore privation of mode, species and
order is not the effect of each sin.

_On the contrary,_ Sin is to the soul what weakness is to the body,
according to Ps. 6:3, "Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak." Now
weakness deprives the body of mode, species and order.

_I answer that,_ As stated in the First Part, Q. 5, A. 5, mode,
species and order are consequent upon every created good, as such,
and also upon every being. Because every being and every good as such
depends on its form from which it derives its species. Again, any
kind of form, whether substantial or accidental, of anything
whatever, is according to some measure, wherefore it is stated in
_Metaph._ viii, that "the forms of things are like numbers," so that
a form has a certain _mode_ corresponding to its measure. Lastly
owing to its form, each thing has a relation of _order_ to something
else.

Accordingly there are different grades of mode, species and order,
corresponding to the different degrees of good. For there is a good
belonging to the very substance of nature, which good has its mode,
species and order, and is neither destroyed nor diminished by sin.
There is again the good of the natural inclination, which also has
its mode, species and order; and this is diminished by sin, as stated
above (AA. 1, 2), but is not entirely destroyed. Again, there is the
good of virtue and grace: this too has its mode, species and order,
and is entirely taken away by sin. Lastly, there is a good consisting
in the ordinate act itself, which also has its mode, species and
order, the privation of which is essentially sin. Hence it is clear
both how sin is privation of mode, species and order, and how it
destroys or diminishes mode, species and order.

This suffices for the Replies to the first two Objections.

Reply Obj. 3: Mode, species and order follow one from the other, as
explained above: and so they are destroyed or diminished together.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 85, Art. 5]

Whether Death and Other Bodily Defects Are the Result of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that death and other bodily defects are
not the result of sin. Because equal causes have equal effects. Now
these defects are not equal in all, but abound in some more than in
others, whereas original sin, from which especially these defects
seem to result, is equal in all, as stated above (Q. 82, A. 4).
Therefore death and suchlike defects are not the result of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, if the cause is removed, the effect is removed. But
these defects are not removed, when all sin is removed by Baptism or
Penance. Therefore they are not the effect of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, actual sin has more of the character of guilt than
original sin has. But actual sin does not change the nature of the
body by subjecting it to some defect. Much less, therefore, does
original sin. Therefore death and other bodily defects are not the
result of sin.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 5:12), "By one man sin
entered into this world, and by sin death."

_I answer that,_ One thing causes another in two ways: first, by
reason of itself; secondly, accidentally. By reason of itself, one
thing is the cause of another, if it produces its effect by reason of
the power of its nature or form, the result being that the effect is
directly intended by the cause. Consequently, as death and such like
defects are beside the intention of the sinner, it is evident that
sin is not, of itself, the cause of these defects. Accidentally, one
thing is the cause of another if it causes it by removing an
obstacle: thus it is stated in _Phys._ viii, text. 32, that "by
displacing a pillar a man moves accidentally the stone resting
thereon." In this way the sin of our first parent is the cause of
death and all such like defects in human nature, in so far as by the
sin of our first parent original justice was taken away, whereby not
only were the lower powers of the soul held together under the
control of reason, without any disorder whatever, but also the whole
body was held together in subjection to the soul, without any defect,
as stated in the First Part (Q. 97, A. 1). Wherefore, original
justice being forfeited through the sin of our first parent; just as
human nature was stricken in the soul by the disorder among the
powers, as stated above (A. 3; Q. 82, A. 3), so also it became
subject to corruption, by reason of disorder in the body.

Now the withdrawal of original justice has the character of
punishment, even as the withdrawal of grace has. Consequently, death
and all consequent bodily defects are punishments of original sin.
And although the defects are not intended by the sinner, nevertheless
they are ordered according to the justice of God Who inflicts them as
punishments.

Reply Obj. 1: Causes that produce their effects of themselves, if
equal, produce equal effects: for if such causes be increased or
diminished, the effect is increased or diminished. But equal causes
of an obstacle being removed, do not point to equal effects. For
supposing a man employs equal force in displacing two columns, it
does not follow that the movements of the stones resting on them will
be equal; but that one will move with greater velocity, which has the
greater weight according to the property of its nature, to which it
is left when the obstacle to its falling is removed. Accordingly,
when original justice is removed, the nature of the human body is
left to itself, so that according to diverse natural temperaments,
some men's bodies are subject to more defects, some to fewer,
although original sin is equal in all.

Reply Obj. 2: Both original and actual sin are removed by the same
cause that removes these defects, according to the Apostle (Rom.
8:11): "He . . . shall quicken . . . your mortal bodies, because of
His Spirit that dwelleth in you": but each is done according to the
order of Divine wisdom, at a fitting time. Because it is right that
we should first of all be conformed to Christ's sufferings, before
attaining to the immortality and impassibility of glory, which was
begun in Him, and by Him acquired for us. Hence it behooves that our
bodies should remain, for a time, subject to suffering, in order that
we may merit the impassibility of glory, in conformity with Christ.

Reply Obj. 3: Two things may be considered in actual sin, the
substance of the act, and the aspect of fault. As regards the
substance of the act, actual sin can cause a bodily defect: thus some
sicken and die through eating too much. But as regards the fault, it
deprives us of grace which is given to us that we may regulate the
acts of the soul, but not that we may ward off defects of the body,
as original justice did. Wherefore actual sin does not cause those
defects, as original sin does.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 85, Art. 6]

Whether Death and Other Defects Are Natural to Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that death and such like defects are
natural to man. For "the corruptible and the incorruptible differ
generically" (Metaph. x, text. 26). But man is of the same genus as
other animals which are naturally corruptible. Therefore man is
naturally corruptible.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is composed of contraries is naturally
corruptible, as having within itself the cause of corruption. But
such is the human body. Therefore it is naturally corruptible.

Obj. 3: Further, a hot thing naturally consumes moisture. Now human
life is preserved by hot and moist elements. Since therefore the
vital functions are fulfilled by the action of natural heat, as
stated in _De Anima_ ii, text. 50, it seems that death and such like
defects are natural to man.

_On the contrary,_ (1) God made in man whatever is natural to him.
Now "God made not death" (Wis. 1:13). Therefore death is not natural
to man.

(2) Further, that which is natural cannot be called either a
punishment or an evil: since what is natural to a thing is suitable
to it. But death and such like defects are the punishment of original
sin, as stated above (A. 5). Therefore they are not natural to man.

(3) Further, matter is proportionate to form, and everything to its
end. Now man's end is everlasting happiness, as stated above (Q. 2,
A. 7; Q. 5, AA. 3, 4): and the form of the human body is the rational
soul, as was proved in the First Part (Q. 75, A. 6). Therefore the
human body is naturally incorruptible.

_I answer that,_ We may speak of any corruptible thing in two ways;
first, in respect of its universal nature, secondly, as regards its
particular nature. A thing's particular nature is its own power of
action and self-preservation. And in respect of this nature, every
corruption and defect is contrary to nature, as stated in _De Coelo_
ii, text. 37, since this power tends to the being and preservation of
the thing to which it belongs.

On the other hand, the universal nature is an active force in some
universal principle of nature, for instance in some heavenly body; or
again belonging to some superior substance, in which sense God is
said by some to be "the Nature Who makes nature." This force intends
the good and the preservation of the universe, for which alternate
generation and corruption in things are requisite: and in this
respect corruption and defect in things are natural, not indeed as
regards the inclination of the form which is the principle of being
and perfection, but as regards the inclination of matter which is
allotted proportionately to its particular form according to the
discretion of the universal agent. And although every form intends
perpetual being as far as it can, yet no form of a corruptible being
can achieve its own perpetuity, except the rational soul; for the
reason that the latter is not entirely subject to matter, as other
forms are; indeed it has an immaterial operation of its own, as
stated in the First Part (Q. 75, A. 2). Consequently as regards his
form, incorruption is more natural to man than to other corruptible
things. But since that very form has a matter composed of contraries,
from the inclination of that matter there results corruptibility in
the whole. In this respect man is naturally corruptible as regards
the nature of his matter left to itself, but not as regards the
nature of his form.

The first three objections argue on the side of the matter; while the
other three argue on the side of the form. Wherefore in order to
solve them, we must observe that the form of man which is the
rational soul, in respect of its incorruptibility is adapted to its
end, which is everlasting happiness: whereas the human body, which is
corruptible, considered in respect of its nature, is, in a way,
adapted to its form, and, in another way, it is not. For we may note
a twofold condition in any matter, one which the agent chooses, and
another which is not chosen by the agent, and is a natural condition
of matter. Thus, a smith in order to make a knife, chooses a matter
both hard and flexible, which can be sharpened so as to be useful for
cutting, and in respect of this condition iron is a matter adapted
for a knife: but that iron be breakable and inclined to rust, results
from the natural disposition of iron, nor does the workman choose
this in the iron, indeed he would do without it if he could:
wherefore this disposition of matter is not adapted to the workman's
intention, nor to the purpose of his art. In like manner the human
body is the matter chosen by nature in respect of its being of a
mixed temperament, in order that it may be most suitable as an organ
of touch and of the other sensitive and motive powers. Whereas the
fact that it is corruptible is due to a condition of matter, and is
not chosen by nature: indeed nature would choose an incorruptible
matter if it could. But God, to Whom every nature is subject, in
forming man supplied the defect of nature, and by the gift of
original justice, gave the body a certain incorruptibility, as was
stated in the First Part (Q. 97, A. 1). It is in this sense that it
is said that "God made not death," and that death is the punishment
of sin.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.
________________________

QUESTION 86

OF THE STAIN OF SIN
(In Two Articles)

We must now consider the stain of sin; under which head there are two
points of inquiry:

(1) Whether an effect of sin is a stain on the soul?

(2) Whether it remains in the soul after the act of sin?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 86, Art. 1]

Whether Sin Causes a Stain on the Soul?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin causes no stain on the soul. For
a higher nature cannot be defiled by contact with a lower nature:
hence the sun's ray is not defiled by contact with tainted bodies, as
Augustine says (Contra Quinque Haereses v). Now the human soul is of
a much higher nature than mutable things, to which it turns by
sinning. Therefore it does not contract a stain from them by sinning.

Obj. 2: Further, sin is chiefly in the will, as stated above (Q. 74,
AA. 1, 2). Now the will is in the reason, as stated in _De _Anima
iii, text. 42. But the reason or intellect is not stained by
considering anything whatever; rather indeed is it perfected thereby.
Therefore neither is the will stained by sin.

Obj. 3: Further, if sin causes a stain, this stain is either
something positive, or a pure privation. If it be something positive,
it can only be either a disposition or a habit: for it seems that
nothing else can be caused by an act. But it is neither disposition
nor habit: for it happens that a stain remains even after the removal
of a disposition or habit; for instance, in a man who after
committing a mortal sin of prodigality, is so changed as to fall into
a sin of the opposite vice. Therefore the stain does not denote
anything positive in the soul. Again, neither is it a pure privation.
Because all sins agree on the part of aversion and privation of
grace: and so it would follow that there is but one stain caused by
all sins. Therefore the stain is not the effect of sin.

_On the contrary,_ It was said to Solomon (Ecclus. 47:22): "Thou hast
stained thy glory": and it is written (Eph. 5:27): "That He might
present it to Himself a glorious church not having spot or wrinkle":
and in each case it is question of the stain of sin. Therefore a
stain is the effect of sin.

_I answer that,_ A stain is properly ascribed to corporeal things,
when a comely body loses its comeliness through contact with another
body, e.g. a garment, gold or silver, or the like. Accordingly a
stain is ascribed to spiritual things in like manner. Now man's soul
has a twofold comeliness; one from the refulgence of the natural
light of reason, whereby he is directed in his actions; the other,
from the refulgence of the Divine light, viz. of wisdom and grace,
whereby man is also perfected for the purpose of doing good and
fitting actions. Now, when the soul cleaves to things by love, there
is a kind of contact in the soul: and when man sins, he cleaves to
certain things, against the light of reason and of the Divine law, as
shown above (Q. 71, A. 6). Wherefore the loss of comeliness
occasioned by this contact, is metaphorically called a stain on the
soul.

Reply Obj. 1: The soul is not defiled by inferior things, by their
own power, as though they acted on the soul: on the contrary, the
soul, by its own action, defiles itself, through cleaving to them
inordinately, against the light of reason and of the Divine law.

Reply Obj. 2: The action of the intellect is accomplished by the
intelligible thing being in the intellect, according to the mode of
the intellect, so that the intellect is not defiled, but perfected,
by them. On the other hand, the act of the will consists in a
movement towards things themselves, so that love attaches the soul to
the thing loved. Thus it is that the soul is stained, when it cleaves
inordinately, according to Osee 9:10: "They . . . became abominable
as those things were which they loved."

Reply Obj. 3: The stain is neither something positive in the soul,
nor does it denote a pure privation: it denotes a privation of the
soul's brightness in relation to its cause, which is sin; wherefore
diverse sins occasion diverse stains. It is like a shadow, which is
the privation of light through the interposition of a body, and which
varies according to the diversity of the interposed bodies.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 86, Art. 2]

Whether the Stain Remains in the Soul After the Act of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that the stain does not remain in the soul
after the act of sin. For after an action, nothing remains in the
soul except habit or disposition. But the stain is not a habit or
disposition, as stated above (A. 1, Obj. 3). Therefore the stain does
not remain in the soul after the act of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, the stain is to the sin what the shadow is to the
body, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3). But the shadow does not remain
when the body has passed by. Therefore the stain does not remain in
the soul when the act of sin is past.

Obj. 3: Further, every effect depends on its cause. Now the cause of
the stain is the act of sin. Therefore when the act of sin is no
longer there, neither is the stain in the soul.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Jos. 22:17): "Is it a small thing
to you that you sinned with Beelphegor, and the stain of that crime
remaineth in you [Vulg.: 'us'] to this day?"

_I answer that,_ The stain of sin remains in the soul even when the
act of sin is past. The reason for this is that the stain, as stated
above (A. 1), denotes a blemish in the brightness of the soul, on
account of its withdrawing from the light of reason or of the Divine
law. And therefore so long as man remains out of this light, the
stain of sin remains in him: but as soon as, moved by grace, he
returns to the Divine light and to the light of reason, the stain is
removed. For although the act of sin ceases, whereby man withdrew
from the light of reason and of the Divine law, man does not at once
return to the state in which he was before, and it is necessary that
his will should have a movement contrary to the previous movement.
Thus if one man be parted from another on account of some kind of
movement, he is not reunited to him as soon as the movement ceases,
but he needs to draw nigh to him and to return by a contrary movement.

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing positive remains in the soul after the act of
sin, except the disposition or habit; but there does remain something
privative, viz. the privation of union with the Divine light.

Reply Obj. 2: After the interposed body has passed by, the
transparent body remains in the same position and relation as regards
the illuminating body, and so the shadow passes at once. But when the
sin is past, the soul does not remain in the same relation to God:
and so there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 3: The act of sin parts man from God, which parting causes
the defect of brightness, just as local movement causes local
parting. Wherefore, just as when movement ceases, local distance is
not removed, so neither, when the act of sin ceases, is the stain
removed.
________________________

QUESTION 87

OF THE DEBT OF PUNISHMENT
(In Eight Articles)

We must now consider the debt of punishment. We shall consider (1)
the debt itself; (2) mortal and venial sin, which differ in respect
of the punishment due to them.

Under the first head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the debt of punishment is an effect of sin?

(2) Whether one sin can be the punishment of another?

(3) Whether any sin incurs a debt of eternal punishment?

(4) Whether sin incurs a debt of punishment that is infinite in
quantity?

(5) Whether every sin incurs a debt of eternal and infinite
punishment?

(6) Whether the debt of punishment can remain after sin?

(7) Whether every punishment is inflicted for a sin?

(8) Whether one person can incur punishment for another's sin?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 1]

Whether the Debt of Punishment Is an Effect of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that the debt of punishment is not an
effect of sin. For that which is accidentally related to a thing,
does not seem to be its proper effect. Now the debt of punishment is
accidentally related to sin, for it is beside the intention of the
sinner. Therefore the debt of punishment is not an effect of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, evil is not the cause of good. But punishment is
good, since it is just, and is from God. Therefore it is not an
effect of sin, which is evil.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (Confess. i) that "every inordinate
affection is its own punishment." But punishment does not incur a
further debt of punishment, because then it would go on indefinitely.
Therefore sin does not incur the debt of punishment.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Rom. 2:9): "Tribulation and anguish
upon every soul of man that worketh evil." But to work evil is to
sin. Therefore sin incurs a punishment which is signified by the
words "tribulation and anguish."

_I answer that,_ It has passed from natural things to human affairs
that whenever one thing rises up against another, it suffers some
detriment therefrom. For we observe in natural things that when one
contrary supervenes, the other acts with greater energy, for which
reason "hot water freezes more rapidly," as stated in _Meteor._ i,
12. Wherefore we find that the natural inclination of man is to
repress those who rise up against him. Now it is evident that all
things contained in an order, are, in a manner, one, in relation to
the principle of that order. Consequently, whatever rises up against
an order, is put down by that order or by the principle thereof. And
because sin is an inordinate act, it is evident that whoever sins,
commits an offense against an order: wherefore he is put down, in
consequence, by that same order, which repression is punishment.

Accordingly, man can be punished with a threefold punishment
corresponding to the three orders to which the human will is subject.
In the first place a man's nature is subjected to the order of his
own reason; secondly, it is subjected to the order of another man who
governs him either in spiritual or in temporal matters, as a member
either of the state or of the household; thirdly, it is subjected to
the universal order of the Divine government. Now each of these
orders is disturbed by sin, for the sinner acts against his reason,
and against human and Divine law. Wherefore he incurs a threefold
punishment; one, inflicted by himself, viz. remorse of conscience;
another, inflicted by man; and a third, inflicted by God.

Reply Obj. 1: Punishment follows sin, inasmuch as this is an evil by
reason of its being inordinate. Wherefore just as evil is accidental
to the sinner's act, being beside his intention, so also is the debt
of punishment.

Reply Obj. 2: Further, a just punishment may be inflicted either by
God or by man: wherefore the punishment itself is the effect of sin,
not directly but dispositively. Sin, however, makes man deserving of
punishment, and that is an evil: for Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv)
that "punishment is not an evil, but to deserve punishment is."
Consequently the debt of punishment is considered to be directly the
effect of sin.

Reply Obj. 3: This punishment of the _inordinate affection_ is due to
sin as overturning the order of reason. Nevertheless sin incurs a
further punishment, through disturbing the order of the Divine or
human law.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 2]

Whether Sin Can Be the Punishment of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin cannot be the punishment of sin.
For the purpose of punishment is to bring man back to the good of
virtue, as the Philosopher declares (Ethic. x, 9). Now sin does not
bring man back to the good of virtue, but leads him in the opposite
direction. Therefore sin is not the punishment of sin.

Obj. 2: Further, just punishments are from God, as Augustine says
(Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 82). But sin is not from God, and is an injustice.
Therefore sin cannot be the punishment of sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the nature of punishment is to be something against
the will. But sin is something from the will, as shown above (Q. 74,
AA. 1, 2). Therefore sin cannot be the punishment of sin.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory speaks (Hom. xi in Ezech.) that some sins
are punishments of others.

_I answer that,_ We may speak of sin in two ways: first, in its
essence, as such; secondly, as to that which is accidental thereto.
Sin as such can nowise be the punishment of another. Because sin
considered in its essence is something proceeding from the will, for
it is from this that it derives the character of guilt. Whereas
punishment is essentially something against the will, as stated in
the First Part (Q. 48, A. 5). Consequently it is evident that sin
regarded in its essence can nowise be the punishment of sin.

On the other hand, sin can be the punishment of sin accidentally in
three ways. First, when one sin is the cause of another, by removing
an impediment thereto. For passions, temptations of the devil, and
the like are causes of sin, but are impeded by the help of Divine
grace which is withdrawn on account of sin. Wherefore since the
withdrawal of grace is a punishment, and is from God, as stated above
(Q. 79, A. 3), the result is that the sin which ensues from this is
also a punishment accidentally. It is in this sense that the Apostle
speaks (Rom. 1:24) when he says: "Wherefore God gave them up to the
desires of their heart," i.e. to their passions; because, to wit,
when men are deprived of the help of Divine grace, they are overcome
by their passions. In this way sin is always said to be the
punishment of a preceding sin. Secondly, by reason of the substance
of the act, which is such as to cause pain, whether it be an interior
act, as is clearly the case with anger or envy, or an exterior act,
as is the case with one who endures considerable trouble and loss in
order to achieve a sinful act, according to Wis. 5:7: "We wearied
ourselves in the way of iniquity." Thirdly, on the part of the
effect, so that one sin is said to be a punishment by reason of its
effect. In the last two ways, a sin is a punishment not only in
respect of a preceding sin, but also with regard to itself.

Reply Obj. 1: Even when God punishes men by permitting them to fall
into sin, this is directed to the good of virtue. Sometimes indeed it
is for the good of those who are punished, when, to wit, men arise
from sin, more humble and more cautious. But it is always for the
amendment of others, who seeing some men fall from sin to sin, are
the more fearful of sinning. With regard to the other two ways, it is
evident that the punishment is intended for the sinner's amendment,
since the very fact that man endures toil and loss in sinning, is of
a nature to withdraw man from sin.

Reply Obj. 2: This objection considers sin essentially as such: and
the same answer applies to the Third Objection.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 3]

Whether Any Sin Incurs a Debt of Eternal Punishment?

Objection 1: It would seem that no sin incurs a debt of eternal
punishment. For a just punishment is equal to the fault, since
justice is equality: wherefore it is written (Isa. 27:8): "In measure
against measure, when it shall be cast off, thou shalt judge it." Now
sin is temporal. Therefore it does not incur a debt of eternal
punishment.

Obj. 2: Further, "punishments are a kind of medicine" (Ethic. ii, 3).
But no medicine should be infinite, because it is directed to an end,
and "what is directed to an end, is not infinite," as the Philosopher
states (Polit. i, 6). Therefore no punishment should be infinite.

Obj. 3: Further, no one does a thing always unless he delights in it
for its own sake. But "God hath not pleasure in the destruction of
men" [Vulg.: 'of the living']. Therefore He will not inflict eternal
punishment on man.

Obj. 4: Further, nothing accidental is infinite. But punishment is
accidental, for it is not natural to the one who is punished.
Therefore it cannot be of infinite duration.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 25:46): "These shall go into
everlasting punishment"; and (Mk. 3:29): "He that shall blaspheme
against the Holy Ghost, shall never have forgiveness, but shall be
guilty of an everlasting sin."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), sin incurs a debt of
punishment through disturbing an order. But the effect remains so
long as the cause remains. Wherefore so long as the disturbance of
the order remains the debt of punishment must needs remain also. Now
disturbance of an order is sometimes reparable, sometimes
irreparable: because a defect which destroys the principle is
irreparable, whereas if the principle be saved, defects can be
repaired by virtue of that principle. For instance, if the principle
of sight be destroyed, sight cannot be restored except by Divine
power; whereas, if the principle of sight be preserved, while there
arise certain impediments to the use of sight, these can be remedied
by nature or by art. Now in every order there is a principle whereby
one takes part in that order. Consequently if a sin destroys the
principle of the order whereby man's will is subject to God, the
disorder will be such as to be considered in itself, irreparable,
although it is possible to repair it by the power of God. Now the
principle of this order is the last end, to which man adheres by
charity. Therefore whatever sins turn man away from God, so as to
destroy charity, considered in themselves, incur a debt of eternal
punishment.

Reply Obj. 1: Punishment is proportionate to sin in point of
severity, both in Divine and in human judgments. In no judgment,
however, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xxi, 11) is it requisite for
punishment to equal fault in point of duration. For the fact that
adultery or murder is committed in a moment does not call for a
momentary punishment: in fact they are punished sometimes by
imprisonment or banishment for life--sometimes even by death; wherein
account is not taken of the time occupied in killing, but rather of
the expediency of removing the murderer from the fellowship of the
living, so that this punishment, in its own way, represents the
eternity of punishment inflicted by God. Now according to Gregory
(Dial. iv, 44) it is just that he who has sinned against God in his
own eternity should be punished in God's eternity. A man is said to
have sinned in his own eternity, not only as regards continual
sinning throughout his whole life, but also because, from the very
fact that he fixes his end in sin, he has the will to sin,
everlastingly. Wherefore Gregory says (Dial. iv, 44) that the "wicked
would wish to live without end, that they might abide in their sins
for ever."

Reply Obj. 2: Even the punishment that is inflicted according to
human laws, is not always intended as a medicine for the one who is
punished, but sometimes only for others: thus when a thief is hanged,
this is not for his own amendment, but for the sake of others, that
at least they may be deterred from crime through fear of the
punishment, according to Prov. 19:25: "The wicked man being scourged,
the fool shall be wiser." Accordingly the eternal punishments
inflicted by God on the reprobate, are medicinal punishments for
those who refrain from sin through the thought of those punishments,
according to Ps. 59:6: "Thou hast given a warning to them that fear
Thee, that they may flee from before the bow, that Thy beloved may be
delivered."

Reply Obj. 3: God does not delight in punishments for their own sake;
but He does delight in the order of His justice, which requires them.

Reply Obj. 4: Although punishment is related indirectly to nature,
nevertheless it is essentially related to the disturbance of the
order, and to God's justice. Wherefore, so long as the disturbance
lasts, the punishment endures.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 4]

Whether Sin Incurs a Debt of Punishment Infinite in Quantity?

Objection 1: It would seem that sin incurs a debt of punishment
infinite in quantity. For it is written (Jer. 10:24): "Correct me, O
Lord, but yet with judgment: and not in Thy fury, lest Thou bring me
to nothing." Now God's anger or fury signifies metaphorically the
vengeance of Divine justice: and to be brought to nothing is an
infinite punishment, even as to make a thing out of nothing denotes
infinite power. Therefore according to God's vengeance, sin is
awarded a punishment infinite in quantity.

Obj. 2: Further, quantity of punishment corresponds to quantity of
fault, according to Deut. 25:2: "According to the measure of the sin
shall the measure also of the stripes be." Now a sin which is
committed against God, is infinite: because the gravity of a sin
increases according to the greatness of the person sinned against
(thus it is a more grievous sin to strike the sovereign than a
private individual), and God's greatness is infinite. Therefore an
infinite punishment is due for a sin committed against God.

Obj. 3: Further, a thing may be infinite in two ways, in duration,
and in quantity. Now the punishment is infinite in duration.
Therefore it is infinite in quantity also.

_On the contrary,_ If this were the case, the punishments of all
mortal sins would be equal; because one infinite is not greater than
another.

_I answer that,_ Punishment is proportionate to sin. Now sin
comprises two things. First, there is the turning away from the
immutable good, which is infinite, wherefore, in this respect, sin is
infinite. Secondly, there is the inordinate turning to mutable good.
In this respect sin is finite, both because the mutable good itself
is finite, and because the movement of turning towards it is finite,
since the acts of a creature cannot be infinite. Accordingly, in so
far as sin consists in turning away from something, its corresponding
punishment is the _pain of loss,_ which also is infinite, because it
is the loss of the infinite good, i.e. God. But in so far as sin
turns inordinately to something, its corresponding punishment is the
_pain of sense,_ which is also finite.

Reply Obj. 1: It would be inconsistent with Divine justice for the
sinner to be brought to nothing absolutely, because this would be
incompatible with the perpetuity of punishment that Divine justice
requires, as stated above (A. 3). The expression "to be brought to
nothing" is applied to one who is deprived of spiritual goods,
according to 1 Cor. 13:2: "If I . . . have not charity, I am nothing."

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers sin as turning away from
something, for it is thus that man sins against God.

Reply Obj. 3: Duration of punishment corresponds to duration of
fault, not indeed as regards the act, but on the part of the stain,
for as long as this remains, the debt of punishment remains. But
punishment corresponds to fault in the point of severity. And a fault
which is irreparable, is such that, of itself, it lasts for ever;
wherefore it incurs an everlasting punishment. But it is not infinite
as regards the thing it turns to; wherefore, in this respect, it does
not incur punishment of infinite quantity.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 5]

Whether Every Sin Incurs a Debt of Eternal Punishment?

Objection 1: It would seem that every sin incurs a debt of eternal
punishment. Because punishment, as stated above (A. 4), is
proportionate to the fault. Now eternal punishment differs infinitely
from temporal punishment: whereas no sin, apparently, differs
infinitely from another, since every sin is a human act, which cannot
be infinite. Since therefore some sins incur a debt of everlasting
punishment, as stated above (A. 4), it seems that no sin incurs a
debt of mere temporal punishment.

Obj. 2: Further, original sin is the least of all sins, wherefore
Augustine says (Enchiridion xciii) that "the lightest punishment is
incurred by those who are punished for original sin alone." But
original sin incurs everlasting punishment, since children who have
died in original sin through not being baptized, will never see the
kingdom of God, as shown by our Lord's words (John 3:3): "Unless a
man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." Much more,
therefore, will the punishments of all other sins be everlasting.

Obj. 3: Further, a sin does not deserve greater punishment through
being united to another sin; for Divine justice has allotted its
punishment to each sin. Now a venial sin deserves eternal punishment
if it be united to a mortal sin in a lost soul, because in hell there
is no remission of sins. Therefore venial sin by itself deserves
eternal punishment. Therefore temporal punishment is not due for any
sin.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Dial. iv, 39), that certain slighter
sins are remitted after this life. Therefore all sins are not
punished eternally.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 3), a sin incurs a debt of
eternal punishment, in so far as it causes an irreparable disorder in
the order of Divine justice, through being contrary to the very
principle of that order, viz. the last end. Now it is evident that in
some sins there is disorder indeed, but such as not to involve
contrariety in respect of the last end, but only in respect of things
referable to the end, in so far as one is too much or too little
intent on them without prejudicing the order to the last end: as, for
instance, when a man is too fond of some temporal thing, yet would
not offend God for its sake, by breaking one of His commandments.
Consequently such sins do not incur everlasting, but only temporal
punishment.

Reply Obj. 1: Sins do not differ infinitely from one another in
respect of their turning towards mutable good, which constitutes the
substance of the sinful act; but they do differ infinitely in respect
of their turning away from something. Because some sins consist in
turning away from the last end, and some in a disorder affecting
things referable to the end: and the last end differs infinitely from
the things that are referred to it.

Reply Obj. 2: Original sin incurs everlasting punishment, not on
account of its gravity, but by reason of the condition of the
subject, viz. a human being deprived of grace, without which there is
no remission of sin.

The same answer applies to the Third Objection about venial sin.
Because eternity of punishment does not correspond to the quantity of
the sin, but to its irremissibility, as stated above (A. 3).
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 6]

Whether the Debt of Punishment Remains After Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that there remains no debt of punishment
after sin. For if the cause be removed the effect is removed. But sin
is the cause of the debt of punishment. Therefore, when the sin is
removed, the debt of punishment ceases also.

Obj. 2: Further, sin is removed by man returning to virtue. Now a
virtuous man deserves, not punishment, but reward. Therefore, when
sin is removed, the debt of punishment no longer remains.

Obj. 3: Further, "Punishments are a kind of medicine" (Ethic. ii, 3).
But a man is not given medicine after being cured of his disease.
Therefore, when sin is removed the debt of punishment does not remain.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (2 Kings xii. 13, 14): "David said
to Nathan: I have sinned against the Lord. And Nathan said to David:
The Lord also hath taken away thy sin; thou shalt not die.
Nevertheless because thou hast given occasion to the enemies of the
Lord to blaspheme . . . the child that is born to thee shall die."
Therefore a man is punished by God even after his sin is forgiven:
and so the debt of punishment remains, when the sin has been removed.

_I answer that,_ Two things may be considered in sin: the guilty act,
and the consequent stain. Now it is evident that in all actual sins,
when the act of sin has ceased, the guilt remains; because the act of
sin makes man deserving of punishment, in so far as he transgresses
the order of Divine justice, to which he cannot return except he pay
some sort of penal compensation, which restores him to the equality
of justice; so that, according to the order of Divine justice, he who
has been too indulgent to his will, by transgressing God's
commandments, suffers, either willingly or unwillingly, something
contrary to what he would wish. This restoration of the equality of
justice by penal compensation is also to be observed in injuries done
to one's fellow men. Consequently it is evident that when the sinful
or injurious act has ceased there still remains the debt of
punishment.

But if we speak of the removal of sin as to the stain, it is evident
that the stain of sin cannot be removed from the soul, without the
soul being united to God, since it was through being separated from
Him that it suffered the loss of its brightness, in which the stain
consists, as stated above (Q. 86, A. 1). Now man is united to God by
his will. Wherefore the stain of sin cannot be removed from man,
unless his will accept the order of Divine justice, that is to say,
unless either of his own accord he take upon himself the punishment
of his past sin, or bear patiently the punishment which God inflicts
on him; and in both ways punishment avails for satisfaction. Now when
punishment is satisfactory, it loses somewhat of the nature of
punishment: for the nature of punishment is to be against the will;
and although satisfactory punishment, absolutely speaking, is against
the will, nevertheless in this particular case and for this
particular purpose, it is voluntary. Consequently it is voluntary
simply, but involuntary in a certain respect, as we have explained
when speaking of the voluntary and the involuntary (Q. 6, A. 6). We
must, therefore, say that, when the stain of sin has been removed,
there may remain a debt of punishment, not indeed of punishment
simply, but of satisfactory punishment.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as after the act of sin has ceased, the stain
remains, as stated above (Q. 86, A. 2), so the debt of punishment
also can remain. But when the stain has been removed, the debt of
punishment does not remain in the same way, as stated.

Reply Obj. 2: The virtuous man does not deserve punishment simply,
but he may deserve it as satisfactory: because his very virtue
demands that he should do satisfaction for his offenses against God
or man.

Reply Obj. 3: When the stain is removed, the wound of sin is healed
as regards the will. But punishment is still requisite in order that
the other powers of the soul be healed, since they were so disordered
by the sin committed, so that, to wit, the disorder may be remedied
by the contrary of that which caused it. Moreover punishment is
requisite in order to restore the equality of justice, and to remove
the scandal given to others, so that those who were scandalized at
the sin many be edified by the punishment, as may be seen in the
example of David quoted above.
________________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 7]

Whether Every Punishment Is Inflicted for a Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that not every punishment is inflicted for
a sin. For it is written (John 9:3, 2) about the man born blind:
"Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents . . . that he should
be born blind." In like manner we see that many children, those also
who have been baptized, suffer grievous punishments, fevers, for
instance, diabolical possession, and so forth, and yet there is no
sin in them after they have been baptized. Moreover before they are
baptized, there is no more sin in them than in the other children who
do not suffer such things. Therefore not every punishment is
inflicted for a sin.

Obj. 2: Further, that sinners should thrive and that the innocent
should be punished seem to come under the same head. Now each of
these is frequently observed in human affairs, for it is written
about the wicked (Ps. 72:5): "They are not in the labor of men:
neither shall they be scourged like other men"; and (Job 21:7): "[Why
then do] the wicked live, are [they] advanced, and strengthened with
riches" (?)[*The words in brackets show the readings of the Vulgate];
and (Hab. 1:13): "Why lookest Thou upon the contemptuous [Vulg.:
'them that do unjust things'], and holdest Thy peace, when the wicked
man oppresseth [Vulg.: 'devoureth'], the man that is more just than
himself?" Therefore not every punishment is inflicted for a sin.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written of Christ (1 Pet. 2:22) that "He did
no sin, nor was guile found in His mouth." And yet it is said (1 Pet.
2:21) that "He suffered for us." Therefore punishment is not always
inflicted by God for sin.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Job 4:7, seqq.): "Who ever perished
innocent? Or when were the just destroyed? _On the contrary,_ I have
seen those who work iniquity . . . perishing by the blast of God";
and Augustine writes (Retract. i) that "all punishment is just, and
is inflicted for a sin."

_I answer that,_ As already stated (A. 6), punishment can be
considered in two ways--simply, and as being satisfactory. A
satisfactory punishment is, in a way, voluntary. And since those who
differ as to the debt of punishment, may be one in will by the union
of love, it happens that one who has not sinned, bears willingly the
punishment for another: thus even in human affairs we see men take
the debts of another upon themselves. If, however, we speak of
punishment simply, in respect of its being something penal, it has
always a relation to a sin in the one punished. Sometimes this is a
relation to actual sin, as when a man is punished by God or man for a
sin committed by him. Sometimes it is a relation to original sin: and
this, either principally or consequently--principally, the punishment
of original sin is that human nature is left to itself, and deprived
of original justice: and consequently, all the penalties which result
from this defect in human nature.

Nevertheless we must observe that sometimes a thing seems penal, and
yet is not so simply. Because punishment is a species of evil, as
stated in the First Part (Q. 48, A. 5). Now evil is privation of
good. And since man's good is manifold, viz. good of the soul, good
of the body, and external goods, it happens sometimes that man
suffers the loss of a lesser good, that he may profit in a greater
good, as when he suffers loss of money for the sake of bodily health,
or loss of both of these, for the sake of his soul's health and the
glory of God. In such cases the loss is an evil to man, not simply
but relatively; wherefore it does not answer to the name of
punishment simply, but of medicinal punishment, because a medical man
prescribes bitter potions to his patients, that he may restore them
to health. And since such like are not punishments properly speaking,
they are not referred to sin as their cause, except in a restricted
sense: because the very fact that human nature needs a treatment of
penal medicines, is due to the corruption of nature which is itself
the punishment of original sin. For there was no need, in the state
of innocence, for penal exercises in order to make progress in
virtue; so that whatever is penal in the exercise of virtue, is
reduced to original sin as its cause.

Reply Obj. 1: Such like defects of those who are born with them, or
which children suffer from, are the effects and the punishments of
original sin, as stated above (Q. 85, A. 5); and they remain even
after baptism, for the cause stated above (Q. 85, A. 5, ad 2): and
that they are not equally in all, is due to the diversity of nature,
which is left to itself, as stated above (Q. 85, A. 5, ad 1).
Nevertheless, they are directed by Divine providence, to the
salvation of men, either of those who suffer, or of others who are
admonished by their means--and also to the glory of God.

Reply Obj. 2: Temporal and bodily goods are indeed goods of man, but
they are of small account: whereas spiritual goods are man's chief
goods. Consequently it belongs to Divine justice to give spiritual
goods to the virtuous, and to award them as much temporal goods or
evils, as suffices for virtue: for, as Dionysius says (Div. Nom.
viii), "Divine justice does not enfeeble the fortitude of the
virtuous man, by material gifts." The very fact that others receive
temporal goods, is detrimental to their spiritual good; wherefore the
psalm quoted concludes (verse 6): "Therefore pride hath held them
fast."

Reply Obj. 3: Christ bore a satisfactory punishment, not for His, but
for our sins.
________________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 87, Art. 8]

Whether Anyone Is Punished for Another's Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that one may be punished for another's
sin. For it is written (Ex. 20:5): "I am . . . God . . . jealous,
visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation of them that hate Me"; and (Matt. 23:35):
"That upon you may come all the just blood that hath been shed upon
the earth."

Obj. 2: Further, human justice springs from Divine justice. Now,
according to human justice, children are sometimes punished for their
parents, as in the case of high treason. Therefore also according to
Divine justice, one is punished for another's sin.

Obj. 3: Further, if it be replied that the son is punished, not for
the father's sin, but for his own, inasmuch as he imitates his
father's wickedness; this would not be said of the children rather
than of outsiders, who are punished in like manner as those whose
crimes they imitate. It seems, therefore, that children are punished,
not for their own sins, but for those of their parents.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ezech. 18:20): "The son shall not
bear the iniquity of the father."

_I answer that,_ If we speak of that satisfactory punishment, which
one takes upon oneself voluntarily, one may bear another's
punishment, in so far as they are, in some way, one, as stated above
(A. 7). If, however, we speak of punishment inflicted on account of
sin, inasmuch as it is penal, then each one is punished for his own
sin only, because the sinful act is something personal. But if we
speak of a punishment that is medicinal, in this way it does happen
that one is punished for another's sin. For it has been stated (A. 7)
that ills sustained in bodily goods or even in the body itself, are
medicinal punishments intended for the health of the soul. Wherefore
there is no reason why one should not have such like punishments
inflicted on one for another's sin, either by God or by man; e.g. on
children for their parents, or on servants for their masters,
inasmuch as they are their property so to speak; in such a way,
however, that, if the children or the servants take part in the sin,
this penal ill has the character of punishment in regard to both the
one punished and the one he is punished for. But if they do not take
part in the sin, it has the character of punishment in regard to the
one for whom the punishment is borne, while, in regard to the one who
is punished, it is merely medicinal (except accidentally, if he
consent to the other's sin), since it is intended for the good of his
soul, if he bears it patiently.

With regard to spiritual punishments, these are not merely medicinal,
because the good of the soul is not directed to a yet higher good.
Consequently no one suffers loss in the goods of the soul without
some fault of his own. Wherefore Augustine says (Ep. ad Avit.) [*Ep.
ad Auxilium, ccl.], such like punishments are not inflicted on one
for another's sin, because, as regards the soul, the son is not the
father's property. Hence the Lord assigns the reason for this by
saying (Ezech. 18:4): "All souls are Mine."

Reply Obj. 1: Both the passages quoted should, seemingly, be referred
to temporal or bodily punishments, in so far as children are the
property of their parents, and posterity, of their forefathers. Else,
if they be referred to spiritual punishments, they must be understood
in reference to the imitation of sin, wherefore in Exodus these words
are added, "Of them that hate Me," and in the chapter quoted from
Matthew (verse 32) we read: "Fill ye up then the measure of your
fathers." The sins of the fathers are said to be punished in their
children, because the latter are the more prone to sin through being
brought up amid their parents' crimes, both by becoming accustomed to
them, and by imitating their parents' example, conforming to their
authority as it were. Moreover they deserve heavier punishment if,
seeing the punishment of their parents, they fail to mend their ways.
The text adds, "to the third and fourth generation," because men are
wont to live long enough to see the third and fourth generation, so
that both the children can witness their parents' sins so as to
imitate them, and the parents can see their children's punishments so
as to grieve for them.

Reply Obj. 2: The punishments which human justice inflicts on one for
another's sin are bodily and temporal. They are also remedies or
medicines against future sins, in order that either they who are
punished, or others may be restrained from similar faults.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who are near of kin are said to be punished,
rather than outsiders, for the sins of others, both because the
punishment of kindred redounds somewhat upon those who sinned, as
stated above, in so far as the child is the father's property, and
because the examples and the punishments that occur in one's own
household are more moving. Consequently when a man is brought up amid
the sins of his parents, he is more eager to imitate them, and if he
is not deterred by their punishments, he would seem to be the more
obstinate, and, therefore, to deserve more severe punishment.
________________________

QUESTION 88

OF VENIAL AND MORTAL SIN
(In Six Articles)

In the next place, since venial and mortal sins differ in respect of
the debt of punishment, we must consider them. First, we shall
consider venial sin as compared with mortal sin; secondly, we shall
consider venial sin in itself.

Under the first head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether venial sin is fittingly condivided with mortal sin?

(2) Whether they differ generically?

(3) Whether venial sin is a disposition to mortal sin?

(4) Whether a venial sin can become mortal?

(5) Whether a venial sin can become mortal by reason of an
aggravating circumstance?

(6) Whether a mortal sin can become venial?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 88, Art. 1]

Whether Venial Sin Is Fittingly Condivided with Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that venial sin is unfittingly condivided
with mortal sin. For Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxii, 27): "Sin is
a word, deed or desire contrary to the eternal law." But the fact of
being against the eternal law makes a sin to be mortal. Consequently
every sin is mortal. Therefore venial sin is not condivided with
mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:31): "Whether you eat or
drink, or whatever else you do; do all to the glory of God." Now
whoever sins breaks this commandment, because sin is not done for
God's glory. Consequently, since to break a commandment is to commit
a mortal sin, it seems that whoever sins, sins mortally.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever cleaves to a thing by love, cleaves either
as enjoying it, or as using it, as Augustine states (De Doctr.
Christ. i, 3, 4). But no person, in sinning, cleaves to a mutable
good as using it: because he does not refer it to that good which
gives us happiness, which, properly speaking, is to use, according to
Augustine (De Doctr. Christ. i, 3, 4). Therefore whoever sins enjoys
a mutable good. Now "to enjoy what we should use is human
perverseness," as Augustine again says (Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 30).
Therefore, since "perverseness" [*The Latin 'pervertere' means to
overthrow, to destroy, hence 'perversion' of God's law is a mortal
sin.] denotes a mortal sin, it seems that whoever sins, sins mortally.

Obj. 4: Further, whoever approaches one term, from that very fact
turns away from the opposite. Now whoever sins, approaches a mutable
good, and, consequently turns away from the immutable good, so that
he sins mortally. Therefore venial sin is unfittingly condivided with
mortal sin.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Tract. xli in Joan.), that "a
crime is one that merits damnation, and a venial sin, one that does
not." But a crime denotes a mortal sin. Therefore venial sin is
fittingly condivided with mortal sin.

_I answer that,_ Certain terms do not appear to be mutually opposed,
if taken in their proper sense, whereas they are opposed if taken
metaphorically: thus "to smile" is not opposed to "being dry"; but if
we speak of the smiling meadows when they are decked with flowers and
fresh with green hues this is opposed to drought. In like manner if
mortal be taken literally as referring to the death of the body, it
does not imply opposition to venial, nor belong to the same genus.
But if mortal be taken metaphorically, as applied to sin, it is
opposed to that which is venial.

For sin, being a sickness of the soul, as stated above (Q. 71, A. 1,
ad 3; Q. 72, A. 5; Q. 74, A. 9, ad 2), is said to be mortal by
comparison with a disease, which is said to be mortal, through
causing an irreparable defect consisting in the corruption of a
principle, as stated above (Q. 72, A. 5). Now the principle of the
spiritual life, which is a life in accord with virtue, is the order
to the last end, as stated above (Q. 72, A. 5; Q. 87, A. 3): and if
this order be corrupted, it cannot be repaired by any intrinsic
principle, but by the power of God alone, as stated above (Q. 87, A.
3), because disorders in things referred to the end, are repaired
through the end, even as an error about conclusions can be repaired
through the truth of the principles. Hence the defect of order to the
last end cannot be repaired through something else as a higher
principle, as neither can an error about principles. Wherefore such
sins are called mortal, as being irreparable. On the other hand, sins
which imply a disorder in things referred to the end, the order to
the end itself being preserved, are reparable. These sins are called
venial: because a sin receives its acquittal (_veniam_) when the debt
of punishment is taken away, and this ceases when the sin ceases, as
explained above (Q. 87, A. 6).

Accordingly, mortal and venial are mutually opposed as reparable and
irreparable: and I say this with reference to the intrinsic
principle, but not to the Divine power, which can repair all
diseases, whether of the body or of the soul. Therefore venial sin is
fittingly condivided with mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: The division of sin into venial and mortal is not a
division of a genus into its species which have an equal share of the
generic nature: but it is the division of an analogous term into its
parts, of which it is predicated, of the one first, and of the other
afterwards. Consequently the perfect notion of sin, which Augustine
gives, applies to mortal sin. On the other hand, venial sin is called
a sin, in reference to an imperfect notion of sin, and in relation to
mortal sin: even as an accident is called a being, in relation to
substance, in reference to the imperfect notion of being. For it is
not _against_ the law, since he who sins venially neither does what
the law forbids, nor omits what the law prescribes to be done; but he
acts _beside_ the law, through not observing the mode of reason,
which the law intends.

Reply Obj. 2: This precept of the Apostle is affirmative, and so it
does not bind for all times. Consequently everyone who does not
actually refer all his actions to the glory of God, does not
therefore act against this precept. In order, therefore, to avoid
mortal sin each time that one fails actually to refer an action to
God's glory, it is enough to refer oneself and all that one has to
God habitually. Now venial sin excludes only actual reference of the
human act to God's glory, and not habitual reference: because it does
not exclude charity, which refers man to God habitually. Therefore it
does not follow that he who sins venially, sins mortally.

Reply Obj. 3: He that sins venially, cleaves to temporal good, not as
enjoying it, because he does not fix his end in it, but as using it,
by referring it to God, not actually but habitually.

Reply Obj. 4: Mutable good is not considered to be a term in
contraposition to the immutable good, unless one's end is fixed
therein: because what is referred to the end has not the character of
finality.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 88, Art. 2]

Whether Mortal and Venial Sin Differ Generically?

Objection 1: It would seem that venial and mortal sin do not differ
generically, so that some sins be generically mortal, and some
generically venial. Because human acts are considered to be
generically good or evil according to their matter or object, as
stated above (Q. 18, A. 2). Now either mortal or venial sin may be
committed in regard to any object or matter: since man can love any
mutable good, either less than God, which may be a venial sin, or
more than God, which is a mortal sin. Therefore venial and mortal sin
do not differ generically.

Obj. 2: Further, as stated above (A. 1; Q. 72, A. 5; Q. 87, A. 3), a
sin is called mortal when it is irreparable, venial when it can be
repaired. Now irreparability belongs to sin committed out of malice,
which, according to some, is irremissible: whereas reparability
belongs to sins committed through weakness or ignorance, which are
remissible. Therefore mortal and venial sin differ as sin committed
through malice differs from sin committed through weakness or
ignorance. But, in this respect, sins differ not in genus but in
cause, as stated above (Q. 77, A. 8, ad 1). Therefore venial and
mortal sin do not differ generically.

Obj. 3: Further, it was stated above (Q. 74, A. 3, ad 3; A. 10) that
sudden movements both of the sensuality and of the reason are venial
sins. But sudden movements occur in every kind of sin. Therefore no
sins are generically venial.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine, in a sermon on Purgatory (De Sanctis,
serm. xli), enumerates certain generic venial sins, and certain
generic mortal sins.

_I answer that,_ Venial sin is so called from _venia_ (pardon).
Consequently a sin may be called venial, first of all, because it has
been pardoned: thus Ambrose says that "penance makes every sin
venial": and this is called venial "from the result." Secondly, a sin
is called venial because it does not contain anything either
partially or totally, to prevent its being pardoned: partially, as
when a sin contains something diminishing its guilt, e.g. a sin
committed through weakness or ignorance: and this is called venial
"from the cause": totally, through not destroying the order to the
last end, wherefore it deserves temporal, but not everlasting
punishment. It is of this venial sin that we wish to speak now.

For as regards the first two, it is evident that they have no
determinate genus: whereas venial sin, taken in the third sense, can
have a determinate genus, so that one sin may be venial generically,
and another generically mortal, according as the genus or species of
an act is determined by its object. For, when the will is directed to
a thing that is in itself contrary to charity, whereby man is
directed to his last end, the sin is mortal by reason of its object.
Consequently it is a mortal sin generically, whether it be contrary
to the love of God, e.g. blasphemy, perjury, and the like, or against
the love of one's neighbor, e.g. murder, adultery, and such like:
wherefore such sins are mortal by reason of their genus. Sometimes,
however, the sinner's will is directed to a thing containing a
certain inordinateness, but which is not contrary to the love of God
and one's neighbor, e.g. an idle word, excessive laughter, and so
forth: and such sins are venial by reason of their genus.

Nevertheless, since moral acts derive their character of goodness and
malice, not only from their objects, but also from some disposition
of the agent, as stated above (Q. 18, AA. 4, 6), it happens sometimes
that a sin which is venial generically by reason of its object,
becomes mortal on the part of the agent, either because he fixes his
last end therein, or because he directs it to something that is a
mortal sin in its own genus; for example, if a man direct an idle
word to the commission of adultery. In like manner it may happen, on
the part of the agent, that a sin generically mortal because venial,
by reason of the act being imperfect, i.e. not deliberated by reason,
which is the proper principle of an evil act, as we have said above
in reference to sudden movements of unbelief.

Reply Obj. 1: The very fact that anyone chooses something that is
contrary to divine charity, proves that he prefers it to the love of
God, and consequently, that he loves it more than he loves God. Hence
it belongs to the genus of some sins, which are of themselves
contrary to charity, that something is loved more than God; so that
they are mortal by reason of their genus.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument considers those sins which are venial
from their cause.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument considers those sins which are venial by
reason of the imperfection of the act.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 88, Art. 3]

Whether Venial Sin Is a Disposition to Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that venial sin is not a disposition to
mortal sin. For one contrary does not dispose to another. But venial
and mortal sin are condivided as contrary to one another, as stated
above (A. 1). Therefore venial sin is not a disposition to mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, an act disposes to something of like species,
wherefore it is stated in _Ethic._ ii, 1, 2, that "from like acts
like dispositions and habits are engendered." But mortal and venial
sin differ in genus or species, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore
venial sin does not dispose to mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, if a sin is called venial because it disposes to
mortal sin, it follows that whatever disposes to mortal sin is a
venial sin. Now every good work disposes to mortal sin; wherefore
Augustine says in his Rule (Ep. ccxi) that "pride lies in wait for
good works that it may destroy them." Therefore even good works would
be venial sins, which is absurd.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ecclus. 19:1): "He that contemneth
small things shall fall by little and little." Now he that sins
venially seems to contemn small things. Therefore by little and
little he is disposed to fall away together into mortal sin.

_I answer that,_ A disposition is a kind of cause; wherefore as there
is a twofold manner of cause, so is there a twofold manner of
disposition. For there is a cause which moves directly to the
production of the effect, as a hot thing heats: and there is a cause
which moves indirectly, by removing an obstacle, as he who displaces
a pillar is said to displace the stone that rests on it. Accordingly
an act of sin disposes to something in two ways. First, directly, and
thus it disposes to an act of like species. In this way, a sin
generically venial does not, primarily and of its nature, dispose to
a sin generically mortal, for they differ in species. Nevertheless,
in this same way, a venial sin can dispose, by way of consequence, to
a sin which is mortal on the part of the agent: because the
disposition or habit may be so far strengthened by acts of venial
sin, that the lust of sinning increases, and the sinner fixes his end
in that venial sin: since the end for one who has a habit, as such,
is to work according to that habit; and the consequence will be that,
by sinning often venially, he becomes disposed to a mortal sin.
Secondly, a human act disposes to something by removing an obstacle
thereto. In this way a sin generically venial can dispose to a sin
generically mortal. Because he that commits a sin generically venial,
turns aside from some particular order; and through accustoming his
will not to be subject to the due order in lesser matters, is
disposed not to subject his will even to the order of the last end,
by choosing something that is a mortal sin in its genus.

Reply Obj. 1: Venial and mortal sin are not condivided in contrariety
to one another, as though they were species of one genus, as stated
above (A. 1, ad 1), but as an accident is condivided with substance.
Wherefore an accident can be a disposition to a substantial form, so
can a venial sin dispose to mortal.

Reply Obj. 2: Venial sin is not like mortal sin in species; but it is
in genus, inasmuch as they both imply a defect of due order, albeit
in different ways, as stated (AA. 1, 2).

Reply Obj. 3: A good work is not, of itself, a disposition to mortal
sin; but it can be the matter or occasion of mortal sin accidentally;
whereas a venial sin, of its very nature, disposes to mortal sin, as
stated.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 88, Art. 4]

Whether a Venial Sin Can Become Mortal?

Objection 1: It would seem that a venial sin can become a mortal sin.
For Augustine in explaining the words of John 3:36: "He that
believeth not the Son, shall not see life," says (Tract. xii in
Joan.): "The slightest," i.e. venial, "sins kill if we make little of
them." Now a sin is called mortal through causing the spiritual death
of the soul. Therefore a venial sin can become mortal.

Obj. 2: Further, a movement in the sensuality before the consent of
reason, is a venial sin, but after consent, is a mortal sin, as
stated above (Q. 74, A. 8, ad 2). Therefore a venial sin can become
mortal.

Obj. 3: Further, venial and mortal sin differ as curable and
incurable disease, as stated above (A. 1). But a curable disease may
become incurable. Therefore a venial sin may become mortal.

Obj. 4: Further, a disposition may become a habit. Now venial sin is
a disposition to mortal, as stated (A. 3). Therefore a venial sin can
become mortal.

_I answer that,_ The fact of a venial sin becoming a mortal sin may
be understood in three ways. First, so that the same identical act be
at first a venial, and then a mortal sin. This is impossible: because
a sin, like any moral act, consists chiefly in an act of the will: so
that an act is not one morally, if the will be changed, although the
act be continuous physically. If, however, the will be not changed,
it is not possible for a venial sin to become mortal.

Secondly, this may be taken to mean that a sin generically venial,
becomes mortal. This is possible, in so far as one may fix one's end
in that venial sin, or direct it to some mortal sin as end, as stated
above (A. 2).

Thirdly, this may be understood in the sense of many venial sins
constituting one mortal sin. If this be taken as meaning that many
venial sins added together make one mortal sin, it is false, because
all the venial sins in the world cannot incur a debt of punishment
equal to that of one mortal sin. This is evident as regards the
duration of the punishment, since mortal sin incurs a debt of eternal
punishment, while venial sin incurs a debt of temporal punishment, as
stated above (Q. 87, AA. 3, 5). It is also evident as regards the
pain of loss, because mortal sins deserve to be punished by the
privation of seeing God, to which no other punishment is comparable,
as Chrysostom states (Hom. xxiv in Matth.). It is also evident as
regards the pain of sense, as to the remorse of conscience; although
as to the pain of fire, the punishments may perhaps not be
improportionate to one another.

If, however, this be taken as meaning that many venial sins make one
mortal sin dispositively, it is true, as was shown above (A. 3) with
regard to the two different manners of disposition, whereby venial
sin disposes to mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Augustine is referring to the fact of many venial sins
making one mortal sin dispositively.

Reply Obj. 2: The same movement of the sensuality which preceded the
consent of reason can never become a mortal sin; but the movement of
the reason in consenting is a mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Disease of the body is not an act, but an abiding
