
This is called "The great Welsh love-song." It was written by Rev.
William Rees, D.D., eminent as a preacher, poet, politician and
essayist. One of the greatest names of nineteenth century Wales. He died
in 1883.

The tune, "Cwynfan Prydian," sung to this hymn is one of the old Welsh
minors that would sound almost weird to our ears, but Welsh voices can
sing with strange sweetness the Saviour's passion on which Christian
hearts of that nation love so well to dwell, and the shadow of it, with
His love shining through, creates the paradox of a joyful lament in many
of their chorals. We cannot imitate it.


"RHYFEDDODAU DYDD YR ADGYFODIDD."

    Unnumbered are the marvels
     The Last Great Day shall see,
    With earth's poor storm-tossed children
     From tribulation free,
    All in their shining raiment
     Transfigured, bright and brave,
    Like to their Lord ascending
     In triumph from the grave.

The author of this Easter hymn is unknown.

The _most_ popular Welsh hymns would be named variously by different
witnesses according to the breadth and length of their observation. Two
of them, as a Wrexham music publisher testifies, are certainly the
following; "Heaven and Home," and "Lo, a Saviour for the Fallen." The
first of these was sung in the late revival with "stormy rapture."


"O FRYNAU CAERSALEM CEIR GIVELED."

    The heights of fair Salem ascended,
      Each wilderness path we shall see;
    Now thoughts of each difficult journey
      A sweet meditation shall be.
    On death, on the grave and its terrors
      And storms we shall gaze from above
    And freed from all cares we shall revel (?)
      In transports of heavenly love.

According to the mood of the meeting this was pitched in three sharps to
Evelyn Evans' tune of "Eirinwg" or with equal Welsh enthusiasm in the C
minor of old "Darby."

The author of the hymn was the Rev. David Charles, of Carmarthen, born
1762; died 1834. He was a heavenly-minded man who loved to dwell on the
divine and eternal wonders of redemption. A volume of his sermons was
spoken of as "Apples of gold in pictures of silver," and the beautiful
piety of all his writings made them strings of pearls. He understood
English as well as Welsh, and enjoyed the hymns not only of William and
Thomas Williams but of Watts, Wesley, Cowper, and Newton.[43]

[Footnote 43: The following verses were written by him in English:
    Spirit of grace and love divine,
    Help me to sing that Christ is mine;
    And while the theme my tongue employs
    Fill Thou my soul with living joys.

    Jesus is mine--surpassing thought!
    Well may I set the world at nought;
    Jesus is mine, O can it be
    That Jesus lived and died for me?]


"DYMA GEIDWAD I R COLLEDIG."

    Lo! a Saviour for the fallen,
      Healer of the sick and sore,
    One whose love the vilest sinners
      Seeks to pardon and restore.
    Praise Him, praise Him
      Who has loved us evermore!

The little now known of the Rev. Morgan Rhys, author of this hymn, is
that he was a schoolmaster and preacher, and that he was a contemporary
and friend of William Williams. Several of his hymns remain in use of
which the oftenest sung is one cited above, and "_O agor fy llygaid i
weled_:"

    I open my eyes to this vision,
      The deeps of Thy purpose and word;
    The law of Thy lips is to thousands
      Of gold and of silver preferred;
    When earth is consumed, and its treasure,
      God's words will unchanging remain,
    And to know the God-man is my Saviour
      Is life everlasting to gain.

"Lo! a Saviour for the Fallen" finds an appropriate voice in W.M.
Robert's tune of "Nesta," and also, like many others of the same
measure, in the much-used minors "Llanietyn," "Catharine," and "Bryn
Calfaria."


"O SANCTEIDDIA F'ENAID ARGLWYDD."

    Sanctify, O Lord, my spirit,
      Every power and passion sway,
    Bid Thy holy law within me
      Dwell, my wearied soul to stay;
        Let me never
      Rove beyond Thy narrow way.

This one more hymn of William Williams is from his "Song of a Cleansed
Heart" and is amply provided with tunes, popular ones like "Tyddyn
Llwyn," "Y Delyn Aur," or "Capel-Y-Ddol" lending their deep minors to
its lines with a thrilling effect realized, perhaps, only in the land of
Taliessin and the Druids.

The singular history and inspiring cause of one old Welsh hymn which
after various mutilations and vicissitudes survives as the key-note of a
valued song of trust, seems to illustrate the Providence that will never
let a good thing be lost. It is related of the Rev. David Williams, of
Llandilo, an obscure but not entirely forgotten preacher, that he had a
termagant wife, and one stormy night, when her bickerings became
intolerable, he went out in the rain and standing by the river composed
in his mind these lines of tender faith:

    In the waves and mighty waters
      No one will support my head
    But my Saviour, my Beloved,
      Who was stricken in my stead.
    In the cold and mortal river
      He would hold my head above;
    I shall through the waves go singing
      For one look of Him I love.

Apparently the sentiment and substantially the expression of this humble
hymn became the burden of more than one Christian lay. Altered and
blended with a modern gospel hymn, it was sung at the crowded meetings
of 1904 to Robert Lowry's air of "Jesus Only," and often rendered very
impressively as a solo by a sweet female voice.

    In the deep and mighty waters
      There is none to hold my head
    But my loving Bridegroom, Jesus,
      Who upon the cross hath bled.

    If I've Jesus, Jesus only
      Then my sky will have a gem
    He's the Sun of brightest splendor,
      He's the Star of Bethlehem.

    He's the Friend in Death's dark river,
      He will lift me o'er the waves,
    I will sing in the deep waters
      If I only see His face.
    If I've Jesus, Jesus only, etc.

A few of the revival tunes have living authors and are of recent date;
and the minor harmony of "Ebenezer" (marked "Ton Y Botel"), which was
copied in this country by the New York _Examiner_, with its hymn, is
apparently a contemporary piece. It was first sung at Bethany Chapel,
Cardiff, Jan, 8, 1905, the hymn bearing the name of Rev. W.E. Winks.

    Send Thy Spirit, I beseech Thee,
      Gracious Lord, send while I pray;
    Send the Comforter to teach me,
      Guide me, help me in Thy way.
    Sinful, wretched, I have wandered
      Far from Thee in darkest night,
    Precious time and talents squandered,
      Lead, O lead me into light.

    Thou hast heard me; light is breaking--
      Light I never saw before.
    Now, my soul with joy awaking,
      Gropes in fearful gloom no more:
    O the bliss! my soul, declare it;
      Say what God hath done for thee;
    Tell it out, let others share it--
      Christ's salvation, full and free.

One cannot help noticing the fondness of the Welsh for the 7-6, 8-7, and
8-7-4 metres. These are favorites since they lend themselves so
naturally to the rhythms of their national music--though their newest
hymnals by no means exclude exotic lyrics and melodies. Even "O mother
dear, Jerusalem," one of the echoes of Bernard of Cluny's great hymn, is
cherished in their tongue (_O, Frynian Caerselem_) among the favorites
of song. Old "Truro" by Dr. Burney appears among their tunes, Mason's
"Ernan," "Lowell" and "Shawmut," I.B. Woodbury's "Nearer Home" (to Phebe
Cary's hymn), and even George Hews' gently-flowing "Holley." Most of
these tunes retain their own hymns, but in Welsh translation. To find
our Daniel Read's old "Windham" there is no surprise. The minor mode--a
song-instinct of the Welsh, if not of the whole Celtic family of
nations, is their rural inheritance. It is in the wind of their
mountains and the semitones of their streams; and their nature can make
it a gladness as the Anglo-Saxon cannot. So far from being a gloomy
people, their capacity for joy in spiritual life is phenomenal. In
psalmody their emotions mount on wings, and they find ecstacy in solemn
sounds.

"A temporary excitement" is the verdict of skepticism on the Reformation
wave that for a twelvemonth swept over Wales with its ringing symphonies
of hymn and tune. But such excitements are the May-blossom seasons of
God's eternal husbandry. They pass because human vigor cannot last at
flood-tide, but in spiritual economy they will always have their place,
"If the blossoms had not come and gone there would be no fruit."




CHAPTER XII.

FIELD HYMNS.


Hymns of the hortatory and persuasive tone are sufficiently numerous to
make an "embarrassment of riches" in a compiler's hands. Not a few songs
of invitation and awakening are either quoted or mentioned in the
chapter on "Old Revival Hymns," and many appear among those in the last
chapter, (on the _Hymns of Wales_;) but the _working_ songs of Christian
hymnology deserve a special space _as_ such.


"COME HITHER ALL YE WEARY SOULS,"

Sung to "Federal St.," is one of the older soul-winning calls from the
great hymn-treasury of Dr. Watts; and another note of the same sacred
bard,--

    Life is the time to serve the Lord,

--is always coupled with the venerable tune of "Wells."[44] Aged
Christians are still remembered who were wont to repeat or sing with
quavering voices the second stanza,--

    The living know that they must die,
      But all the dead forgotten lie;
    Their memory and their sense are gone,
      Alike unknowing and unknown.

And likewise from the fourth stanza,--

    There are no acts of pardon passed
      In the cold grave to which we haste.

[Footnote 44: One of Israel Holroyd's tunes. He was born in England,
about 1690, and was both a composer and publisher of psalmody. His chief
collection is dated 1746.]


"AND WILL THE JUDGE DESCEND?"

Is one of Doddridge's monitory hymns, once sung to J.C. Woodman's tune
of "State St." with the voice of both the Old and New Testaments in the
last verse:

    Ye sinners, seek His grace
      Whose wrath ye cannot bear;
    Fly to the shelter of His Cross,
      And find Salvation there.

Jonathan Call Woodman was born in Newburyport, Mass., July 12, 1813,
and was a teacher, composer, and compiler. Was organist of St. George's
Chapel, in Flushing, L.I., and in 1858 published _The Musical Casket_.
Died January, 1894. He wrote "State St." for William B. Bradbury, in
August, 1844.


"HASTEN SINNER, TO BE WISE"

Is one of the few unforgotten hymns of Thomas Scott, every second line
repeating the solemn caution,--

    Stay not for tomorrow's sun,

--and every line enforcing its exhortation with a new word, "To be
wise," "to implore," "to return," and "to be blest" were natural
cumulatives that summoned and wooed the sinner careless and astray. It
is a finished piece of work, but it owes its longevity less to its
structural form than to its spirit. For generations it has been sung to
"Pleyel's Hymn."

The Rev. Thomas Scott (not Rev. Thomas Scott the Commentator) was born
in Norwich, Eng., in 1705, and died at Hupton, in Norfolk, 1776. He was
a Dissenting minister, pastor for twenty-one years--until disabled by
feeble health--at Lowestoft in Suffolk. He was the author of--

    Angels roll the rock away.


"MUST JESUS BEAR THE CROSS ALONE?"

This emotional and appealing hymn still holds its own in the hearts of
millions, though probably two hundred years old. It was written by a
clergyman of the Church of England, the Rev. Thomas Shepherd, Vicar of
Tilbrook, born in 1665. Joining the Nonconformists in 1694, he settled
first in Castle Hill, Nottingham, and afterward in Bocking, Essex, where
he remained until his death, January, 1739. He published a selection of
his sermons, and _Penitential Cries_, a book of sacred lyrics, some of
which still appear in collections.

The startling question in the above line is answered with emphasis in
the third of the stanza,--

   _No_! There's a cross for every one,
      And there's a cross for _me_,

--and this is followed by the song of resolve and triumph,--

    The consecrated cross I'll bear,
      Till death shall set me free.
    And then go home my crown to wear,
      For there's a crown for me.

       *       *       *       *       *

    O precious cross! O glorious crown!
      O Resurrection Day!
    Ye angels from the stars flash down
      And bear my soul away!

The hymn is a personal New Testament. No one who analyzes it and feels
its Christian vitality will wonder why it has lived so long.


_THE TUNE._

For half a century George N. Allen, composer of "Maitland," the music
inseparable from the hymn, was credited with the authorship of the words
also, but his vocal aid to the heart-stirring poem earned him sufficient
praise. The tune did not meet the hymn till the latter was so old that
the real author was mostly forgotten, for Allen wrote the music in 1849;
but if the fine stanzas needed any renewing it was his tune that made
them new. Since it was published nobody has wanted another.

George Nelson Allen was born in Mansfield, Mass., Sept. 7, 1812, and
lived at Oberlin, O. It was there that he composed "Maitland," and
compiled the _Social and Sabbath Hymn-book_--besides songs for the
_Western Bell_, published by Oliver Ditson and Co. He died in
Cincinnati, Dec. 9, 1877.


"AWAKE MY SOUL, STRETCH EVERY NERVE!"

This most popular of Dr. Doddridge's hymns is also the richest one of
all in lyrical and spiritual life. It is a stadium song that sounds the
starting-note for every young Christian at the outset of his career, and
the slogan for every faint Christian on the way.

    A _heavenly_ race demands thy zeal,
      And an immortal crown.

Like the "Coronation" hymn, it transports the devout singer till he
feels only the momentum of the words and forgets whether it is common or
hallelujah metre that carries him along.

    A cloud of witnesses around
      Hold thee in full survey;
    Forget the steps already trod,
      And onward urge thy way!

   'Tis God's all-animating voice
      That calls thee from on high,
   'Tis His own hand presents the prize
      To thine aspiring eye.

In all persuasive hymnology there is no more kindling lyric that this.
As a field-hymn it is indispensable.


_THE TUNE._

Whenever and by whomsoever the brave processional known as "Christmas"
was picked from among the great Handel's Songs and mated with
Doddridge's lines, the act gave both hymn and tune new reason to endure,
and all posterity rejoices in the blend. Old "Christmas" was originally
one of the melodies in the great Composer's Opera of "Ciroe" (Cyrus)
1738. It was written to Latin words (_Non vi piacque_) and afterwards
adapted to an English versification of Job 29:15, "I was eyes to the
blind."

Handel himself became blind at the age of sixty eight (1753).


"THERE IS A GREEN HILL FAR AWAY."

Written in 1848 by Miss Cecil Frances Humphreys, an Irish lady, daughter
of Major John Humphreys of Dublin. She was born in that city in 1823.
Her best known name is Mrs. Cecil Frances Alexander, her husband being
the Rt. Rev. William Alexander, Bishop of Derry. Among her works are
_Hymns for Little Children_, _Narrative Hymns_, _Hymns Descriptive and
Devotional_, and _Moral Songs_. Died 1895.

"There is a _green_ hill" is poetic license, but the hymn is sweet and
sympathetic, and almost childlike in its simplicity.

    There is a green hill far away
      Without the city wall,
    Where our dear Lord was crucified
      Who died to save us all.

    We may not know, we cannot tell
      What pains He had to bear;
    But we believe it was for us
      He hung and suffered there.

[Illustration: George Frederick Handel]


_THE TUNES._

There is no room here to describe them all. Airs and chorals by Berthold
Tours, Pinsuti, John Henry Cornell, Richard Storrs Willis, George C.
Stebbins and Hubert P. Main have been adapted to the words--one or two
evidently composed for them. It is a hymn that attracts
tune-makers--literally so commonplace and yet so quiet and tender, with
such a theme and such natural melody of line--but most of the scores
indicated are choir music rather than congregational. Mr. Stebbins'
composition comes nearest to being the favorite, if one judges by the
extent and frequency of its use. It can be either partly or wholly
choral; and the third stanza makes the refrain--

    O dearly, dearly has He loved
      And we must love Him too,
    And trust in His redeeming blood,
      And try His works to do.


"REJOICE AND BE GLAD!"

This musical shout of joy, written by Dr. Horatius Bonar, scarcely needs
a new song helper, as did Bishop Heber's famous hymn--not because it is
better than Heber's but because It was wedded at once to a tune worthy
of it.

    Rejoice and be glad! for our King is on high;
    He pleadeth for us on His throne in the sky.
    Rejoice and be glad! for He cometh again;
    He cometh in glory, the Lamb that was slain
                                 Hallelujah! Amen.

The hymn was composed in 1874.


_THE TUNE._

The author of the "English Melody" (as ascribed in _Gospel Hymns_) is
said to have been John Jenkins Husband, born in Plymouth, Eng., about
1760. He was clerk at Surrey Chapel and composed several anthems. Came
to the United States In 1809. Settled in Philadelphia, where he taught
music and was clerk of St. Paul's P.E. Church. Died there in 1825.

His tune, exactly suited to the hymn, is a true Christian paean. It has
few equals as a rouser to a sluggish prayer-meeting--whether sung to
Bonar's words or those of Rev. William Paton Mackay (1866)--

    We praise Thee, O God, for the Son of Thy love,

--with the refrain of similar spirit in both hymns--

    Hallelujah! Thine the glory, Hallelujah! Amen,
    Hallelujah! Thine the glory; revive us again;

--or,--

    Sound His praises! tell the story of Him who was slain!
    Sound His praises! tell with gladness, "He liveth again."

Husband's tune is supposed to have been written very early in the last
century. Another tune composed by him near the same date to the words--

   "We are on our journey home
    To the New Jerusalem,"

--is equally musical and animating, and with a vocal range that brings
out the full strength of choir and congregation.


"COME, SINNER, COME."

A singular case of the same tune originating in the brain of both author
and composer is presented in the history of this hymn of Rev. William
Ellsworth Witter, D.D., born in La Grange, N.Y., Dec. 9, 1854. He wrote
the hymn in the autumn of 1878, while teaching a district school near
his home. The first line--

    While Jesus whispers to you,

--came to him during a brief turn of outdoor work by the roadside and
presently grew to twenty-four lines. Soon after, Prof. Horatio Palmer,
knowing Witter to be a verse writer, invited him to contribute a hymn to
a book he had in preparation, and this hymn was sent. Dr. Palmer set it
to music, it soon entered into several collections, and Mr. Sankey sang
it in England at the Moody meetings.

Dr. Witter gives this curious testimony,

"While I cannot sing myself, though very fond of music, the hymn sang
itself to me by the roadside _in almost the exact tune given to it by
Professor Palmer_." Which proves that Professor Palmer had the feeling
of the hymn--and that the maker of a true hymn has at least a
sub-consciousness of its right tune, though he may be neither a musician
nor a poet.

    While Jesus whispers to you,
      Come, sinner, come!
    While we are praying for you,
      Come, sinner, come!
    Now is the time to own Him,
      Come, sinner, come!
    Now is the time to know Him,
      Come, sinner, come!


"ONE MORE DAY'S WORK FOR JESUS."

The writer of this hymn was Miss Anna Warner, one of the well-known
"Wetherell Sisters," joint authors of _The Wide World_, _Queechy_, and a
numerous succession of healthful romances very popular in the middle and
later years of the last century. Her own pen name is "Amy Lothrop,"
under which she has published many religious poems, hymns and other
varieties of literary work. She was born in 1820, at Martlaer, West
Point, N.Y., where she still resides.

    One more day's work for Jesus,
    One less of life for me:
      But heaven is nearer,
      And Christ is dearer
    Than yesterday to me.
      His love and light
    Fill all my soul tonight.

  REFRAIN:--
    One more day's work for Jesus, (_ter_)
    One less of life for me.

The hymn has five stanzas all expressing the gentle fervor of an active
piety loving service:


_THE TUNE_

was composed by the Rev. Robert Lowry, and first published in _Bright
Jewels_.


THE GOSPEL HYMNS.

These popular religious songs have been criticised as "degenerate
psalmody" but those who so style them do not seem to consider the need
that made them.

The great majority of mankind can only be reached by missionary methods,
and in these art and culture do not play a conspicuous part. The
multitude could be supplied with technical preaching and technical music
for their religious wants, but they would not rise to the bait, whereas
nothing so soon kindles their better emotions or so surely appeals to
their better nature as even the humblest sympathetic hymn sung to a
simple and stirring tune. If the music is unclassical and the hymn crude
there is no critical audience to be offended.

The artless, almost colloquial, words "of a happily rhymed camp-meeting
lyric and the wood-notes wild" of a new melody meet a situation. Moral
and spiritual lapse makes it necessary at times for religion to put on
again her primitive raiment, and be "a voice crying in the wilderness."

Between the slums and the boulevards live the masses that shape the
generations, and make the state. They are wage-earners who never hear
the great composers nor have time to form fine musical and literary
tastes. The spiritual influences that really reach them are of a very
direct and simple kind; and for the good of the church--and the
nation--it is important that at least this elementary education in the
school of Christ should be supplied them.

It is the popular hymn tunes that speed a reformation. So say history
and experience. Once in two hundred years a great revival movement may
produce a Charles Wesley, but the humbler singers carry the divine fire
that quickens religious life in the years between.

All this is not saying that the gospel hymns, as a whole, are or ever
professed to be suitable for the stated service of the sanctuary. Their
very style and movement show exactly what they were made for--to win the
hearing of the multitude, and put the music of God's praise and Jesus'
love into the mouths and hearts of thousands who had been strangers to
both. They are the modern lay songs that go with the modern lay sermons.
They give voice to the spirit and sentiment of the conference, prayer
and inquiry meetings, the Epworth League and Christian Endeavor
meetings, the temperance and other reform meetings, and of the
mass-meetings in the cities or the seaside camps.

During their evangelistic mission in England and Scotland in 1873,
Dwight L. Moody and Ira D. Sankey used the hymnbook of Philip Phillips,
a compilation entitled _Hallowed Songs_, some of them his own. To these
Mr. Sankey added others of his own composing from time to time which
were so enthusiastically received that he published them in a pamphlet.
This, with the simultaneous publication in America of the revival
melodies of Philip P. Bliss, was the beginning of that series of popular
hymn-and-tune books, which finally numbered six volumes. Sankey's
_Sacred Songs and Solos_ combined with Bliss's _Gospel Songs_ were the
foundation of the _Gospel Hymns_.

Subjectively their utterances are indicative of ardent piety and
unquestioning faith, and on the other hand their direct and intimate
appeal and dramatic address are calculated to affect a throng as if each
individual in it was the person meant by the words. The refrain or
chorus feature is notable in nearly all.

A selection of between thirty and forty of the most characteristic is
here given.


"HALLELUJAH! 'TIS DONE."

This is named from its chorus. The song is one of the spontaneous
thanksgivings in revival meetings that break out at the announcement of
a new conversion.

   'Tis the promise of God full salvation to give
    Unto him who on Jesus His Son will believe,
        Hallelujah! 'tis done; I believe on the Son;
      I am saved by the blood of the crucified One.

    Though the pathway be lonely and dangerous too,
    Surely Jesus is able to carry me through--
        Hallelujah! etc.

The words and music are both by P.P. Bliss.


THE NINETY AND NINE.

The hymn was written by Mrs. Elizabeth Cecilia Clephane at Melrose,
Scotland, early in 1868. She was born in Edinburgh, June 10, 1830, and
died of consumption, Feb. 19, 1869. The little poem was seen by Mr.
