     event; or, as they term it, unless he were a 'Jahilee' or a
     'Mukhadram,' or (as some pronounce it) 'Mukhadrim,' or 'Muhadram'
     or 'Muhadrim.' A poet of the class next after the Mukhadrams is
     termed an 'Islamee:' and as the corruption of the language had
     become considerable in his time, even among those who aimed at
     chasteness of speech, he is not cited as an authority absolutely
     and unquestionably like the two preceding classes. A poet of the
     next class, which is the last, is termed 'Muwelled;' he is
     absolutely post-classical; and is cited as an unquestionable
     authority with respect only to the rhetorical sciences. The
     commencement of the period of the Muwelleds is not distinctly
     stated: but it must have preceded the middle of the second century
     of the Flight; for the classical age may be correctly defined as
     having nearly ended with the first century, when very few persons
     born before the establishment of El-Islam through Arabia were
     living. Thus the best of the Islami poets may be regarded, and are
     generally regarded, as holding classical rank, though not as being
     absolute authorities with respect to the words and the
     significations, the grammar, and the prosody of the classical
     language."

Mr. Thomas Chenry, M.A., writes:[327]--

     "Within a century of Mohammad's flight from Mecca, the Moslem
     empire stretched from Kashgar and Mooltan to Morocco and the
     Pyrenees, and the Arab man of letters was exposed to the corrupting
     propinquity of men of very different races. Only a poet of
     Ignorance, that is, one who died before the preaching of Islam, or
     a Mokhadram, that is, who was contemporary with it, was looked upon
     as of paramount and unquestionable authority. An Islami, that is,
     one who was born after the rise of Islam, was of least
     consideration, and after the first century, the poets are called
     Muwalladun and are only quoted for their literary beauties, and not
     as authorities for the Arab tongue."

[Sidenote: Mohammadan commentators, &c., quoted.]

9. All commentators, paraphrasts, and jurisconsults admit that the
primary and original signification of the words "_Jahad_" and "_Jihad_"
is power, ability, and toil, and that its use, as making wars or
crusades, is conventional and figurative. Ibn Attiah says regarding
verse 69, Chapter XXIX, that it is Meccan, and was revealed before the
enjoining of the _Orfee_ or conventional _Jihad_ (_vide_ Fat-hul bayan
fi maquasidil Koran, Vol. II, page 517, by Siddik Hussan). Khateeb
Koostlane, in his _Irshadussari_, a paraphrase of Bokhari, says that
"_Jihad_ is derived from _Jahd_, which means toil and labour, or from
_Johd_, which means power. And in technical language it means fighting
with infidels to assist Islam" (Vol. V, page 26). Mohammad Allauddin Al
Haskafi (died 1088 A.H.), the author of Dur-ral-Mukhtar, a commentary on
Tanviral Absar, by Sheikh Mohammad Al Tamartashi (died 1004), says in
the chapter on _Jihad_, that "in the classical language it is the
infinitive noun of _Jahada fi Sabil-Allah_, and in the language of the
law it means inviting the infidels to the true faith and fighting with
him who does not accept it." And Ibn Abidin Shami, in his annotation on
the above work, says:

     "The infinitive noun of _Jahada_ means to do one's utmost, and that
     it is general, and includes any person who supports all that is
     reasonable and forbids what is wrong."

[Sidenote: When the word Jihad was diverted from its original
signification to its figurative meaning of waging religious war?]

10. It is admitted by all lexicologists, commentators, and jurisconsults
that _Jihad_ in classical Arabic means to labour, strive earnestly, and
that the change of its meaning or the technical signification occurred
only in the post-classical period, _i.e._, long after the publication
of the Koran. It is obviously improper, therefore, to apply the
post-classical meaning of the word where it occurs in the Koran. This
fact is further admitted by all the Mohammadan commentators and English
translators of the Koran, who render the word in its original and
literal meaning in all the Meccan and in the early Medinite Suras or
Chapters of the Koran.[328]

It is only in a few of the latest chapters of the Koran published at
later dates at Medina, that they (the commentators and translators)
deviate from the original meaning, and prefer the subsequent unclassical
and technical signification of waging war or crusade.

[Sidenote: All verses of the Koran containing the word Jihad and its
derivation quoted and explained.]

11. I herein place in juxtaposition the several English translations of
the word "_Jihad_," together with its etymological derivation and
several grammatical forms, to show, in the first place, that Mr. George
Sale and the Rev. J.M. Rodwell and other European authors generally give
the literal, original, and classical meaning; and in the second place,
to show how they differ in giving various meanings, literal and
technical, in some passages to the same word in the same verses.

It will be observed from a perusal of the statement, that the Rev. Mr.
Rodwell, M.A., is more correct than the earliest English translator of
the Koran, Mr. George Sale, and the latest, Mr. W.H. Palmer. The latter
is the most unsatisfactory of all in this respect, as everywhere, except
in six places--XXIX, 7; V, 39, 59; IV, 97; and IX, 74, 89--he translates
_Jihad_ as meaning fighting--a circumstance which not unnaturally leads
to the supposition that he had paid but slight heed to the context.

  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  |Serial No.
  |    | No. of the Chapter and the Verse of the Koran.
  |    |     | Original Words.                ----------------------------
  |    |     |    | George Sale's Translation.            }   ENGLISH
  |    |     |    |    | Rev. Rodwell's Translation.      }
  |    |     |    |    |    | Henry Palmer's Translation. } TRANSLATIONS.
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  | 1  |
  |    | XXXI. 14
  |    |     | "Jahadaka"
  |    |     |    | "Strive"
  |    |     |    |    | "Endeavour to prevail"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Strive."
  | 2  |
  |    | XXV. 54
  |    |     | "Jahid," "Jihadan."
  |    |     |    | "Oppose them herewith with strong opposition."
  |    |     |    |    | "By means of the Koran strive against them with
  |    |     |    |    | a mighty strife."
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously; strenuous fight."
  | 3  |
  |    | XXII. 77
  |    |     | "Jahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Fight in the defence of God's religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Do valiantly"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously."
  | 4  |
  |    | XVI. 111
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Have since sought _in the_ defence of the true religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Fought"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought strenuously."
  | 5  |
  |    | XXIX. 5
  |    |     | "Jahada"
  |    |     |    | "Striveth"
  |    |     |    |    | "Maketh efforts"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously; fight strenuously."
  | 6  |
  |    | XXIX. 7
  |    |     | "Jahadaka"
  |    |     |    | "Endeavour"
  |    |     |    |    | "Strive"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Strive."
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  |Serial No.
  |    | No. of the Chapter and the Verse of the Koran.
  |    |     | Original Words.                ----------------------------
  |    |     |    | George Sale's Translation.            }   ENGLISH
  |    |     |    |    | Rev. Rodwell's Translation.      }
  |    |     |    |    |    | Henry Palmer's Translation. } TRANSLATIONS.
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  | 7  |
  |    | XXIX. 69
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Utmost endeavour"
  |    |     |    |    | "Made efforts"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously."
  | 8  |
  |    | XVI. 40
  |    |     | "Jahd"
  |    |     |    | "Most solemnly"
  |    |     |    |    | "Most sacred"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Most strenuous."
  | 9  |
  |    | XXXV. 40
  |    |     | "Jahd"
  |    |     |    | "Most solemn"
  |    |     |    |    | "Mightiest"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Most strenuous."
  | 10 |
  |    | II. 215
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Fight in God's cause"
  |    |     |    |    | "Fight"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Wage war."
  | 11 |
  |    | III. 136
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Those who fought strenuously."
  |    |     |    |    | "Did valiantly"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought well."
  | 12 |
  |    | VIII. 73
  |    |     | "Jahadoo be-am-walhim-w-anfosa-him."
  |    |     |    | "Employed their substance and their persons in fight for
  |    |     |    | the religion of God."
  |    |     |    |    | "Spent their substance and themselves for the cause
  |    |     |    |    | of God."
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought strenuously with their wealth and
  |    |     |    |    |    | person."
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  |Serial No.
  |    | No. of the Chapter and the Verse of the Koran.
  |    |     | Original Words.                ----------------------------
  |    |     |    | George Sale's Translation.            }   ENGLISH
  |    |     |    |    | Rev. Rodwell's Translation.      }
  |    |     |    |    |    | Henry Palmer's Translation. } TRANSLATIONS.
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  | 13 |
  |    | VIII. 75
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Have fought for God's true religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Fought"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought strenuously."
  | 14 |
  |    | VIII. 76
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Have fought with you."
  |    |     |    |    | "Fought"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought strenuously."
  | 15 |
  |    | VI. 109
  |    |     | "Jahd"
  |    |     |    | "Most solemn"
  |    |     |    |    | "Most binding"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Most strenuous"
  | 16 |
  |    | XLVII. 33
  |    |     | "Mojahidina"
  |    |     |    | "Who fight valiantly"
  |    |     |    |    | "Valiant"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought strenuously."
  | 17 |
  |    | LXI. 11
  |    |     | "Jahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Defend God's true religion with your substance and in
  |    |     |    | your person."
  |    |     |    |    | "Do valiantly"
  |    |     |    |    |    |  "To fight strenuously."
  | 18 |
  |    | IV. 97
  |    |     | 1st. "Mojahidina"
  |    |     |    | 1st. "Those who employ their fortune and their persons
  |    |     |    | for the religion of God."
  |    |     |    |    | 1. "Defend God's true religion valiantly."
  |    |     |    |    |    | 1. "Strenuous."
  |    |     | 2nd. "Mojahidina."
  |    |     |    | 2nd. "Those who employ their fortune and persons."
  |    |     |    |    | 2. "Contend earnestly."
  |    |     |    |    |    | 2. "Strenuous."
  |    |     | 3rd. "Mojahidina."
  |    |     |    | 3rd. "Those who fight"
  |    |     |    |    | 3. "Strenuous"
  |    |     |    |    |    | 3. "Strenuous."
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  |Serial No.
  |    | No. of the Chapter and the Verse of the Koran.
  |    |     | Original Words.                ----------------------------
  |    |     |    | George Sale's Translation.            }   ENGLISH
  |    |     |    |    | Rev. Rodwell's Translation.      }
  |    |     |    |    |    | Henry Palmer's Translation. } TRANSLATIONS.
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  | 19 |
  |    | XXIV. 52
  |    |     | "Jahd"
  |    |     |    | "Most solemn"
  |    |     |    |    | "Most solemn"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Most strenuous."
  | 20 |
  |    | LXVI. 9
  |    |     | "Jahid"
  |    |     |    | "Attack the hypocrites with arguments."
  |    |     |    |    | "Make war"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously."
  | 21 |
  |    | IX. 74
  |    |     | "Jahid"
  |    |     |    | "Wage war"
  |    |     |    |    | "Contend"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Strive strenuously."
  | 22 |
  |    | LXI. 1
  |    |     | "Jihadan"
  |    |     |    | "To fight in the defence of my religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "To fight"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fighting strenuously."
  | 23 |
  |    | XLIX. 5
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Who employ their substance and their person in the
  |    |     |    | defence of God's true religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Contend with their substance and their person."
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously with their wealth and their
  |    |     |    |    |    | persons."
  | 24 |
  |    | IX. 16
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Those among you who sought for his religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Valiantly"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought strenuously."
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  |Serial No.
  |    | No. of the Chapter and the Verse of the Koran.
  |    |     | Original Words.                ----------------------------
  |    |     |    | George Sale's Translation.            }   ENGLISH
  |    |     |    |    | Rev. Rodwell's Translation.      }
  |    |     |    |    |    | Henry Palmer's Translation. } TRANSLATIONS.
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  | 25 |
  |    | IX. 19
  |    |     | "Jahada"
  |    |     |    | "Fighteth"
  |    |     |    |    | "Fighteth"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Strenuous."
  | 26 |
  |    | IX. 20
  |    |     | "Jahadoo"
  |    |     |    | "Fought for his religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Do valiantly"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fought strenuously."
  | 27 |
  |    | IX. 24
  |    |     | "Jihadan"
  |    |     |    | "Advancement"
  |    |     |    |    | "Efforts"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fighting strenuously."
  | 28 |
  |    | IX. 41
  |    |     | "Jahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Employ your substance and your person for the advancement
  |    |     |    | of God's religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Contend with your substance and with your person."
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously with your wealth and your
  |    |     |    |    |    | persons."
  | 29 |
  |    | IX. 44
  |    |     | "Yojahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Employing their substance and their persons for the
  |    |     |    | advancement of God's true religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Contending with your substance and your person."
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fighting strenuously."
  | 30 |
  |    | IX. 82
  |    |     | "Yojahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Employ their substance and their persons for the
  |    |     |    | advancement of God's true religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Contending with their riches and their persons."
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fighting strenuously with their wealth and
  |    |     |    |    |    | their persons."
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  |Serial No.
  |    | No. of the Chapter and the Verse of the Koran.
  |    |     | Original Words.                ----------------------------
  |    |     |    | George Sale's Translation.            }   ENGLISH
  |    |     |    |    | Rev. Rodwell's Translation.      }
  |    |     |    |    |    | Henry Palmer's Translation. } TRANSLATIONS.
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  | 31 |
  |    | IX. 87
  |    |     | "Jahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Go forth to war"
  |    |     |    |    | "Contend"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Fight strenuously."
  | 32 |
  |    | IX. 89
  |    |     | "Jahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Expose their fortunes and their lives."
  |    |     |    |    | "Contend with purse and persons."
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Strenuous with their wealth and with their
  |    |     |    |    |    | person."
  | 33 |
  |    | V. 39
  |    |     | "Jahidoo"
  |    |     |    | "Fight for his religion."
  |    |     |    |    | "Contend earnestly"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Be strenuous."
  | 34 |
  |    | V. 58
  |    |     | "Jahd"
  |    |     |    | "Most firm"
  |    |     |    |    | "Most solemn"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Most strenuous."
  | 35 |
  |    | V. 59
  |    |     | "Yojahidoona"
  |    |     |    | "They shall fight for the religion of God."
  |    |     |    |    | "Will they contend"
  |    |     |    |    |    | "Strenuous."
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------
  |Serial No.
  |    | No. of the Chapter and the Verse of the Koran.
  |    |     | Original Words.                ----------------------------
  |    |     |    | George Sale's Translation.            }   ENGLISH
  |    |     |    |    | Rev. Rodwell's Translation.      }
  |    |     |    |    |    | Henry Palmer's Translation. } TRANSLATIONS.
  |----+-----+----+----+----+---------------------------------------------

12. The above verses quoted with remarks. I will now proceed to give a
correct translation of all the verses of the Koran referred to above, in
the chronological order of the chapters of the Koran as far as it is
ascertained together with my observations and remarks on them, and
quotations from Mohammadan commentators when necessary.

I.--THE MECCAN SURAS.

[Sidenote: (1) Lokman, XXXI, 14.]

     13. "But if they exert their utmost (Jahadaka) to make thee to join
     that with Me of which thou hadst no knowledge, obey them not."

Chapter XXXI is one of the oldest of the Meccan Suras, having been
revealed between the sixth and tenth year of the Prophet's mission. The
admonition relates to a man's behaviour to his parents. He is enjoined
to treat them with kindness, but not to obey them if they lead him to
polytheism.

Here "_Jahada_" means "if they two (parents) task or toil thee, or make
efforts and endeavour (that thou shouldst associate any god with God),"
and none of the translators and commentators take the word to mean the
making of war or hostilities or fighting.

[Sidenote: (2) Furkan, XXV, 53, 54.]

     14. "Moreover had We pleasured We had certainly raised up a warner
     in every city."

     "Do not then obey the unbelievers, but by means of this (_Jahid_)
     exert with them with a (_Jihadan kabira_) strenuous exertion (or
     labour with great labour)."

This evidently relates to the Koran, or the warning mentioned in the
preceding verse, and it is wrong to translate "_Jihad_" as meaning to
fight strenuously with them, or as inciting to strenuous fighting as
translated by Henry Palmer (Vol. II, p. 88). Mr. Sale and the Rev. Mr.
Rodwell do not translate it fighting, and so Mohammadan commentators.
Fakhr-ud-din Razi (died 606 A.H.), the Imam, in his great commentary
says:

     "Some say _Jahid hoom bihi Jihadan Kabira_ means to make efforts in
     preaching, but some say it meant fighting, and others say it meant
     both; but the former is nearer the truth, as the chapter was
     revealed at Mecca, and the command for fighting was issued after
     the Flight, some time afterwards" (Vol. VI, p. 490).

[Sidenote: (3) The Pilgrimage,[329] XXII, 76, 78.]

     15. "Believers! bow down with worship your Lord and work
     righteousness, haply ye may prosper."

     "And ('_Jahidoo_') make efforts in God, as (_Jihadehi_) your making
     efforts is His due, He hath elected you, and hath not laid on you
     any hardship in religion, the Faith of your father Abraham. He hath
     named you the Muslims."

Messrs. Sale and Palmer translate the word here as meaning fighting,
which is wrong, as it is unclassical and not literal. Rodwell translates
it "do valiantly," and Sir William Muir says it is used in the more
general sense (Vol. III, p. 32).

This verse is a brief and concise version of the great maxim in Deut.
VI. 5; Mark XII. 30; and Luke X. 27,--

