been in her days of radiant happiness. How pathetically, silently,
nobly, devoutly, that sorrow has been borne, it is not for us to speak.
She has become one of the great company of sad and lonely hearts, and
in her sadness has shown an eager desire to send messages of sympathy
to all whom she could reach, who were in like darkness and sorrow.

Brethren, I have ventured to diverge so far from the ordinary run of
pulpit ministrations because I feel that to-day all of us, whatever may
be our political or ecclesiastical relationships and proclivities, are
one in thanking God for the monarch whose life has been without a
stain, and her reign without a blot.

II. Now let me say a word as to the other line of thought which my text
suggests, the effect of such a reign on the condition of the subject.

Now, of course, in the narrowly limited domain of that strange
creation, a constitutional monarchy, there is far less opportunity for
the Sovereign's direct influence on the Subject than there was in the
ancient kingdoms of which David was thinking in his psalm. The
marvellous progress of Britain during these sixty years is due, not to
our Sovereign, but to a multitude of strenuous workers and earnest
thinkers in a hundred different departments, as well as to the
evolution of the gifts that come down to us from our ancient
inheritance of freedom. But we shall much mistake if, for that reason,
we set aside the monarch's character and influence as of no account in
the progress,

A supposition, which is a violent one, may be made which will set this
matter in clearer light. Suppose that during these sixty years we had
had a king on the throne of England like some of the kings we have had.
The sentiment of loyalty is not now of such a character as that it will
survive a vicious sovereign. If we had had such a monarch as I have
hinted at, the loyalty of the good would for all these years have been
suffering a severe strain, and the forces that make for evil would have
been disastrously strengthened. Dangers escaped are unnoticed, but one
twelvemonth of the reign of a profligate would shake the foundations of
the monarchy, and would open the floodgates of vice; and we should then
know how much the nation owed to the Queen whose life was pure, and who
cast all her influence on the side of 'things that are lovely and of
good report.'

Take another supposition. Suppose that during these years of wonderful
transition, when the whole aspect of English politics and society has
been transformed, we had had a king like George III., who set his
opinion against the nation's will constitutionally expressed. Then no
man knows with what storm and tumult, with what strife and injury, the
inevitable transition would have been effected. Be sure of this, that
the wise self-effacement of our Sovereign during these critical years
of change is largely the reason why they have been years of peace, in
which the new has mingled itself with the old without revolution or
disturbance. It is due to her in a very large degree that
                 'Freedom broadens slowly down
                  From precedent to precedent.'

I need not dilate on the changed Britain that she looks out upon and
rules to-day. I need not speak--there will be many voices to do that,
in not altogether agreeable notes, for there will be a dash of too much
self-complacency in them--about progress in material wealth, colonial
expansion, the increase of education, the gentler manners, the new life
that has been breathed over art and literature, the achievements in
science and philosophy, the drawing together of classes, the bridging
over of the great gulf between rich and poor by some incipient and
tentative attempts at sympathy and brotherhood.

Nor need I dwell upon the ecclesiastical signs of the times, in which,
mingled as they are, there is at least this one great good, that never
since the early days have so large a proportion of Christian men been
'seeking after the things that make for peace,' and realising the
oneness of all believers who hold the Headship of Christ.

All this review falls more properly into other hands than mine. Only I
would put in a caution--do not let us mingle self-conceit with our
congratulations; and, above all, do not let us 'rest and be thankful.'
There is much to be done yet. Listening ears can catch on every side
vague sounds that tell of unrest and of the stirrings into wakefulness
of
                'The spirit of the years to come,
                 Yearning to mix itself with life.'

I seem to hear all around me the rushing in the dark of a mighty
current that is bearing down upon us. Great social questions are
rapidly coming to the front--the questions of distribution of wealth,
abolition of privilege, the relations of labour and capital, and many
others are clamant to be dealt with at least, if not solved. There Is
much to be done before Jesus Christ is throned as King of England. War
has to be frowned down; the brotherhood of man has to be realised,
temperance has to be much more largely practised than it is.

I need not go over the catalogue of _desiderata,_ of _agenda_--things
that have to be done--in the near future. Only this I would
say--Christian men and women are the last people who should be ready to
'rest and be thankful,' for the principles of the Gospel that we
profess, which have never been applied to the life of nations as they
ought to be, will solve the questions which make the despair of so many
in this generation. We shall best express our thankfulness for these
past sixty years by each of us taking our part in the great movement
which, in the inevitable drift of things to democracy, is going to
'cast the kingdom old into another mould,' and which will, I pray, make
our people more of what John Milton long ago called them, 'God's
Englishmen.' We have taught the nations many things. Our Parliament is
called the Mother of Parliaments. Ours is
           'The land where, girt with friends or foes,
            A man may say the thing he will.'

It has taught the nations a tempered freedom, and that a monarchy may
be a true republic. May we rise to the height of our privileges and
responsibilities, and teach our subject peoples, not only mechanics,
science, law, free trade, but a loftier morality, and the name of Him
by whom kings reign and princes decree justice!

We, members of the free Churches of England, come seldom under the
notice of royalty, and have little acquaintance with courts, but we
yield to none in our recognition of the virtues and in our sympathy
with the sorrows of the Sovereign Lady, the good woman, who rules these
lands, and we all heartily thank God for her to-day, and pray that for
long years still to come the familiar letters V.R. may stand, as they
have stood to two generations, as the symbol of womanly purity and of
the faithful discharge of queenly duty.




A LIBATION TO JEHOVAH

'And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me drink of the
water of the well of Beth-lehem, which is by the gate! 16. And the
three mighty men brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew
water out of the well of Beth-lehem, that was by the gate, and took it
and brought it to David: nevertheless he would not drink thereof, but
poured it out unto the Lord. 17. And he said, Be it far from me, O
Lord, that I should do this; is not this the blood of the men that went
in jeopardy of their lives? therefore he would not drink it. These
things did these three mighty men.'--2 SAMUEL xxiii. 15-17.


David's fortunes were at a low ebb. He was in hiding in his cave of
Adullam, and a Philistine garrison held Bethlehem, his native place. He
was little different from an outlaw at the head of a band of 'broken
men,' but there were depths of chivalry and poetry in his heart.
Sweltering in his cave in the fierce heat of harvest, he thought of his
native Bethlehem; he remembered the old days when he had watered his
flock at the well by its gate, or mingled with the people of the little
town, in their evening assemblies round it. The memories of boyhood
rose up radiant before him, and as he was immersed in the past, the
grim present, the perils that threatened his life, the savage, gaunt
rocks without a trace of greenness that girded him, the privations to
which he was exposed, were all forgotten, and he longed for one more
draught of the water that tasted so cool and sweet to memory. Three of
his 'mighty men,' bound to him by loyal devotion and unselfish love,
were ready to die to win for their chief a momentary gratification. So
they slipped away from Adullam, 'brake through the host of the
Philistines,' and brought back the longed-for draught. David's
reception of the dearly-bought, sparkling gift was due to a noble
impulse. The water seemed to him to be dyed with blood, and to be not
water so much as 'lives of men.' It had become too precious to be used
to satisfy his longing. It would be base self-indulgence to drink what
had been won by such self-forgetting devotion. God only had the right
to receive what men had risked their lives to obtain, and therefore he
'poured it out unto the Lord.'

The story gleams out of the fierce narratives in which it is embedded,
like a flower blooming on some grim cliff. May we not learn lessons
from it?

I. David's longing.

David, a fugitive in the cave, haunted by the 'nostalgia' that made
Bethlehem seem so fair and dear, may stand for us as an example of the
longings and thirsts that sometimes force themselves into consciousness
in every soul. Below the bustle and strife of daily life, occupied as
it must be with material and often ignoble things, below the hardness
into which the world has compressed men's surface nature, there lies a
yearning for the cool water that rises hard by the gate of our native
home. True, it is with many of us overlaid for the most part by coarser
desires, and may be as unlike our usual dominant longings and aims, as
David's tender outbreak of sentiment was to the prevailing tenor of his
life, in those days when he was an outlaw and a freebooter. But the
longing, though often stifled, is not wholly quenched. It is
misinterpreted by the man who is conscious of it, and far too often he
tries to slake the thirst by fiery and drugged liquors which but make
it more intense. Happy are they who know what it is that their parched
palates crave, and have learned, while yet the knowledge avails, to
say, 'My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God'! 'Blessed are they
who thirst after' the water of the well of Bethlehem, 'for they shall
be filled!'

II. The three heroes' devotion.

These three rough soldiers, lawless and fierce as they were, had been
so mastered by their chief that they were ready to dare anything to
pleasure him. Who would have looked for such delicacy of feeling and
such enthusiastic self-surrender in such men?

They stand as grand instances of the height of devotion of which the
rudest nature is capable, when once its love and loyalty to the Beloved
are evoked.

How such deeds ennoble the lowest types of character, and make us think
better of men, and more sadly of the contrast between their habitual
characteristics and the possibilities that lie slumbering in their
ignoble lives! There are sparks in the hard cold flint, if only they
could be struck out. There is water in the rock, if only the right
hand, armed with the wonder-working rod, smites it.


Let us not judge men too harshly by what they do and are, but let us
try to bring their sleeping possibilities into conscious exercise.

Let us remember that love and self-sacrifice, which is the very outcome
and natural voice of love, ennoble the most degraded.

But these heroic three may suggest to us a sadder thought. They were
ready to die for David; would they have been as ready to die for God?
These noble emotions of love, leading to glad flinging away of life to
pleasure the beloved, are freely given to men, but too often withheld
from God, We lavish on our beloveds or on our chosen leaders, a
devotion that ought to shame us, when contrasted with the scantiness of
our grudging devotion and self-surrender to Him. If we loved God a
tenth part as ardently as we love our wives or husbands or parents or
children, and were willing to do and bear as much for Him as we are
willing to bear for them, how different our lives would be! We can love
utterly, enthusiastically, self-forget-tingly, absorbed in the beloved,
and counting all surrender of self to, and the sacrifice of life itself
for, him or her a delight. Many of us do love men so. Do we love God so?

But these heroic three may suggest another thought. Their
self-sacrificing love was illustrious; but there is a nobler, more
wonderful, more soul-subduing instance of such love. They broke through
the ranks of the Philistines to bring David a draught from the well of
Bethlehem. Jesus has broken through the ranks of our enemies to bring
us the water of which 'if a man drink, he shall live for ever.' If we
would see the highest example of self-sacrificing love, we must turn to
look, not on the instances of it that shine through the ages on the
page of history, and make men thrill as they gaze, and think better of
the human nature that can do such things, but on the Christ hanging on
the Cross because He loved those who did not love Him, and giving His
life a ransom for sinners.


III. David's reception of the water.

The chivalrous devotion of the three touched an answering chord in
their chivalrous chief. His heart filled at the thought of what they
had risked, and revolted from employing what had been thus won for no
higher use than to gratify a piece of sentiment in himself. The
sparkling water was too sacred to be taken for any baser use than as a
libation to Jehovah. And who can doubt that the three were more fully
repaid for their devotion, as David poured it out unto the Lord, than
if he had drunk it eagerly up? His feeling and his act indicate
beautiful delicacy of instinct, and swiftness of perception of how to
requite the devotion of the three.

We may separate into its two parts the generous impulse which sprang as
one whole in David's breast. There was the shrinking from using the
water to slake his thirst merely, and there was the resolve to pour it
out as a libation to God. Both parts of that whole may yield us
profitable thoughts.

To risk their lives for the water was noble in the three; to have
quaffed it as if it had been drawn like any other water from a well,
would have been ignoble in David. There are things that it may be noble
to give and ignoble to accept. There are sacrifices which we are not
entitled to allow others to make for our sakes. Gratifications which
can only be procured at the hazard of men's lives are too dearly bought.

Would not a civilisation, that draws much of its comforts and
appliances from 'sweated industries,' and is languidly amused by seeing
men and women performers peril their lives nightly, and lose them too,
for its gratification, be the better for copying David's recoil from
drinking 'the blood of men that went in jeopardy of their lives'? Is
there not 'blood' on many a woman's ball-dress, on many an article of
luxury, on many an amusement?

There are sacrifices which we have no right to accept from others. The
three had no right to risk life for such a purpose, and David would
have been selfish if he had drunk the water. Do not such thoughts lead
us by contrast to Him who has done what none other can do? 'None of
them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give his life a ransom
for him'; but Jesus can and Jesus does, and what it would be
impossible, and wrong if it were possible, for one man to do for
another, He has done for us all, and what it would be base for a man to
accept from another if that other could give it, it is blessed and the
beginning of all nobleness of character for us to accept from Him.
David would not drink because the cup seemed to him to be red with
blood. Jesus offers to us a cup, not of cold water only but of 'water
and blood,' and bids us drink of it and remember Him.

The generous devotion of the three kindled answering emotions in
David's breast. It would be a churlish soul that was not warmed into
some faint replica of such self-sacrifice, and most of us would be
ashamed of ourselves if we were unmoved by such love. But does the
supreme example of it affect us as much as the lesser examples of it
do? How many of us stand before it like the peaks of the Alps that
front full south, and lift an unmelted breastplate of snow to the
midday sun! How many of us have lived all our lives in presence of
Jesus' infinite love and self-surrender for us each, and never have
felt one transient touch of answering love!

The other part of David's impulse was to offer to God what was too
precious for his own use. That is the fitting destination of our most
precious and prized possessions. And whatever is thus offered becomes
more precious by being offered. The altar sanctifies and enhances the
worth of the gift. What we give to God is more our own than if we had
kept it to ourselves, and develops richer capacities of ministering to
our delight. It is so with our greatest surrender, the surrender of
ourselves. When we give ourselves to Jesus, He renders us back to
ourselves, far better worth having than before. We are never so much
our own as when we are wholly Christ's. And the same thing is true as
to all our riches of mind, heart, or worldly wealth. If we wish to
taste their most delicate and refined sweetness, let us give them to
Jesus, and the touch of His hand, as He accepts them and gives them
back to us, will leave a lingering fragrance that nothing else can
impart. Was not the water from the well of Bethlehem sweeter to David
as he poured it out unto the Lord than if he had greedily gulped it
down?




THE FIRST BOOK OF KINGS




DAVID APPOINTING SOLOMON

'Then king David answered and said, Call me Bath-sheba. And she came
into the king's presence, and stood before the king. 29. And the king
sware, and said, As the Lord liveth, that hath redeemed my soul out of
all distress, 30. Even as I sware unto thee by the Lord God of Israel,
saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall
sit upon my throne in my stead; even so will I certainly do this day.
31. Then Bath-sheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did reverence
to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live for ever. 32. And
king David said, Call me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king. 33. The
king also said unto them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and
cause Solomon my son to ride upon mine own mule, and bring him down to
Gihon: 34. And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him
there king over Israel: and blow ye with the trumpet, and say, God save
king Solomon. 35. Then ye shall come up after him, that he may come and
sit upon my throne; for he shall be king in my stead: and I have
appointed him to be ruler over Israel and over Judah. 36. And Benaiah
the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said, Amen; the Lord God of
my lord the king say so too. 37. As the Lord hath been with my lord the
king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the
throne of my lord king David. 38. So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the
prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites, and the
Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's
mule, and brought him to Gihon. 39. And Zadok the priest took an horn
of oil out of the tabernacle, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the
trumpet; and all the people said, God save king Solomon.'--1 KINGS i.
28-39.


The earlier part of this chapter must be taken into account in order to
get the right view of this incident. David's eldest surviving son,
Adonijah, had claimed the succession, and gathered his partisans to a
feast. Nathan, alarmed at the prospect of such a successor, had
arranged with Bathsheba that she should go to David and ask his public
confirmation of his promise to her that Solomon should succeed him, and
that then Nathan should seek an audience while she was with the king,
and, as independently, should prefer the same request.

The plan was carried out, and here we see its results. The old king was
roused to a flash of his ancient vigour, confirmed his oath to
Bathsheba, and promptly cut the ground from under Adonijah's feet by
sending for the three who had remained true to him--Nathan, Benaiah,
and Zadok--and despatching them without a moment's delay to proclaim
Solomon king, and then to bring him up to the palace and enthrone him.
The swift execution of these decisive orders, and the burst of popular
acclamation which welcomed Solomon's accession, shattered the nascent
conspiracy, and its supporters scattered in haste, to preserve their
lives. The story may be best dealt with, for our purpose, by taking
this brief summary and trying to draw lessons from it.

I. It points anew the truth that 'whatsoever a man soweth, that shall
he also reap.' As Absalom, so Adonijah, had been spoiled by David's
over-indulgence (verse 6), and having never had his wishes checked, was
now letting his unbridled wishes hurry him into rebellion. Nor was that
fault of David's the only one which brought about the miserable
squabbles round his deathbed, as to who should wear the crown which had
not yet fallen from his head. Eastern monarchies are familiar with
struggles for the crown between the sons of different mothers when
their father dies. David had indulged in a multitude of wives, and his
last days were darkened by the resulting intrigues of his sons. No
doubt, too, Solomon was disliked by his brethren as the child of
Bathsheba, and the shame of David's crime was an obstacle in his
younger son's way. Thus, as ever, his evil deeds came home to roost,
and the poisonous seed which he had sown grew up and waved, a bitter
harvest, which he had to reap. Repentance and forgiveness did not
neutralise the natural consequences of his sin. Nor will they do so for
us. God often leaves them to be experienced, that the experience may
make us hate the sins the more.

II. The sad defection to Adonijah of such tried friends as Joab and
Abiathar has its lesson. The reason for Joab's treachery is plain. He
had been steadily drifting away from David for years. His fierce temper
could not brook the king's displeasure on account of his murders of
Abner and Amasa, and his slaying of Absalom had made the breach
irreparable. No doubt, David had made him feel that he loved and
trusted him no longer; and his old comrade in many a fight, Benaiah,
had stepped into the place which he had once filled. Professional
rivalry had darkened into bitter bate. Joab commanded the native-born
Israelites; Benaiah, the 'Cherethites and Pelethites,' who are now
generally regarded as foreign mercenaries. They were David's bodyguard,
and were probably as heartily hated by Joab and the other Israelite
soldiers as they were trusted by David. So there were reasons enough
for Joab's abetting an insurrection which would again make him the
foremost soldier. He wanted to be indispensable, and would prop the
throne as long as its occupant looked only to him as its defender.
Besides, he probably felt that he would have little chance of winning
distinction in a kingdom which was to be a peaceful one.

Abiathar's motives are unexplained, but if we notice that he had been
obliged to acquiesce in the irregular arrangement of putting the
high-priest's office into commission, we can understand that he bore no
goodwill to Zadok, his colleague, or to David for making the latter so.
Self was at the bottom of these two renegades' action. The fair
fellowship, which had been made the closer because of dangers and
privations faced together, crumbled away before the disintegrating
influences of petty personal jealousies. When once self-regard gets in,
it is like the trickle of water in the cracks of a rock, which freezes
in winter and splits the hardest stone. No common action for a great
cause is possible without the suppression of sidelong looks towards
private advantage. Joab and Abiathar tarnished a life's devotion and
broke sacred bonds, because they thought of themselves rather than of
God's will. Surely they must have had some pangs as they sat at
Adonijah's feast, when they thought of the decrepit old king lying in
his chamber up on Zion, and remembered what he and they had come
through together.

III. We may note the pathetic picture of decaying old age which is seen
in David. He was not very old in years, being about seventy, but he was
a worn-out man. His early hardships had told on him, and now he lay in
the inner chamber, the shadow of himself. His love for Bathsheba had
died down, as would appear both from her demeanour before him, and from
her ignorance of his intentions as to his successor. She was little or
nothing to him now. He seems to have been torpidly unaware of what was
going on. The noise of Adonijah's revels had not disturbed his quiet.
He had not even taken the trouble to designate his successor, though
'the eyes of all Israel were upon him that he should tell who was to
sit on his throne after him' (v. 20). Such neglect was criminal in the
circumstances, and brings out forcibly the weary indifference which had
crept over him. Contrast that picture with the early days of swift
energy and eager interest in all things. Is this half-comatose old man
the David who flashed like a meteor and struck swift as a thunderbolt
but a few years before? Yes, and a like collapse of power befalls us
all, if life is prolonged. Those who most need the lesson will be least
touched by it; but let not the young glory in their strength, for it
soon fades away; and let them give the vigour of their early days to
God, that, when the years come in which they shall say, 'I have no
pleasure in them,' they may be able, like David, to look back over a
long life and say, with him, that the Lord 'hath redeemed my soul out
of all adversity.'

IV. We note the flash of fire which blazed up in the dying embers of
David's life. The old lion could be roused yet, and could strike when
roused. It took much to shake him out of his torpor. Nathan's plan of
bringing the double influence of Bathsheba and himself to bear was
successful beyond what he had hoped. All that they desired was a formal
declaration of Solomon as successor. They knew that the king's name was
still dear enough to all Israel to ensure that his wish would settle
the succession; and they would have been content to have left the
actual entrance of Solomon on office till after David's death, so sure
were they that his word was still a spell. But the old king, shaking
off his languor, as a lion does the drops from his mane, goes beyond
their wishes, and strikes one decisive blow as with a great paw, and no
second is needed. Without a moment's delay, he sends for the trusty
three, and bids them act on the instant. So down to Gihon goes the
procession, with the youthful prince seated on his father's mule, in
token of his accession, the trusty bodyguard round him with Benaiah at
their head, and the great prophet Nathan, side by side with the
high-priest Zadok, representing the divine sanction of the solemn act.

It would take stronger men than the spoiled Adonijah and his revellers
to upset anything which that determined company resolved to do. The lad
is anointed with the holy oil which Zadok as high-priest had the right
to bring forth from the temporary sanctuary. That signified and
effected the communication from above of qualifications for the kingly
office, and indicated divine appointment. Then out blared the trumpets,
and the glad people shouted 'God save the king!' What thoughts filled
the young heart of Solomon as he stood silent there his vision in
Gibeon may partly tell. But the distant roar of acclaim reached
Adonijah and his gang as they sat at their too hasty banquet.

They had begun at the wrong end. The feast should have closed, not
inaugurated, the dash for the crown. They who feast when they should
fight are likely to end their mirth with sorrow. David's one stroke was
enough. They were as sure as Nathan and Bathsheba had been that the
declaration of his wish would carry all Israel with it, and so they saw
that the game was up, and there was a rush for dear life. The empty
banqueting-hall proclaimed the collapse of a rebellion which had no
brains to guide it, and no reason to justify it. Let us learn that,
though 'the race is not always to the swift,' promptitude of action,
when we are sure of God's will, is usually a condition of success. Life
is too short, and the work to be done too pressing and great, to allow
of dawdling. 'I made haste, and delayed not, but made haste to keep Thy
commandments.' Let us learn, too, from Adonijah's fiasco, to see the
end of a thing before we commit ourselves to it, and to have the work
done first before we think of the feast.

Nathan and Bathsheba and David all believed that God had willed
Solomon's succeeding to the throne. No doubt, the reason for their
belief was the divine word to David through Nathan (2 Samuel vii. 12),
which designated a son not yet born as his successor, and therefore
excluded Adonijah as well as Absalom. But, while they believed this,
they did not therefore let Adonijah work his will, and leave God to
carry out His purposes. Their belief animated their action. They knew
what God willed, and therefore they worked strenuously to effect that
will. We may bewilder our brains with speculations about the relation
between God's sovereignty and man's freedom, but, when it comes to
practical work, we have to put out the best and most that is in us to
prevent God's will from being thwarted by rebellious men, and to ensure
its being carried into effect through our efforts, 'for we are God's
fellow-workers.'




A YOUNG MAN'S WISE CHOICE OP WISDOM

'In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God
said, Ask what I shall give thee. 6. And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed
unto Thy servant David my father great mercy, according as he walked
before Thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart
with Thee; and Thou hast kept for him this great kindness, that Thou
hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day. 7. And
now, O Lord my God, Thou hast made Thy servant king instead of David my
father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come
in. 8. And Thy servant is in the midst of Thy people which Thou hast
chosen, a great people, that cannot be numbered nor counted for
multitude. 9. Give therefore Thy servant an understanding heart to
judge Thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is
able to judge this Thy so great a people? 10. And the speech pleased
the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. 11. And God said unto him,
Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long
life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of
thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern
judgment; 12. Behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have
given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none
like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto
thee. 13. And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked,
both riches and honour: so that there shall not be any among the kings
like unto thee all thy days. 14. And if thou wilt walk in My ways, to
keep My statutes and My commandments, as thy father David did walk,
then I will lengthen thy days. 15. And Solomon awoke; and, behold, It
was a dream. And he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the
covenant of the Lord, and offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace
offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.'--1 KINGS iii. 5-15.


The new king was apparently some nineteen or twenty years old on his
accession. He stepped at once out of seclusion and idleness to bear the
whole weight of the kingdom. The glories of David's reign, his brother
Adonijah's pretensions to the crown, the smouldering hostility of
Saul's old partisans, made his position difficult and his throne
unsteady. No doubt, 'the weight of too much dignity' pressed on the
youth, and this dream found a point of origin in his waking thoughts.
God does not thus reveal Himself to men who seek Him not; and the offer
in the vision is but the repetition of what Solomon felt in many a
waking moment of meditation that God was saying to him, and the choice
he makes in it is the choice that he had already made. He who seeks
wisdom first is already wise.

I. Note the wide possibilities opened by the divine offer. Our
narrative brings that gracious offer into connection with Solomon's
lavish sacrifice before the Tabernacle at Gibeon. 'God loveth a
cheerful giver' and because these thousand burnt offerings meant
devotion and thankfulness, therefore He who lets no man be the poorer
for what he gives to Him, and is honoured most, not by our givings to,
but by our takings from Him, comes in the quiet night, and puts the key
of all His treasures into the young king's hands. In a very real sense
this divine voice is but the putting into words of the fact as to every
young life. The all but boundless possibilities before every young man
and woman give solemnity to their position, which they too often do not
recognise till youth is past. The future lies blank before them, ready
to receive what they choose to write on its page. Once written, it is
indelible. They are still free from the limitations of habit and
associations. They have still the capacity and the opportunity of
choice. There are limits, of course, but still it is scarcely
exaggeration to say that a man may become almost anything he likes, if
he strongly wills it when young, and sticks to his resolve. When the
liquid iron flows from the blast furnace, it may be run into any mould;
but it soon cools and hardens, and obstinately keeps its shape, in
spite of hammers.

If young men and women could but see the possibilities of their youth,
and the issues that hang on early choice, as clearly as they will see
them some day, there would be fewer wasted mornings of life and fewer
gloomy sunsets. But the misery is that so many do not choose at all,
but just let things slide, and allow themselves to be moulded by
whatever influence happens to be strongest. For one man who goes wrong
by deliberate choice, with open eyes, there are twenty who simply
drift. Unfortunately, there is more evil than good in the world; and if
a lad takes his colour from his surroundings, the chances are terribly
against his coming to anything high, noble, or pure. This world is no
place for a man who cannot say 'No.' If we are like the weeds in a
stream, and let it decide which way we shall point, we shall be sure to
point downwards. It would do much to secure the choice of the Good, if
there were a clear recognition by all young persons of the fact that
they have the choice to make, and are really making it unconsciously.
If they could be brought, like Solomon, to put their ruling wish into
plain words, many who are not ashamed to yield to unworthy desires
would be ashamed to speak them out baldly. Let each ask himself,
'Suppose that I had to say out what I want most, dare I avow before my
own conscience, to say nothing of God, what it is?

Looked at from a somewhat different point of view, God's offer to
Solomon presupposes God's knowledge and approval of his wishes. He does
not give blank cheques to those whom He cannot trust to fill them up
rightly. When James and John tried to commit Jesus to a blind promise
'that Thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall ask of Thee,' their
answer was a question as to what they wished. 'Delight thyself also in
the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart.' God loves
us too well to let us have _carte blanche_ unless our wills run
parallel with His. He is a foolish and cruel father who promises
compliance with all his child's unknown wishes. Not such is our
Father's loving discipline. It is to those who 'abide in Christ,' and
have Him abiding in them, moulding their longings and prayers, that the
great promise is sealed: 'Ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be
done unto you.'

II. Note next the wise choice of wisdom. 'Had not Solomon been wise
before, he had not known the worth of wisdom. The dunghill cocks of
this world cannot know the price of this pearl; those that have it know
that all other excellencies are but trash and rubbish unto it.'
Solomon's prayer shows the temper with which he entered on his reign.
There is no exultation; his serious and clear-eyed spirit sees in rule
a heavy task. He contrasts his inexperienced rawness with the 'truth
and righteousness' and veteran maturity of his great predecessor, and
trembles to think that he, a mere lad, sits on David's throne. But he
pleads with God that He has made him king, and implies that therefore
God is bound to fit him for his office. That is the boldness permitted
to faith,--to remind God of His own past acts, which pledge Him to give
what He has put us into circumstances to need. With beautiful humility,
Solomon dwells on his youth and inexperience, and on the vastness of
the charge laid on him. All these considerations are the motives for
his choice of a gift, and also pleas with God to grant his request.

He asks for the practical wisdom needed for ruling in these old days,
when the king was judge as well as ruler and captain. Was this the
highest gift that he could have asked or received? Surely the deep
longings of his father for communion with God were yet better. No doubt
the 'wisdom' of the Book of Proverbs is religion and morality as well
as true thinking, but the 'understanding heart to judge Thy people'
which Solomon asked and received is narrower and more secular in its
meaning. There is no sign in his biography that he ever had the deep
inward devotion of his father. After the poet-psalmist came the prosaic
and keen-sighted shrewd man of affairs. The one breathed his ardent
soul into psalms, which feed devotion to-day; the other crystallised
his discernment in 'three thousand proverbs,' and, though his 'songs
were one thousand and five' they touched a lower range, both of poetry
and religious feeling, than his father's, as may be expressed by
calling them 'songs,' not 'psalms.'

But though the request is not the highest, it may well be taken as a
pattern by the young. Note the view of his position from which it
rises. To Solomon dignity meant duty; and his crown was not a toy, but
a task. The responsibilities, not the enjoyments, of his station were
uppermost in his mind. That is the only right view to take. Youth is
meant to be enthusiastic, and to feed its aspirations on noble ideals,
and if, instead of that, it does as too many do, especially in
countries where wealth abounds, namely, regards life as a garden of
delights, or sometimes as a sty where young men may wallow in
'pleasures,' then farewell to all hopes of high achievements or of an
honourable career. Youthful ideals will fade fast enough; but alas for
the life which had none to begin with! Note the sense of insufficiency
for his task. Youth is prone to be over-confident, and to think that it
can do better than its fathers, who were as confident in their time.
There is a false humility which flattens the spirit and keeps from
plain duty; and there is a true lowliness which feels that the task
must be attempted, though the heart may shrink, and which impels to
prayer for fitness not its own. He who tells God his consciousness of
impotence, and asks Him to supply His strength to its weakness and His
wisdom to its inexperience, will never shirk work because it is too
great, nor ever fail to find power according to his need.

III. Note God's answer. Solomon gets his wish, and much which he had
not asked besides. The divine answer is in two parts. First, the
reasons for the large gift; and second, the details of the gift. His
not wishing material good was the very reason why he obtained it. That
is not always so; for often enough a man whose whole nature is
sharpened to one point, in the intensity of his desire to make money,
will succeed. But what then? He will be none the better, but the
poorer, for his wealth. But this is always true,--that the people who
do not make worldly good their first object are the people who can be
most safely trusted with it, and who get most enjoyment out of it.
Whether in the precise form of the gift to Solomon or not, outward good
does attend a life which sets duty before pleasure, and desires most to
be able to do it. All earthly good is exalted by being put second, and
degraded as well as corrupted by being put first. The water lapped up
in the palm, as the soldier marches, is sweeter than the abundant
draughts swilled down by self-indulgence. 'Seek ye first the kingdom of
God, ... and all these things shall be added unto you.'

Note the largeness of the gift. When God is pleased with a man's
prayers, He gives more than was asked, and so teaches us to be ashamed
of the smallness of our expectations, and widens our desires by His
overlapping bestowments. First, He gives the wisdom asked. Dependence
on God, rising from the sense of our own ignorance, has a wonderful
power of bringing illumination, even as to small matters of practical
duty. Solomon asked it, to guide him in his judicial decisions; and the
first case to which it was applied, when received, was a miserable
quarrel between two disreputable women. A devout heart, purged from
self-conceit, is often gifted with a piercing wisdom before which the
crafty shrewdness of the world is abashed. We cannot be 'wise as
serpents' unless we are 'harmless as doves.' The world may think such
'wisdom' folly, but she will be 'justified of her children.' Is the
saying of James's Epistle a reminiscence of Solomon's dream, 'If any of
you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, ... and it shall be given him'?

Then follows the grant of the unasked goods,--riches, honour, and
length of days. Surely we hear an echo of these promises in that
magnificent description of Wisdom in the Book of Proverbs: 'Length of
days is in her right hand; in her left hand are riches and honour'
These and similar gifts may or may not follow our choice of divine
wisdom as our truest good If we have really chosen it, we shall regard
them as make-weights, to be thankfully received and rightly used, but
not as indispensable. If we pursue wisdom for the sake of getting
these, we shall lose both it and them. If we have set our desires most
earnestly on the most worthy things, which are God's love and a
character hallowed by His grace, we shall be rich indeed, whether what
the world calls wealth be ours or no; and our days will be long enough
if in them we have been prepared for the fuller wisdom and undying life
of heaven.

Solomon realised his youthful aspirations. The only way to be sure of
getting what we wish, is to wish what God desires to give,--even
Himself,--and to ask it of Him. Solomon, like many a young man, outgrew
his early 'dream.' Was he happier or wiser when he was a worn-out
voluptuary, smiling with cynical scorn at his young self, or when, with
generous enthusiasm, he felt the solemnity of life and the awfulness of
duty, and asked God to help his insufficiency? Was not the dream truer
and more real than the waking hours of profligacy and unreal
'enjoyment'?




THE GREAT GAIN OF GODLINESS

'And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under
his fig tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solomon. 26.
And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and
twelve thousand horsemen. 27. And those officers provided victual for
king Solomon, and for all that came unto king Solomon's table, every
man in his month: they lacked nothing. 28. Barley also and straw for
the horses and dromedaries brought they unto the place where the
officers were, every man according to his charge. 29. And God gave
Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of
heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore. 30. And Solomon's
wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east country, and
all the wisdom of Egypt. 31 For he was wiser than all men; than Ethan
the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Chalcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol: and
his fame was in all nations round about. 32. And he spake three
thousand proverbs: and his songs were a thousand and five. 33. And he
spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the
hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and of
fowl and of creeping things, and of fishes. 34. And there came of all
people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth,
which had heard of his wisdom.'--1 KINGS iv. 25-34


The glories of Solomon's reign kindle the writer of this Book of Kings
to patriotic enthusiasm, all the more touching if, as is probable, he
wrote during Israel's exile. The fair vision of the past would make the
sad present still sadder. But it is not patriotism only which guides
his pen; he recognises that Solomon's glory was the result of Solomon's
religion, and by portraying it he would teach the eternal truth that
godliness hath 'promise of the life that now is' as well as 'of that
which is to come.' The passage brings out three characteristics of
Solomon's reign and character: the peace enjoyed by Israel during his
time, his wealth, and his wisdom.

I. That beautiful phrase for a time of secure enjoyment of modest,
material good in a simple state of agricultural society, 'dwelt safely,
every man under his vine and under his fig tree' occurs frequently in
the Old Testament, and breathes the very essence of a calm life of
rural felicity and restful enjoyment of wholesome joys. How different
from the feverish ideal predominant in our great cities to-day! Which
is the nobler and the more likely to yield abiding content and to be
the ally of high and serious thought--this antique picture of
leisurely, unambitious lives, or the scramble for wealth which destroys
repose, and is so busy getting that it has no time either rightly to
enjoy, or nobly to expend, its wealth? Those who have their country's
truest prosperity at heart may well sigh for the return of the vanished
ideal of Solomon's days; and those who would make the most of
themselves must in some measure seek to conform their own lives to it.

But another view may be taken of this picture of national prosperity.
Remember the time at which it was painted,--a time when the prosperity
of a nation was thought to consist in conquest, and when the arts of
peace were despised. How far beyond his era was the king who set his
highest glory in securing for his people tranquil lives on their
fertile homesteads, and condemned the vulgar glory of the conqueror!
How far beyond his era was the writer who felt that the fairest page in
his book was not that which told of battles and triumphs, but that
which portrayed a peaceful reign, when swords were turned into
ploughshares! The world has not yet learned that the highest function
of government is to promote individual prosperity. The vulgar, wicked
notion of 'glory' bewitches the nations still. A Europe, armed to the
teeth and staggering under the weight of its weapons, has need to go to
school to this old Hebrew ideal. 'They didn't know everything down in
Judee,' but they knew that peace has nobler victories than war has. The
people who see nothing in the world's history but natural evolution
have a hard nut to crack in accounting for the singular fact that the
Jew somehow or other had got hold of a truth to which the most advanced
nations to-day have scarcely grown up.

II. The wealth of Solomon is illustrated by his large equipment of
chariots and horsemen. The older habits of the nation had not favoured
the use of either, and their employment by Solomon was a sign of
growing luxury, which had the seeds of evil in it. But the novelty was
characteristic of the change coming over Israel in his day, and of its
closer intercourse with other nations. The number of forty thousand for
the stalls of the horses is an evident clerical error, which is
corrected in the parallel passage in 2 Chronicles ix. 25 to the more
probable number of four thousand. A well-organised staff looked after
provisioning the cavalry and chariot horses wherever they were
quartered. This one instance of Solomon's resources should be connected
with the other details of these. The intention of all is, not only to
magnify his wealth, but to bring out the fulfilment of the promise made
to him as part of the reward of his prayer for wisdom, that he should
have the inferior good which he had not asked, 'both riches and honour.'

The principle which the writer of this book would confirm and exemplify
is, that to the man who seeks first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness all these things shall be added. Now the whole order of
supernatural providences in the Old Testament was directed to making
material prosperity depend on obedience to God. And we cannot assert
that the New Testament order has the same purpose in view. 'Prosperity
was the blessing of the Old Testament; adversity is the blessing of the
New.' But even in Old Testament times outward prosperity did not always
follow godliness, and the problem which has tortured all generations
