"One Sunday," Therese relates, "I was going toward the chestnut
avenue, full of rejoicing, for it was spring-time, and I wanted to
enjoy nature's beauties. What a bitter disappointment! My dear
chestnuts had been pruned, and the branches, already covered with
buds, now lay on the ground. On seeing this havoc, and thinking
that three years must elapse before it could be repaired, my heart
felt very sore. But the grief did not last long. 'If I were in
another convent,' I reflected, 'what would it matter to me if the
chestnut-trees of the Carmel at Lisieux were entirely cut down?' I
will not worry about things that pass. God shall be my all. I will
take my walks in the wooded groves of His Love, whereon none dare
lay hands."

*   *   *   *   *   *

A novice asked her Sisters to help her shake some blankets. As
they were somewhat liable to tear because of their worn condition,
she insisted, rather sharply, on their being handled with care.
"What would you do," said Therese to the impatient one, "if it
were not your duty to mend these blankets? There would be no
thought of self in the matter, and if you did call attention to
the fact that they are easily torn, it would be done in quite an
impersonal way. In all your actions, you should avoid the least
trace of self-seeking."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Seeing one of our Sisters very much fatigued, I said to Soeur
Therese: "It grieves me to see people suffer, especially those who
are holy." She instantly replied: "I do not feel as you do. Saints
who suffer never excite my pity. I know they have strength to bear
their sufferings, and that through them they are giving great
glory to God. But I compassionate greatly those who are not
Saints, and who do not know how to profit by suffering. They
indeed awake my pity. I would strain every nerve to help and
comfort them."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Were I to live longer, it is the office of Infirmarian that would
most please me. I would not ask for it, but were it imposed
through obedience, I should consider myself highly favoured. I
think I should fulfill its duties with much affection, always
mindful of Our Lord's words: 'I was sick, and you visited Me.'[13]
The infirmary bell should be for you as heavenly music, and you
ought purposely to pass by the windows of the sick that it might
be easy for them to summon you. Consider yourself as a little
slave whom everyone has the right to command. Could you but see
the Angels who from the heights of Heaven watch your combats in
the arena! They are awaiting the end of the fight to crown you and
cover you with flowers. You know that we claim to rank as _little
Martyrs_ . . . . but we must win our palms.

"God does not despise these hidden struggles with ourselves, so
much richer in merit because they are unseen: 'The patient man is
better than the valiant, and he that ruleth his spirit than he
that taketh cities.'[14] Through our little acts of charity,
practised in the dark, as it were, we obtain the conversion of the
heathen, help the missionaries, and gain for them plentiful alms,
thus building both spiritual and material dwellings for Our
Eucharistic God."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I had seen Mother Prioress showing, as I thought, more confidence
and affection to one of our Sisters than she extended to me.
Expecting to win sympathy, I told my trouble to Soeur Therese, and
great was my surprise when she put me the question: "Do you think
you love our Mother very much?" "Certainly! otherwise I should be
indifferent if others were preferred to me."

"Well, I shall prove that you are absolutely mistaken, and that it
is not our Mother that you love, but yourself. When we really love
others, we rejoice at their happiness, and we make every sacrifice
to procure it. Therefore if you had this true, disinterested
affection, and loved our Mother for her own sake, you would be
glad to see her find pleasure even at your expense; and since you
think she has less satisfaction in talking with you than with
another Sister, you ought not to grieve at being apparently
neglected."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I was distressed at my many distractions during prayers: "I also
have many," she said, "but as soon as I am aware of them, I pray
for those people the thought of whom is diverting my attention,
and in this way they reap benefit from my distractions. . . . I
accept all for the love of God, even the wildest fancies that
cross my mind."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I was regretting a pin which I had been asked for, and which I had
found most useful. "How rich you are," said Therese, "you will
never be happy!"

*   *   *   *   *   *

The grotto of the Holy Child was in her charge, and, knowing that
one of our Mothers greatly disliked perfumes, she never put any
sweet-smelling flowers there, not even a tiny violet. This cost
her many a real sacrifice. One day, just as she had placed a
beautiful artificial rose at the foot of the statue, the Mother
called her. Soeur Therese, surmising that it was to bid her remove
the rose, was anxious to spare her any humiliation. She therefore
took the flower to the good Sister, and, forestalling all
observations, said: "Look, Mother, how well nature is imitated
nowadays: would you not think this rose had been freshly gathered
from the garden?"

*   *   *   *   *   *

"There are moments," she told us, "when we are so miserable
within, that there is nothing for it but to get away from
ourselves. At those times God does not oblige us to remain at
home. He even permits our own company to become distasteful to us
in order that we may leave it. Now I know no other means of exit
save through the doorway of charitable works, on a visit to Jesus
and Mary."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"When I picture the Holy Family, the thought that does me most
good is--the simplicity of their home-life. Our Lady and St.
Joseph were well aware that Jesus was God, while at the same time
great wonders were hidden from them, and--like us--they lived by
faith. You have heard those words of the Gospel: 'They understood
not the word that He spoke unto them';[15] and those others no
less mysterious: 'His Father and Mother were wondering at those
things which were spoken concerning Him.'[16] They seemed to be
learning something new, for this word 'wondering' implies a
certain amount of surprise."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"There is a verse in the Divine Office which I recite each day
with reluctance: 'I have inclined my heart to do Thy
justifications for ever, because of the reward.'[17] I hasten to
add in my heart: 'My Jesus, Thou knowest I do not serve Thee for
sake of reward, but solely out of love, and a desire to win Thee
souls."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"In Heaven only shall we be in possession of the clear truth. On
earth, even in matters of Holy Scripture, our vision is dim. It
distresses me to see the differences in its translations, and had
I been a Priest I would have learned Hebrew, so as to read the
Word of God as He deigned to utter it in human speech."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Soeur Therese often spoke to me of a well-known toy with which she
had amused herself when a child. This was the kaleidoscope, shaped
like a small telescope, through which, as it is made to revolve,
one perceives an endless variety of pretty-coloured figures.

"This toy," she said, "excited my admiration, and I wondered what
could provide so charming a phenomenon, when one day, after a
lengthy examination, I found that it consisted simply of tiny bits
of paper and cloth scattered inside. A further examination
revealed that there were three mirrors inside the tube, and the
problem was solved. It became for me the illustration of a great
truth.

"So long as our actions, even the most trivial, remain within
Love's kaleidoscope, so long the Blessed Trinity, figured by the
three mirrors, imparts to them a wonderful brightness and beauty.
The eye-piece is Jesus Christ, and He, looking from outside
through Himself into the kaleidoscope, finds perfect all our
works. But, should we leave that ineffable abode of Love, He would
see but the rags and chaff of unclean and worthless deeds."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I told Soeur Therese of the strange phenomena produced by
magnetism on persons who surrender their will to the hypnotiser.
It seemed to interest her greatly, and next day she said to me:
"Your conversation yesterday did me so much good! How I long to be
hypnotised by Our Lord! It was my waking thought, and verily it
was sweet to surrender Him my will. I want Him to take possession
of my faculties in such wise that my acts may no more be mine, or
human, but Divine--inspired and guided by the Spirit of Love."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Before my profession I received through my saintly Novice-mistress
a very special grace. We had been washing all day. I was worn-out
with fatigue and harassed with spiritual worries. That night,
before meditation, I wanted to speak to her, but she dismissed me
with the remark: "That is the bell for meditation, and I have not
time to console you; besides, I see plainly that it would be
useless trouble. For the present, God wishes you to suffer alone."
I followed her to meditation so discouraged that, for the first
time, I doubted of my vocation. I should never be able to be a
Carmelite. The life was too hard.

I had been kneeling for some minutes, when all at once, in the
midst of this interior struggle--without having asked or even
wished for peace--I felt a sudden and extraordinary change of
soul. I no longer knew myself. My vocation appeared to me both
lovely and lovable. I saw the sweetness and priceless value of
suffering. All the privations and fatigues of the religious life
appeared to me infinitely preferable to worldly pleasures, and I
came away from my meditation completely transformed.

Next day I told my Mistress what had taken place, and, seeing she
was deeply touched, I begged to know the reason. "God is good,"
she exclaimed. "Last evening you inspired me with such profound
pity that I prayed incessantly for you at the beginning of
meditation. I besought Our Lord to bring you comfort, to change
your dispositions, and show you the value of suffering. He has
indeed heard my prayers."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Being somewhat of a child in my ways, the Holy Child--to help me
in the practice of virtue--inspired me with the thought of amusing
myself with Him, and I chose the game of _ninepins._ I imagined
them of all sizes and colours, representing the souls I wished to
reach. The ball was--_love._

In December, 1896, the novices received, for the benefit of the
Foreign Missions, various trifles towards a Christmas tree, and at
the bottom of the box containing them was a _top_--a rare thing in
a Carmelite convent. My companions remarked: "What an ugly
thing!--of what use will it be?" But I, who knew the game, caught
hold of it, exclaiming: "Nay, what fun! it will spin a whole day
without stopping if it be well whipped"; and thereupon I spun it
around to their great surprise.

Soeur Therese was quietly watching us, and on Christmas night,
after midnight Mass, I found in our cell the famous top, with a
delightful letter addressed as follows:

_To My Beloved Little Spouse_

_Player of Ninepins on the Mountain of Carmel_

_Christmas Night, 1896._

MY BELOVED LITTLE SPOUSE,--I am well pleased with thee! All the
year round thou hast amused Me by playing at _ninepins._ I was so
overjoyed that the whole court of Angels was surprised and
charmed. Several little cherubs have asked me why I did not make
them children. Others wanted to know if the melody of their
instruments were not more pleasing to me than thy joyous laugh
when a ninepin fell at the stroke of thy love-ball. My answer to
them was, that they must not regret they are not children, since
one day they would play with thee in the meadows of Heaven. I told
them also that thy smiles were certainly more sweet to Me than
their harmonies, because these smiles were purchased by suffering
and forgetfulness of self.

And now, my cherished Spouse, it is my turn to ask something of
thee. Thou wilt not refuse Me--thou lovest Me too much. Let us
change the game. Ninepins amuse me greatly, but at present I
should like to play at spinning a top, and, if thou dost consent,
thou shalt be the top. I give thee one as a model. Thou seest that
it is ugly to look at, and would be kicked aside by whosoever did
not know the game. But at the sight of it a child would leap for
joy and shout: "What fun! it will spin a whole day without
stopping!"

Although thou too art not attractive, I--the little Jesus--love
thee, and beg of thee to keep always spinning to amuse Me. True,
it needs a whip to make a top spin. Then let thy Sisters supply
the whip, and be thou most grateful to those who shall make thee
turn fastest. When I shall have had plenty of fun, I will bring
thee to join Me here, and our games shall be full of unalloyed
delight.--Thy little Brother,

JESUS.

*   *   *   *   *   *

I had the habit of constantly crying about the merest trifles, and
this was a source of great pain to Soeur Therese. One day a bright
idea occurred to her: taking a mussel-shell from her painting
table, and, holding my hands lest I should prevent her, she
gathered my tears in the shell, and soon they were turned into
merry laughter.

"There," she said, "from this onwards I permit you to cry as much
as you like on condition that it is into the shell!"

A week, however, before her death I spent a whole evening in tears
at the thought of her fast-approaching end. She knew it, and said:
"You have been crying. Was it into the shell?" I was unable to
tell an untruth, and my answer grieved her. "I am going to die,"
she continued, "and I shall not be at rest about you unless you
promise to follow faithfully my advice. I consider it of the
utmost importance for the good of your soul."

I promised what she asked, begging leave, however, as a favour, to
be allowed to cry at her death. "But," she answered, "why cry at
my death? Those tears will certainly be useless. You will be
bewailing my happiness! Still I have pity on your weakness, and
for the first few days you have leave to cry, though afterwards
you must again take up the shell."

It has cost me some heroic efforts, but I have been faithful. I
have kept the shell at hand, and each time the wish to cry
overcame me, I laid hold of the pitiless thing. However urgent the
tears, the trouble of passing it from one eye to the other so
distracted my thoughts, that before very long this ingenious
method entirely cured me of my sensibility.

*   *   *   *   *   *

Owing to a fault which had caused Soeur Therese much pain, but of
which I had deeply repented, I intended to deprive myself of Holy
Communion. I wrote to her of my resolution, and this was her
reply: "Little flower, most dear to Jesus, by this humiliation
your roots are feeding upon the earth. You must now open wide your
petals, or rather lift high your head, so that the Manna of the
Angels may, like a divine dew, come down to strengthen you and
supply all your wants. Good-night, poor little flower! Ask of
Jesus that all the prayers offered for my cure may serve to
increase the fire which ought to consume me."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"At the moment of Communion I sometimes liken my soul to that of a
little child of three or four, whose hair has been ruffled and
clothes soiled at play. This is a picture of what befalls me in my
struggling with souls. But Our Blessed Lady comes promptly to the
rescue, takes off _my soiled pinafore,_ and arranges my hair,
adorning it with a pretty ribbon or a simple flower. . . . Then I
am quite nice, and able, without any shame, to seat myself at the
Banquet of Angels."

*   *   *   *   *   *

In the infirmary we scarcely waited for the end of her
thanksgiving before seeking her advice. At first, this somewhat
distressed her, and she would make gentle reproaches, but soon she
yielded to us, saying: "I must not wish for more rest than Our
Lord. When He withdrew into the desert after preaching, the crowds
would come and intrude upon His solitude. Come, then, to me as
much as you like; I must die sword in hand--'the sword of the
Spirit, which is the Word of God.'"[18]

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Advise us," we said to her, "how to profit by our spiritual
instructions." "Go for guidance with great simplicity, not
counting too much on help which may fail you at any moment. You
would then have to say with the Spouse in the Canticles: 'The
keepers took away my cloak and wounded me; when I had a little
passed by them, I found Him whom my soul loveth.'[19] If you ask
with humility and with detachment after your Beloved, the
_keepers_ will tell you. More often, you will find Jesus only when
you have passed by all creatures. Many times have I repeated this
verse of the Spiritual Canticle of St. John of the Cross:

'Messengers, I pray, no more Between us send, who know not how To
tell me what my spirit longs to know. For they Thy charms who
read--For ever telling of a thousand more--Make all my wounds to
bleed, While deeper then before Doth an--I know not what!--my
spirit grieve With stammerings vague, and of all life bereave.'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

"If, supposing the impossible, God Himself could not see my good
actions, I would not be troubled. I love Him so much I would like
to give Him joy without His knowing who gave. When He sees the
gift being made, He is, as it were, obliged to make a
return. . . . I should wish to spare Him the trouble."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Had I been rich, I could never have seen a poor person hungry
without giving him to eat. This is my way also in the spiritual
life. There are many souls on the brink of hell, and as my
earnings come to hand they are scattered among these sinners. The
time has never yet been when I could say: 'Now I am going to work
for myself.'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

"There are people who make the worst of everything. As for me, I
do just the contrary. I always see the good side of things, and
even if my portion be suffering, without a glimmer of solace,
well, I make it my joy."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Whatever has come from God's Hands has always pleased me, even
those things which have seemed to me less good and less beautiful
than the gifts made to others."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"When staying with my aunt, while I was still a little girl, I was
given a certain book to read. In one of the stories great praise
was bestowed on a schoolmistress who by her tact escaped from
every difficulty without hurting anyone's feelings. Her method of
saying to one person: 'You are right,' and to another: 'You are
not wrong,' struck me particularly, and as I read I reflected that
I would not have acted in that way because we should always tell
the truth. And this I always do, though I grant it is much more
difficult. It would be far less trouble for us, when told of a
worry, to cast the blame on the absent. Less trouble . . .
