spirit of the times, it could not have been accomplished. It was,
however, justified by Catholicism, as that system set forth the clergy
in the light of mediators between God and the people. This misconception
of the nature of the Christian ministry generated a multitude of errors.
If ministers are priests they must offer sacrifice, and must be
entrusted with the work of atonement. It is true, indeed, that the
monstrous dogma of transubstantiation was not yet broached, but it
cannot be denied that forms of expression which were exceedingly liable
to misinterpretation, now began to be adopted. Thus, the Eucharist was
styled "a sacrifice," [645:1] and the communion-table "the altar."
[645:2] At first such phraseology was not intended to be literally
understood, [645:3] but its tendency, notwithstanding, was most
pernicious, as it fostered false views of a holy ordinance, and laid the
foundation of the most senseless superstition ever imposed on human
credulity.

Every genuine pastor has a divine call to the sacred office, and no act
of man can supply the place of this spiritual vocation. God alone can
provide a true minister, [645:4] for He alone can bestow the gifts and
the graces which are required. Ordination is simply the form in which
the existing Church rulers endorse the credentials of the candidate, and
sanction his appearance in the character of an ecclesiastical
functionary. But these rulers may themselves be incompetent or profane,
so that their approval may be worthless; or, by mistake, they may permit
wolves in sheep's clothing to take charge of the flock of Christ. The
simple fact, therefore, that an individual holds a certain position in
any section of the visible Church, is no decisive evidence that he is a
true shepherd. Such, however, was not the doctrine of Catholicism.
Whoever was accredited by the existing ecclesiastical authorities was,
according to this system, the chosen of the Lord. When certain parties
who had joined Novatian were induced to retrace their steps, they made
the following penitential declaration in presence of a large
congregation assembled in the Western metropolis--"We acknowledge
Cornelius bishop of the most holy Catholic Church _chosen by God
Almighty_ and Christ our Lord." [646:1] Cyprian asserted that, as he was
bishop of Carthage, he must necessarily have a divine commission.
Nothing, indeed, can exceed the arrogance with which this imperious
prelate expressed himself when speaking of his ecclesiastical authority.
To challenge his conduct was, in his estimation, tantamount to
blasphemy; and, to dispute his prerogatives, a contempt of the Divine
Majesty. Once, in a time of persecution, he retired from Carthage, and
he was, in consequence, upbraided by some as a coward; but when a
fellow-bishop, Papianus, ventured to ask an explanation of a course of
proceeding which apparently betokened indecision, Cyprian treated the
inquiry as an insult, and poured out upon his correspondent a whole
torrent of invectives and reproaches. He is _God's bishop_, and no one
is to attempt, by the breath of suspicion, to stain the lustre of his
episcopal dignity. "I perceive by your letter," says he, "that you
believe the same things of me, and persist in what you believed.... This
is not to believe in God, this is to be a rebel against Christ and
against His gospel.... Do you suppose that the priests of God are
without His cognizance ordained in the Church? For if you believe that
those who are ordained are unworthy and incestuous, what else is it but
to believe that, not by God, or through God, are His bishops appointed
in the Church." [646:2] After indulging at great length in the language
of denunciation, he adds, in a strain of irony--"Vouchsafe at length and
deign to pronounce on us, and to confirm our episcopate by the authority
of _your_ hearing, that God and Christ may give _you_ thanks, that
through you a president and ruler has been restored as well to _their_
altar as to _their_ people." [647:1]

II. The Catholic system encouraged its adherents to cultivate very
bigoted and ungenerous sentiments. They were taught to regard themselves
as the "peculiar people," and to look on all others, however excellent,
as without claim to the title or privileges of Christians. How different
the spirit of the inspired heralds of the gospel! When Peter saw that
the Holy Ghost was poured out on men uncircumcised, he recognized the
divine intimation by acknowledging the believing Gentiles as his
brethren in Christ. Conceiving that God himself had thus settled the
question of their Church membership, "he commanded them to be baptized
in the name of the Lord." [647:2] But men who professed to derive their
authority from the apostle, now showed how grievously they misunderstood
the benign and comprehensive genius of his ecclesiastical polity. The
dominant party among the disciples had not long assumed the name of
Catholics when they sadly belied the designation, for nothing could be
more illiberal or uncatholic than their Church principles. All evidences
of piety, no matter how decided, if found among the Nazarenes, or the
Novatians, or the friends of Felicissimus, were rejected by them as
apocryphal. The brightest manifestations of godliness, if exhibited
outside their own denomination, only roused their jealousy or provoked
their uncandid and malicious criticisms. The Catholic bishops acted as
if they moved within something like a charmed circle, and as if a curse
rested upon everything not under their own influence. Their proceedings
often displayed alike their folly and inconsistency. Tertullian, for
example, was a Montanist, and yet he was the writer from whom Cyprian
himself derived a large share of his theological instruction. "Give me
_the master_," the bishop of Carthage is reported to have said, when he
called for his favourite author. [648:1] Thus, an individual who,
according to Cyprian's own principles, was beyond the pale of hope, was
the teacher with whom he was daily holding spiritual fellowship! The
bigotry of the party must appear all the more intolerable when we
consider that some of those who differed from them taught the cardinal
doctrines of the gospel, as zealously and as fully as themselves. The
Novatians seceded from their communion merely on the ground of a
question of discipline, and yet the Catholics could not believe that any
grace could exist among these ancient Puritans. The Novatians in their
lives might exhibit much of the beauty of holiness, and they might shed
their blood in the cause of Christianity, [648:2] but all this availed
them nothing in the estimation of their narrow-minded antagonists. "Let
no one think," says Cyprian, "that they can be good men who leave the
Church." [648:3] "He can never attain to the kingdom who leaves her with
whom the kingdom shall be." [648:4] "He cannot be a martyr who is not in
the Church." [648:5] Every man not blinded by prejudice might well have
suspected the soundness of a theory which could only be sustained by
such brazen recklessness of assertion.

III. Nothing, however, more clearly revealed the anti-evangelical
character of the Catholic system than its interference with the claims
of the Word of God. The gospel commends itself by the light of its own
evidence. The official rank of the preacher cannot add to its truth,
neither can the corrupt motives which may prompt him to proclaim it,
impair its authority. As a revelation from heaven, it possesses a title
to consideration irrespective of any individual, or any Church; and God
honours His own communication even though it may be delivered by a very
unworthy messenger. [649:1] "Some indeed," says Paul, "preach Christ
even of envy and strife, and some also of good-will.... What then?
Notwithstanding, every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is
preached; and I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice." [649:2] But
Catholicism taught its partizans to cherish very different feelings, for
they were instructed to believe that the gospel itself was without
efficacy when promulgated by a minister who did not belong to their own
party. They could not challenge a single flaw in the creed of Novatian,
[649:3] and yet they strongly maintained that his preaching was useless,
and that the baptism he dispensed was worthless as the ablution of a
heathen. "You should know," says Cyprian, "that _we ought not even to be
curious as to what Novatian teaches, since he teaches out of the
Church._ Whosoever he be, and whatsoever he be, he is not a Christian
who is not in the Church of Christ." [649:4] "When the Novatians
say--'Dost thou believe remission of sins and eternal life by the Holy
Church?' they lie in their interrogatory, since they _have no Church._"
[649:5]

Strange infatuation! Who could have anticipated that one hundred and
fifty years after the death of the Apostle John, such miserable and
revolting bigotry would have been current? The Scriptures teach us that,
in the salvation of sinners, ministers are as nothing, and the gospel
everything. "Whosoever," says Paul, "shall call upon the name of the
Lord _shall be saved_.... Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by _the
Word of God._" [650:1] Cyprian did not understand such doctrine. He
imagined that the Word of God had no power except when issuing from the
lips of the ministers of his own communion. The Catholic Church must put
its seal upon the gospel to give it currency. Without this stamp it was
all in vain to announce it to a world lying in wickedness. The Catholic
pastor might be a man without ability; he might be comparatively
ignorant; and he might be of more than suspicious integrity; and yet the
King of the Church was supposed to look down with complacency on all the
official acts of this wretched hireling, whilst no dew of heavenly
influence rested on the labours of a pious and accomplished Novatian
minister! When men like Cyprian were prepared to acknowledge such folly,
it was not strange that a darkness which might be felt soon settled down
upon Christendom.

                *       *       *       *       *

In the preceding pages the history of the ancient Church for the first
three centuries has passed under review, and a few general observations
may now be not inappropriately appended to this concluding chapter. The
details here furnished supply ample evidence that Christianity was
greatly corrupted long before the conversion of Constantine. It is true,
indeed, that much of the superstition which has since so much disfigured
the Church was yet unknown. During the first three centuries we find no
recognition of the mediatorship of Mary, or of the dogma of her
immaculate conception, [650:2] or of the worship of images, or of the
celebration of divine service in an unknown tongue, or of the doctrine
of the infallibility of the Roman bishop. But the germs of many
dangerous errors were distinctly visible, and when the sun of Imperial
favour began to shine upon the Christians, these errors rapidly reached
maturity. The Eucharistic bread and wine were viewed with superstitious
awe, and language was applied to them which was calculated to bewilder
and to confound. A system of penitential discipline alien to the spirit
of the New Testament was already in existence; rites and ceremonies
unknown in the apostolic age had now made their appearance; and in the
great towns a crowd of functionaries, whom Paul and Peter would have
refused to own, added to the pomp of public worship. Some imagine that
in the times of Tertullian and of Cyprian we may find the purest faith
in the purest form, but a more intimate acquaintance with the history of
the period is quite sufficient to dispel the delusion. A little
consideration may, indeed, convince us that, in the second or third
century, we could scarcely expect to see either the most brilliant
displays of the light of truth or the most attractive exhibitions of
personal holiness. The waters of life gushed forth, clear as crystal,
from the Rock of Ages; but, as their course was through the waste
wilderness of a degenerate world, they were soon defiled by its
pollutions; and it was not until the desert began "to rejoice and
blossom as the rose," that the stream flowed smoothly in the channel it
had wrought, and partially recovered its native purity. At the present
day we would not be warranted in expecting as high a style of
Christianity in a convert from idolatry as in one who had been trained
up from infancy under the care of enlightened and godly parents. By
judicious culture the graces of the Spirit, as well as the fruits of the
earth, may be improved; but when a section of the open field of
immorality and ignorance is first added to the garden of the Lord, it
may not forthwith possess all the fertility and loveliness of the more
ancient plantation. [652:1] A large portion of the early disciples had
once been heathens; they had to struggle against evil habits and
inveterate prejudices; they were surrounded on all sides by corrupting
influences; and, as they had not the same means of obtaining an exact
and comprehensive knowledge of the gospel as ourselves, we cannot
reasonably hope to find among them any very extraordinary measure either
of spiritual wisdom or of consistent piety.

When the Church towards the middle of the second century was sorely
harassed by divisions, its situation was extremely critical and
embarrassing. Christianity had appeared among men bearing the olive
branch of peace, and had proposed to supersede the countless
superstitions of the heathen by a faith which would bind the human race
together in one great and harmonious family. How mortified, then, must
have been its friends when Basilides, Marcion, Valentine, Cerdo, Mark,
and many others began to propagate their heresies, and when it appeared
as if the divisions of the Church were to be as numerous as the
religions of paganism! Had the ministers of the gospel girded themselves
for the emergency; had they boldly encountered the errorists, and
vanquished them with weapons drawn from the armoury of the Word; they
would have approved themselves worthy of their position, and acquired
strength for future conflicts. But whilst they did not altogether
neglect an appeal to Scripture, they were tempted in an evil hour to
think of sequestrating their own freedom that they might overwhelm
heresy with the vigour of an ecclesiastical despotism. By investing
their chairman with arbitrary power and by making communion with this
functionary the criterion of discipleship, they at once sanctioned a
perilous arrangement and endorsed a vicious principle. From this date we
may trace the commencement of a career of defection. The bishop and the
Church began to supplant Christ and a knowledge of the gospel. Bigotry
advanced apace, and conscience found itself in bondage.

The establishment of the hierarchical system, though imparting, as was
thought, greater unity to the structure of the Church, did not really
invigorate its constitution. The spiritual commonwealth is very
different from any merely earthly organization, for it has no
statute-book but the Bible, and it owes explicit obedience to no ruler
but the King of Zion. Freedom of conscience, in obedience to the Word,
is the heritage of all its members; and every one of them is bound to
exercise the privilege, and to resist its violation. Its unity appears,
not in adhesion to any visible head, but in cordial submission to its
one great Lord and Sovereign. When a change was made in its primitive
framework, its essential unity was impaired. After the elders had handed
over a considerable share of their authority to their president, they
could not be expected to take such a deep interest in its government as
when they were themselves individually responsible for its official
administration. They still, indeed, acted as his counsellors, but as
they no longer held the independent footing they had once occupied, they
could neither speak nor act so freely and so energetically as before.
Thus, whilst one member of the ecclesiastical body was permitted to
attain an unnatural magnitude, others ceased to perform their proper
functions, and the whole eventually became diseased and misshapen. And
the new arrangement entirely failed in checking the growth of the
errorists. After its adoption heresies sprung up as rapidly as ever, and
the multitude of its sects continued to be the scandal of Christianity
even in the time of Constantine. [654:1] Their suppression is to be
attributed, not to the potency of Prelacy, but to the stern intolerance
of the Imperial laws. By the rigid enforcement of conformity the
Catholic Church at length reigned without a rival.

It is easy to see from the extant ecclesiastical writings of the third
century that the doctrine of the visible unity of the Church as
represented by the Catholic hierarchy already formed a prominent part of
the current creed. As there is "one God, one Christ, and one Holy
Ghost," it was affirmed that there could be but "one bishop in the
Catholic Church." [654:2] This theory seemed somewhat inconsistent with
the fact that there were many bishops in almost every province of the
Empire; but the ingenuity of churchmen attempted a solution of the
difficulty. It was alleged that the whole episcopacy should be regarded
as one, and that each bishop constituted an integral part of the grand
unit. "The episcopacy is one," says Cyprian, "it is a whole in which
each enjoys full possession." [654:3] "There is one Church from Christ
throughout the whole world divided into many members, and _one
episcopate_ diffused throughout an harmonious multitude of many
bishops." [654:4]

We have seen that the Roman prelate was already recognized as the centre
of ecclesiastical unity. A misunderstood passage in the Gospel of
Matthew [654:5] was supposed to sanction this ecclesiastical primacy.
"There is," said the bishop of Carthage, "one God, and one Christ, and
one Church, and _one chair founded by the Word of the Lord on the
Rock_." [654:6] Though the Roman chief pastor might be considered
theoretically only the first among the Catholic bishops, his zeal for
uniformity had now more than once interrupted the peace of the Christian
community. The erection of a new capital and the subsequent
dismemberment of the Empire considerably affected his position; but,
within a certain sphere, he steadily endeavoured to carry out the idea
of Catholic unity. The doctrine reached its highest point of development
after the lapse of upwards of a thousand years. Then, the bishop of Rome
had become a sovereign prince, and was the acknowledged ruler of a vast
and magnificent hierarchy. Then, he swayed his spiritual sceptre over
all the tribes of Western Christendom. Then, verily, uniformity had its
day of triumph; for, with some rare exceptions, wherever the stranger
travelled throughout Europe, he found the same order of divine service,
and saw the ministers of the sanctuary arrayed in the same costume, and
practising even the same gestures. Then, wherever he entered a sacred
edifice, he heard the same language, and listened to the same prayers
expressed in the very same phraseology. But what was meanwhile the real
condition of the Church? Was there love without dissimulation, and the
keeping of the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace? Nothing of the
kind. Never could it be said with greater truth of the people of the
West that they were "foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving divers
lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one
another." There were wars and rumours of wars; nation rose up against
nation and kingdom against kingdom; and the Pope was generally the cause
of the contention. The very man who claimed to be the centre of Catholic
unity was the grand fomenter of ecclesiastical and political
disturbance. The Sovereign Pontiff, and the Catholic princes with whom
he was engaged in deadly feuds, were equally faithless, restless, and
implacable. Freedom of thought was proscribed, and the human mind was
placed under the most exacting and intolerable tyranny by which it was
ever oppressed.

The mutilation of this Dagon of hierarchical unity is one of the many
glorious results of the great Reformation. The sooner the remaining
fragments of this idol be crushed to atoms, the better for the peace and
freedom of Christendom. The unity of the Church cannot be achieved by
the iron rod of despotism, neither can the communion of saints be
promoted by the sacrifice of their rights and privileges. "Where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty." [656:1] Christ alone can draw
all men unto Him. The real unity of His Church is, not any merely
ecclesiastical cohesion, but a unity of faith, of hope, and of
affection. It is the fellowship of Christian freemen walking together in
the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost. It is the
attraction of all hearts to one heavenly Saviour, and the submission of
all wills to one holy law. Looking at the past condition or the present
aspect of society, we may think the difficulties in the way of such
unity altogether insurmountable; but it will, in due time, be brought
about by Him "who doeth great things and unsearchable, marvellous things
without number." Its realization will present the most delightful and
impressive spectacle that the earth has ever seen. "Every valley shall
be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low; and the
crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain; _and the
glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it
together_." [656:2] "Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, with the
_voice together shall they sing; for they shall see eye to eye_, when
the Lord shall bring again Zion." [656:3] "And the Lord shall be King
over all the earth; in that day shall there be _one Lord, and His name
one_." [656:4] AMEN.


                             THE END.





[ENDNOTES]


[3:1] Mr Merivale, in his "History of the Romans under the Empire,"
(vol. iv. p. 450,) estimates the population in the time of Augustus
at eighty-five millions, but in this reckoning he does not include
Palestine, and perhaps some of his calculations are rather low.
Greswell computes the population of Palestine at ten millions, and that
of the whole empire at one hundred and twenty millions. ("Dissertations
upon an Harmony of the Gospels," vol. iv. p. 11, 493.)

[7:1] See the article [Greek: Hetairai] in Smith's "Dictionary of Greek
and Roman Antiquities."

[8:1] "We despise," says an early Christian writer, "the supercilious
looks of philosophers, whom we have known to be the corrupters of
innocence, adulterers, and tyrants, and eloquent declaimers against
vices of which they themselves are guilty."--_Octavius of Minucius
Felix._

[9:1] "De Republ.," ii.

[9:2] In the "Octavius of Minucius Felix" (c. 25), we meet with the
following startling challenge--"Where are there more bargains for
debauchery made, more assignations concerted, or more adultery devised
than _by the priests_ amidst the altars and shrines of the gods?" This,
of course, refers to the state of things in the third century, but there
is no reason to believe that it was now much better. Tertullian speaks
in the same manner ("Apol". c. 15). See also "Juvenal," sat. vi. 488,
and ix. 23.

[10:1] "Origen. Contra Celsum," lib. i. c. 49.

[10:2] Mat. xxii. 23.

[10:3] Luke ii. 25, 36.

[11:1] See Matt. v. 18; John v. 39, and x. 35.

[11:2] See Josephus against Apion, i. Sec. 8. Origen says that the Hebrews
had twenty-two sacred books corresponding to the number of letters in
their alphabet. Opera, ii. 528. It would appear from Jerome that they
reckoned in the following manner: they considered the Twelve Minor
Prophets only one book; First and Second Samuel, one book; First and
Second Kings, one book; First and Second Chronicles, one book; Ezra and
Nehemiah, one book; Jeremiah and Lamentations, one book; the Pentateuch,
five books; Judges and Ruth, one book; thus, with the other ten books of
Joshua, Esther, Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Isaiah,
Ezekiel, and Daniel, making up twenty-two. The most learned Roman
Catholic writers admit that what are called the apocryphal books were
never acknowledged by the Jewish Church. See, for example, Dupin's
"History of Ecclesiastical Writers," Preliminary Dissertation, section
ii. See also Father Simon's "Critical History of the Old Testament,"
book. i. chap. viii.

[11:3] Matt, xxiii. 15.

[12:1] Many proofs of this occur in the Acts. See Acts x. 2, xiii. 43,
xvi. 14, xvii. 4.

[12:2] See Cudworth's "Intellectual System," i. 318, &c. Edition,
London, 1845. Warburton has adduced evidence to prove that this doctrine
was imparted to the initiated in the heathen mysteries. "Divine Legation
of Moses," i. 224. Edit., London, 1837.

[12:3] Gal. iv. 4.

[12:4] Gen. xlix. 10; Dan. ix. 25; Haggai ii. 6, 7.

[12:5] Virgil. Ec. iv. Suetonius. Octavius, 94. Tacitus. Histor. v. 13.

[13:1] Haggai ii. 7.

[13:2] Dan. vii. 14.

[14:1] See Supplementary Note at the end of this chapter on the year of
Christ's Birth.

[14:2] Luke ii. 6, 7.

[15:1] Luke i. 11, 19.

[15:2] Luke. 26, 31.

[15:3] Luke ii. 13, 14.

[15:4] Matt. ii. 9.

[15:5] Matt. ii. 12.

[15:6] Matt. ii. 3. The evangelist does not positively assert that the
wise men met Herod _at Jerusalem_. On their arrival in the holy city he
was probably at Jericho--distant about a day's journey--for Josephus
states that he died there. ("Antiq." xvii. 6. Sec. 5. and 8. Sec. 1.) We may
infer, therefore, that he "heard" of the strangers on his sick-bed, and
"privily called" them to Jericho. The chief priests and scribes were,
perhaps, summoned to attend him at the same place.

[16:1] Matt. ii. 16. The estimates formed at a subsequent period of the
number of infants in the village of Bethlehem and its precincts betray a
strange ignorance of statistics. "The Greek Church canonised the 14,000
innocents," observes the Dean of St Paul's, "and another notion, founded
on a misrepresentation of Revelations (xiv. 3), swelled the number to
144,000. The former, at least, was the common belief of our Church,
though _even in our liturgy the latter has in some degree been
sanctioned_ by retaining the chapter of Revelations as the epistle for
the day. Even later, Jeremy Taylor, in his 'Life of Christ,' admits the
14,000 without scruple, or rather without thought."--_Milman's History
of Christianity_, i. p. 113, note.

[16:2] Matt. ii. 11.

[16:3] Luke ii. 38. It is a curious fact that in the year 751 of the
city of Rome, the year of the Birth of Christ according to the
chronology adopted in this volume, the passover was not celebrated as
usual in Judea. The disturbances which occurred on the death of Herod
had become so serious on the arrival of the paschal day, that Archelaus
was obliged to disperse the people by force of arms in the very midst of
the sacrifices. So soon did Christ begin to cause the sacrifice and the
oblation to cease. See Greswell's "Dissertations," i. p 393, 394, note.

[17:1] Luke ii. 40.

[17:2] Luke ii. 52.

[17:3] Mark vi. 3.

[17:4] John vii. 15.

[18:1] Luke ii. 46, 47.

[18:2] Luke iv. 16.

[18:3] Luke iii. 21-23. "It became Him, being in the likeness of sinful
flesh, to go through these appointed rites and purifications which
belonged to that flesh. There is no more strangeness in His having been
baptized by John, than in His keeping the Passover. The one rite, as the
other, belonged to sinners, and among the transgressors He was
numbered."--ALFORD, _Greek Testament_, Note on Matt. iii. 13-17.

[18:4] See Greswell's "Dissertations upon an Harmony of the Gospels,"
vol. i. p. 362, 363. John probably commenced his ministry about the
feast of Tabernacles, A.D. 27.

[18:5] See Josephus, "Antiq." xviii, 5, Sec. 2.

[19:1] Matt. iv. 23.

[19:2] Matt. iv. 24, 25.

[19:3] Isaiah xlv. 15.

[19:4] 1 Kings viii. 10-12.

[19:5] John v. 13, vi. 15, viii. 59, xii. 36; Mark i. 45, vii. 24.

[19:6] Mark ii. 1, 2; Matt. xiv. 13, 14, 21, xv. 32, 38, 39.

[20:1] Matt. iv. 13. Hence it is said to have been "exalted unto heaven"
in the way of privilege. Matt. xi. 23; Luke x. 15. It was the residence
as well of Peter and Andrew (Matt. xvii. 24), as of James, John (Mark i.
21, 29), and Matthew (Mark ii. 1, 14, 15), and there also dwelt the
nobleman whose son was healed by our Lord (John iv. 46). It was on the
borders of the Sea of Galilee, so that by crossing the water He could at
once reach the territory of another potentate, and withdraw Himself from
the multitudes drawn together by the fame of His miracles. See Milman's
"History of Christianity," i. 188.

[21:1] John i. 46.

[22:1] Luke xxiv. 32.

[22:2] Matt. vii. 29.

[23:1] According to Mr Greswell our Lord adopted this method of teaching
about eighteen months after the commencement of His ministry, and the
Parable of the Sower was the first delivered. "Exposition of the
Parables," Vol. i. p. 2.

[23:2] Isa. xxxv. 5, 6.

[23:3] See John v. 13, ix. 1, 6, 25, 36.

[23:4] Mark ii. 6, 7, 10, 11, iii. 5, 22.

[24:1] John vi. 9.

[24:2] Matt. xiv. 24, 25.

[24:3] Mark iv. 39; Matt. viii. 26, 27.

[24:4] John ix. 16.

[24:5] Matt. xxi. 19. Neander has shown that this was a typical action
pointing to the rejection of the Jews. See his "Life of Christ." Bohn's
Edition.

[24:6] John ii. 9.

[24:7] Matt. ix. 28, 29; Mark vi. 5, ix. 23, 24.

[25:1] John viii. 12.

[26:1] Several of the early fathers imagined that it continued only a
year. Some of them, such as Clemens Alexandrinus, drew this conclusion
from Isaiah lxi. 1, "To preach _the acceptable year_ of the Lord." See
Kaye's "Clement of Alexandria," p. 347.

[26:2] John ii. 13, v. 1, vi. 4, xii. 1. Eusebius argues from the number
of high priests that our Lord's ministry did not embrace four entire
years. "Ecc. Hist." i. c. x.

[26:3] He lived, therefore, about thirty-three years. According to Malto
Brun ("Universal Geography," book xxii.), "the _mean duration_ of human
life is between thirty and forty years," and, in the same chapter, he
computes it at thirty-three years. It would thus appear that, at the
time of His death, our Lord was, in point of age, a fitting
representative of the species.

[26:4] Luke iv. 44, viii. 1; Matt. ix. 35.

[27:1] John iii. 1, 2.

[27:2] Matt. xxvi. 63-66.

[27:3] Matt, xxvii. 38.

[27:4] Matt, xxvii. 24; John xviii. 38.

[27:5] Mark xv. 10, 15.

[28:1] Acts ii. 23.

[28:2] Matt. xxvi. 38; Mark xiv. 33.

[28:3] Luke xxii. 44.

[28:4] Matt, xxvii. 46.

[28:5] Luke xxii. 43.

[28:6] Luke xxiii. 44; Mark xv. 33.

[29:1] Matt, xxvii. 51, 52.

[29:2] Matt, xxvii. 54.

[29:3] John x. 18.

[29:4] Ps. xvi. 10; Acts ii. 31.

[29:5] John ii. 19; Mark viii. 31; Luke xviii, 33.

[29:6] John xiv. 19; 1 Thess. iv. 14.

[29:7] Rom. i. 4; 1 Cor. xv. 14, 17; 1 Pet. i. 3; Rev. i. 18.

[29:8] John xix. 33, 34.

[29:9] Matt, xxvii. 60.

[30:1] Matt, xxvii. 66.

[30:2] Matt, xxviii. 2, 4.

[30:3] Matt, xxviii. 11.

[30:4] Matt, xxviii. 12, 13, 15.

[30:5] Rev. i. 5.

[30:6] Acts x. 40, 41.

[30:7] John xiv. 22.

[31:1] Acts i. 3.

[31:2] Luke xxiv. 27.

[31:3] Matt, xxviii. 19.

[31:4] Luke xxiv. 50, 51.

[32:1] John i. 10-12.

[36:1] Isa. liii. 3.

[36:2] John vii. 39.

[36:3] Acts i. 15.

[37:1] 1 Cor. xv. 6.

[37:2] See Matt. xv. 31; John ii. 23, vii. 31, viii. 30.

[37:3] See Joshua xv. 25.

[37:4] Hence called Iscariot, that is, _Ish Kerioth_, or, a man of
Kerioth. See Alford, Greek Test., Matt. x. 4.

[37:5] Acts ii. 7.

[37:6] Compare Matt. ix. 9, 10, and Mark ii. 14, 15.

[37:7] "As St John never mentions Bartholomew in the number of the
apostles, so the other evangelists never take notice of Nathanael,
probably because the same person under two several names; and as in
John, Philip and Nathanael are joined together in their coming to
Christ, so in the rest of the evangelists, Philip and Bartholomew are
constantly put together without the least variation."--Cave's Lives of
the Apostles. Life of Bartholomew. Compare Matt. x. 3; Acts i. 13; and
John i. 45, xxl. 2.

[38:1] Compare Matt. x. 3, and Acts i. 13.

[38:2] John xi. 16, xxi. 2.

[38:3] Mark xv. 40. He was in some way related to our Lord, and hence
called His brother (Gal. i. 19). But though Mary, the mother of our
Saviour, had evidently several sons (see Matt. i. 20, 25, compared with
Matt. xiii. 55; Mark vi. 3; Matt. xii. 46, 47), they were not disciples
when the apostles wore appointed, and none of them consequently could
have been of the Twelve. (See John vii. 5). The other sons of Mary, who
must all have been younger than Jesus, seem to have been converted about
the time of the resurrection. Hence they are found among the disciples
before the day of Pentecost (Acts i. 14).

[38:4] Mark iii. 17.

[38:5] Matt. x. 2.

[38:6] John i. 42.

[38:7] Matt. x. 4; Mark iii. 18; Luke vi. 15; Acts i. 13. Some think
that _Kananites_ is equivalent to _Zelotes_, whilst others
contend that it in derived from a village called Canan. See Alford,
Greek Test., Matt. x. 4; and Greswell's; "Dissertations," vol. ii.
p. 128. Some MSS. have [Greek: Kananaios].

[38:8] Mark vi. 7. "Although no two of these catalogues (of the Twelve)
agree precisely in the order of the names, they may all be divided into
three quaternions, which are never interchanged, and the leading names
of which are the same in all. Thus the first is always Peter, the fifth
Philip, the ninth James the son of Alpheus, and the twelfth Judas
Iscariot. Another difference is that Matthew and Luke's Gospel gives the
names in pairs, or two and two, while Mark enumerates them singly, and
the list before us (in the Acts) follows both, these methods, one after
the other."--_Alexander on the Acts_, vol. i. p. 19.

[39:1] Gal. i. 19.

[39:2] Acts i. 13. See also Jude v. 1.

[39:3] Upon this subject see the conjectures of Greswell,
"Dissertation," vol. ii. p. 120.

[39:4] John i. 35, 40.

[39:5] From the great minuteness of the statements in the passage, it
has been conjectured that the evangelist himself was the second of the
two disciples mentioned in John i. 35-37.

[39:6] John iii. 30.

[39:7] Matt. xix. 27.

[40:1] Mark i. 20.

[40:2] Luke xix. 2.

[40:3] Luke xix. 2.

[40:4] Mark ii. 15.

[40:5] John vii. 52.

[40:6] John xi. 16. See also v. 8.

[41:1] John xx. 25.

[41:2] John xx. 28.

[41:3] Some writers have asserted that he is a different person from
James "the Lord's brother" mentioned Gal. i. 19, but the statement rests
upon no solid foundation. Compare John vii. 5; 1 Cor. xv. 7; Acts i. 14,
xv. 2, 13. See also note p. 38 [38:3] of this chapter.

[41:4] John i. 47.

[41:5] Mark v. 37, ix. 2; Matt. xxvi. 37.

[41:6] Acts xii. 2, 3. "It is remarkable that, so far as we know, one of
these inseparable brothers (James and John) was the first, and one the
last, that died of the apostles."--_Alexander on the Acts_, i. 443.

[41:7] See Greswell's "Dissertations," vol. ii. p. 115.

[42:1] Matt. xx. 20, 21.

[42:2] Some writers have asserted that Philip and Nathanael were learned
men, but of this there is no good evidence. See Cave's "Lives of the
Apostles," Philip and Bartholomew.

[42:3] Greswell makes it nine months. See his "Harmonia Evangelica," p.
xxiv. xxvi.

[42:4] Matt. x. 5, 6.

[42:5] See Vitringa "De Synagoga Vetere," p. 577, and Mosheim's
"Commentaries," by Vidal, vol. i. 120-2, note.

[43:1] This is the calculation of Greswell. "Harmonia Evangelica," p.
xxvi. xxxi. Robinson makes the interval considerably shorter. See his
"Harmony of the Four Gospels in Greek."

[43:2] They received new powers at the close of their first missionary
excursion. See Luke x. 19.

[43:3] Selden in his treatise "De Synedriis" supplies some curious
information on this subject. See lib. ii. cap. 9, Sec. 3. See also some
singular speculations respecting it in Baumgarten's "Theologischer
Commentar zum Pentateuch," i. 153, 351. Some of the fathers speak of
seventy-two disciples and of seventy-two nations _and tongues_. See
Stieren's "Irenaeus," i. p. 544, note, and Epiphanius, tom. i. p. 50,
Edit. Coloniae, 1682; compared with Greswell's "Dissertations," ii.
p. 7.

[43:4] Gen. x. 32.

[44:1] The following tabular view of the names of the descendants of
Shem, Ham, and Japheth, mentioned in the 10th chapter of Genesis, will
illustrate this statement:--

             SHEM.                |             HAM.
Elam.Asshur.Arphaxad, Lud. Aram,  |Cush,     Mizraim, Phut. Canaan,
            Salah,         Uz,    |Seba,     Ludim,         Sidon,
            Eber,          Hul,   |Havilah,  Anamim,        Heth,
            Peleg,         Gether,|Sabtah,   Lehabim,       Jebusite,
            Joktan,        Mash.  |Raamah,   Naphtuhim,     Amorite,
            Almodad,              |Sabtechab,Pathrusim,     Girgasite,
            Sheleph,              |Sheba,    Caslubim,      Hivite,
            Hazarmaveth,          |Dedan,    Caphtorim,     Arkite,
            Jerah,                |Nimrod.   Philistim.     Sinite,
            Hadoram,              |                         Arvadite,
            Uzal,                 |                         Zemarite,
            Diklah,               |                         Hamathite.
            Obal,                 |
            Abimael,              |
            Sheba,                |
            Ophir,                |
            Havilah,              |
            Jobab.                |

                              JAPHETH.
        Gomer,      Magog. Madai. Javan,    Tubal. Meshech. Tiras.
        Ashkenaz,                 Elishah,
        Riphath,                  Tarshish,
        Togarmah.                 Kittim,
                                  Dodanim.

It often happens that one branch of a family is exceedingly prolific
whilst another is barren. So it seems to have been with the descendants
of the three sons of Noah. Thus, Elam, Ashur, and others, appear each to
have founded only one nation, whilst Arphaxad and his posterity founded
eighteen.

[45:1] Luke x. 1.

[45:2] John iv. 39.

[45:3] Mark vii. 24, 26, 30, 31.

[45:4] This is the opinion of Dr Robinson. See His "Harmony." See also
Luke ix. 51, 52, x. 33.

[45:5] Luke x. 13, 17, 18.

[45:6] Matt. xv. 24.

[46:1] Rev. xxi. 14.

[46:2] It is certain that some were called apostles who were not of the
number of the Twelve. See Acts xiv. 4. In 1 Cor. xv. 5, 7, both "the
Twelve," and "all the apostles," are mentioned, and it may be that the
Seventy are included under the latter designation. Such was the opinion
of Origen--[Greek: epeita tois eterois para tous dodeka apostolois pasi,
tacha tois ebdomekoita]. "Contra Celsum," lib. ii. 65. See also "De
Recta in Deum Fide," sec. i., Opera, tom. i. p. 806.

[46:3] Luke x. 9, 16, 19, 24.

[46:4] Eph. ii. 20. See also Eph. iii. 5. It is evident, especially from
the latter passage, that the _prophets_ here spoken of belong to the New
Testament Church.

[47:1] Acts xv. 6, xxi. 18.

[47:2] 1 Pet. v. 1; 2 John v. 1; 3 John v. 1. It is remarkable that
