parents' will.

Obj. 2: The children of slaves are themselves slaves, and in the
power of their masters. But Jews and all other unbelievers are the
slaves of kings and rulers. Therefore without any injustice rulers
can have the children of Jews baptized, as well as those of other
slaves who are unbelievers.

Obj. 3: Further, every man belongs more to God, from Whom he has his
soul, than to his carnal father, from whom he has his body. Therefore
it is not unjust if the children of unbelievers are taken away from
their carnal parents, and consecrated to God by Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ It is written in the Decretals (Dist. xlv),
quoting the council of Toledo: "In regard to the Jews the holy synod
commands that henceforward none of them be forced to believe: for
such are not to be saved against their will, but willingly, that
their righteousness may be without flaw."

_I answer that,_ The children of unbelievers either have the use of
reason or they have not. If they have, then they already begin to
control their own actions, in things that are of Divine or natural
law. And therefore of their own accord, and against the will of their
parents, they can receive Baptism, just as they can contract
marriage. Consequently such can lawfully be advised and persuaded to
be baptized.

If, however, they have not yet the use of free-will, according to the
natural law they are under the care of their parents as long as they
cannot look after themselves. For which reason we say that even the
children of the ancients "were saved through the faith of their
parents." Wherefore it would be contrary to natural justice if such
children were baptized against their parents' will; just as it would
be if one having the use of reason were baptized against his will.
Moreover under the circumstances it would be dangerous to baptize the
children of unbelievers; for they would be liable to lapse into
unbelief, by reason of their natural affection for their parents.
Therefore it is not the custom of the Church to baptize the children
of unbelievers against their parents' will.

Reply Obj. 1: It is not right to rescue a man from death of the body
against the order of civil law: for instance, if a man be condemned
to death by the judge who has tried him, none should use force in
order to rescue him from death. Consequently, neither should anyone
infringe the order of the natural law, in virtue of which a child is
under the care of its father, in order to rescue it from the danger
of eternal death.

Reply Obj. 2: Jews are slaves of rulers by civil slavery, which does
not exclude the order of the natural and Divine law.

Reply Obj. 3: Man is ordained unto God through his reason, by which
he can know God. Wherefore a child, before it has the use of reason,
is ordained to God, by a natural order, through the reason of its
parents, under whose care it naturally lies, and it is according to
their ordering that things pertaining to God are to be done in
respect of the child.
_______________________

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 11]

Whether a Child Can Be Baptized While Yet in Its Mother's Womb?

Objection 1: It seems that a child can be baptized while yet in its
mother's womb. For the gift of Christ is more efficacious unto
salvation than Adam's sin unto condemnation, as the Apostle says
(Rom. 5:15). But a child while yet in its mother's womb is under
sentence of condemnation on account of Adam's sin. For much more
reason, therefore, can it be saved through the gift of Christ, which
is bestowed by means of Baptism. Therefore a child can be baptized
while yet in its mother's womb.

Obj. 2: Further, a child, while yet in its mother's womb, seems to be
part of its mother. Now, when the mother is baptized, whatever is in
her and part of her, is baptized. Therefore it seems that when the
mother is baptized, the child in her womb is baptized.

Obj. 3: Further, eternal death is a greater evil than death of the
body. But of two evils the less should be chosen. If, therefore, the
child in the mother's womb cannot be baptized, it would be better for
the mother to be opened, and the child to be taken out by force and
baptized, than that the child should be eternally damned through
dying without Baptism.

Obj. 4: Further, it happens at times that some part of the child
comes forth first, as we read in Gen. 38:27: "In the very delivery of
the infants, one put forth a hand, whereon the midwife tied a scarlet
thread, saying: This shall come forth the first. But he drawing back
his hand, the other came forth." Now sometimes in such cases there is
danger of death. Therefore it seems that that part should be
baptized, while the child is yet in its mother's womb.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Ep. ad Dardan.): "No one can be
born a second time unless he be born first." But Baptism is a
spiritual regeneration. Therefore no one should be baptized before he
is born from the womb.

_I answer that,_ It is essential to Baptism that some part of the
body of the person baptized be in some way washed with water, since
Baptism is a kind of washing, as stated above (Q. 66, A. 1). But an
infant's body, before being born from the womb, can nowise be washed
with water; unless perchance it be said that the baptismal water,
with which the mother's body is washed, reaches the child while yet
in its mother's womb. But this is impossible: both because the
child's soul, to the sanctification of which Baptism is ordained, is
distinct from the soul of the mother; and because the body of the
animated infant is already formed, and consequently distinct from the
body of the mother. Therefore the Baptism which the mother receives
does not overflow on to the child which is in her womb. Hence
Augustine says (Cont. Julian. vi): "If what is conceived within a
mother belonged to her body, so as to be considered a part thereof,
we should not baptize an infant whose mother, through danger of
death, was baptized while she bore it in her womb. Since, then, it,"
i.e. the infant, "is baptized, it certainly did not belong to the
mother's body while it was in the womb." It follows, therefore, that
a child can nowise be baptized while in its mother's womb.

Reply Obj. 1: Children while in the mother's womb have not yet come
forth into the world to live among other men. Consequently they
cannot be subject to the action of man, so as to receive the
sacrament, at the hands of man, unto salvation. They can, however, be
subject to the action of God, in Whose sight they live, so as, by a
kind of privilege, to receive the grace of sanctification; as was the
case with those who were sanctified in the womb.

Reply Obj. 2: An internal member of the mother is something of hers
by continuity and material union of the part with the whole: whereas
a child while in its mother's womb is something of hers through being
joined with, and yet distinct from her. Wherefore there is no
comparison.

Reply Obj. 3: We should "not do evil that there may come good" (Rom.
3:8). Therefore it is wrong to kill a mother that her child may be
baptized. If, however, the mother die while the child lives yet in
her womb, she should be opened that the child may be baptized.

Reply Obj. 4: Unless death be imminent, we should wait until the
child has entirely come forth from the womb before baptizing it. If,
however, the head, wherein the senses are rooted, appear first, it
should be baptized, in cases of danger: nor should it be baptized
again, if perfect birth should ensue. And seemingly the same should
be done in cases of danger no matter what part of the body appear
first. But as none of the exterior parts of the body belong to its
integrity in the same degree as the head, some hold that since the
matter is doubtful, whenever any other part of the body has been
baptized, the child, when perfect birth has taken place, should be
baptized with the form: "If thou art not baptized, I baptize thee,"
etc.
_______________________

TWELFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 12]

Whether Madmen and Imbeciles Should Be Baptized?

Objection 1: It seems that madmen and imbeciles should not be
baptized. For in order to receive Baptism, the person baptized must
have the intention, as stated above (A. 7). But since madmen and
imbeciles lack the use of reason, they can have but a disorderly
intention. Therefore they should not be baptized.

Obj. 2: Further, man excels irrational animals in that he has reason.
But madmen and imbeciles lack the use of reason, indeed in some cases
we do not expect them ever to have it, as we do in the case of
children. It seems, therefore, that just as irrational animals are
not baptized, so neither should madmen and imbeciles in those cases
be baptized.

Obj. 3: Further, the use of reason is suspended in madmen and
imbeciles more than it is in one who sleeps. But it is not customary
to baptize people while they sleep. Therefore it should not be given
to madmen and imbeciles.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Confess. iv) of his friend that
"he was baptized when his recovery was despaired of": and yet Baptism
was efficacious with him. Therefore Baptism should sometimes be given
to those who lack the use of reason.

_I answer that,_ In the matter of madmen and imbeciles a distinction
is to be made. For some are so from birth, and have no lucid
intervals, and show no signs of the use of reason. And with regard to
these it seems that we should come to the same decision as with
regard to children who are baptized in the Faith of the Church, as
stated above (A. 9, ad 2).

But there are others who have fallen from a state of sanity into a
state of insanity. And with regard to these we must be guided by
their wishes as expressed by them when sane: so that, if then they
manifested a desire to receive Baptism, it should be given to them
when in a state of madness or imbecility, even though then they
refuse. If, on the other hand, while sane they showed no desire to
receive Baptism, they must not be baptized.

Again, there are some who, though mad or imbecile from birth, have,
nevertheless, lucid intervals, in which they can make right use of
reason. Wherefore, if then they express a desire for Baptism, they
can be baptized though they be actually in a state of madness. And in
this case the sacrament should be bestowed on them if there be fear
of danger otherwise it is better to wait until the time when they are
sane, so that they may receive the sacrament more devoutly. But if
during the interval of lucidity they manifest no desire to receive
Baptism, they should not be baptized while in a state of insanity.

Lastly there are others who, though not altogether sane, yet can use
their reason so far as to think about their salvation, and understand
the power of the sacrament. And these are to be treated the same as
those who are sane, and who are baptized if they be willing, but not
against their will.

Reply Obj. 1: Imbeciles who never had, and have not now, the use of
reason, are baptized, according to the Church's intention, just as
according to the Church's ritual, they believe and repent; as we have
stated above of children (A. 9, ad Obj.). But those who have had the
use of reason at some time, or have now, are baptized according to
their own intention, which they have now, or had when they were sane.

Reply Obj. 2: Madmen and imbeciles lack the use of reason
accidentally, i.e. through some impediment in a bodily organ; but not
like irrational animals through want of a rational soul. Consequently
the comparison does not hold.

Reply Obj. 3: A person should not be baptized while asleep, except he
be threatened with the danger of death. In which case he should be
baptized, if previously he has manifested a desire to receive
Baptism, as we have stated in reference to imbeciles: thus Augustine
relates of his friend that "he was baptized while unconscious,"
because he was in danger of death (Confess. iv).
_______________________

QUESTION 69

OF THE EFFECTS OF BAPTISM
(In Ten Articles)

We must now consider the effects of Baptism, concerning which there
are ten points of inquiry:

(1) Whether all sins are taken away by Baptism?

(2) Whether man is freed from all punishment by Baptism?

(3) Whether Baptism takes away the penalties of sin that belong to
this life?

(4) Whether grace and virtues are bestowed on man by Baptism?

(5) Of the effects of virtue which are conferred by Baptism?

(6) Whether even children receive grace and virtues in Baptism?

(7) Whether Baptism opens the gates of the heavenly kingdom to those
who are baptized?

(8) Whether Baptism produces an equal effect in all who are baptized?

(9) Whether insincerity hinders the effect of Baptism?

(10) Whether Baptism takes effect when the insincerity ceases?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 1]

Whether All Sins Are Taken Away by Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that not all sins are taken away by Baptism.
For Baptism is a spiritual regeneration, which corresponds to carnal
generation. But by carnal generation man contracts none but original
sin. Therefore none but original sin is taken away by Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, Penance is a sufficient cause of the remission of
actual sins. But penance is required in adults before Baptism,
according to Acts 2:38: "Do penance and be baptized every one of
you." Therefore Baptism has nothing to do with the remission of
actual sins.

Obj. 3: Further, various diseases demand various remedies: because as
Jerome says on Mk. 9:27, 28: "What is a cure for the heel is no cure
for the eye." But original sin, which is taken away by Baptism, is
generically distinct from actual sin. Therefore not all sins are
taken away by Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ezech. 36:25): "I will pour upon
you clean water, and you shall be cleansed from all your filthiness."

_I answer that,_ As the Apostle says (Rom. 6:3), "all we, who are
baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in His death." And further on
he concludes (Rom. 6:11): "So do you also reckon that you are dead to
sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord." Hence it is clear
that by Baptism man dies unto the oldness of sin, and begins to live
unto the newness of grace. But every sin belongs to the primitive
oldness. Consequently every sin is taken away by Baptism.

Reply Obj. 1: As the Apostle says (Rom. 5:15, 16), the sin of Adam
was not so far-reaching as the gift of Christ, which is bestowed in
Baptism: "for judgment was by one unto condemnation; but grace is of
many offenses, unto justification." Wherefore Augustine says in his
book on Infant Baptism (De Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. i), that "in
carnal generation, original sin alone is contracted; but when we are
born again of the Spirit, not only original sin but also wilful sin
is forgiven."

Reply Obj. 2: No sin can be forgiven save by the power of Christ's
Passion: hence the Apostle says (Heb. 9:22) that "without shedding of
blood there is no remission." Consequently no movement of the human
will suffices for the remission of sin, unless there be faith in
Christ's Passion, and the purpose of participating in it, either by
receiving Baptism, or by submitting to the keys of the Church.
Therefore when an adult approaches Baptism, he does indeed receive
the forgiveness of all his sins through his purpose of being
baptized, but more perfectly through the actual reception of Baptism.

Reply Obj. 3: This argument is true of special remedies. But Baptism
operates by the power of Christ's Passion, which is the universal
remedy for all sins; and so by Baptism all sins are loosed.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 2]

Whether Man Is Freed by Baptism from All Debt of Punishment Due to
Sin?

Objection 1: It seems that man is not freed by Baptism from all debt
of punishment due to sin. For the Apostle says (Rom. 13:1): "Those
things that are of God are well ordered [Vulg.: 'Those that are, are
ordained of God']." But guilt is not set in order save by punishment,
as Augustine says (Ep. cxl). Therefore Baptism does not take away the
debt of punishment due to sins already committed.

Obj. 2: Further, the effect of a sacrament has a certain likeness to
the sacrament itself; since the sacraments of the New Law "effect
what they signify," as stated above (Q. 62, A. 1, ad 1). But the
washing of Baptism has indeed a certain likeness with the cleansing
from the stain of sin, but none, seemingly, with the remission of the
debt of punishment. Therefore the debt of punishment is not taken
away by Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, when the debt of punishment has been remitted, a man
no longer deserves to be punished, and so it would be unjust to
punish him. If, therefore, the debt of punishment be remitted by
Baptism, it would be unjust, after Baptism, to hang a thief who had
committed murder before. Consequently the severity of human
legislation would be relaxed on account of Baptism; which is
undesirable. Therefore Baptism does not remit the debt of punishment.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose, commenting on Rom. 11:29, "The gifts and
the calling of God ate without repentance," says: "The grace of God
in Baptism remits all, gratis."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 49, A. 3, ad 2; Q. 68, AA. 1, 4,
5) by Baptism a man is incorporated in the Passion and death of
Christ, according to Rom. 6:8: "If we be dead with Christ, we believe
that we shall live also together with Christ." Hence it is clear that
the Passion of Christ is communicated to every baptized person, so
that he is healed just as if he himself had suffered and died. Now
Christ's Passion, as stated above (Q. 68, A. 5), is a sufficient
satisfaction for all the sins of all men. Consequently he who is
baptized, is freed from the debt of all punishment due to him for his
sins, just as if he himself had offered sufficient satisfaction for
all his sins.

Reply Obj. 1: Since the pains of Christ's Passion are communicated to
the person baptized, inasmuch as he is made a member of Christ, just
as if he himself had borne those pains, his sins are set in order by
the pains of Christ's Passion.

Reply Obj. 2: Water not only cleanses but also refreshes. And thus by
refreshing it signifies the remission of the debt of punishment, just
as by cleansing it signifies the washing away of guilt.

Reply Obj. 3: In punishments inflicted by a human tribunal, we have
to consider not only what punishment a man deserves in respect of
God, but also to what extent he is indebted to men who are hurt and
scandalized by another's sin. Consequently, although a murderer is
freed by Baptism from his debt of punishment in respect of God, he
remains, nevertheless, in debt to men; and it is right that they
should be edified at his punishment, since they were scandalized at
his sin. But the sovereign may remit the penalty to such like out of
kindness.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 3]

Whether Baptism Should Take Away the Penalties of Sin That Belong to
This Life?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism should take away the penalties of
sin that belong to this life. For as the Apostle says (Rom. 5:15),
the gift of Christ is farther-reaching than the sin of Adam. But
through Adam's sin, as the Apostle says (Rom. 5:12), "death entered
into this world," and, consequently, all the other penalties of the
present life. Much more, therefore, should man be freed from the
penalties of the present life, by the gift of Christ which is
received in Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, Baptism takes away the guilt of both original and
actual sin. Now it takes away the guilt of actual sin in such a way
as to free man from all debt of punishment resulting therefrom.
Therefore it also frees man from the penalties of the present life,
which are a punishment of original sin.

Obj. 3: Further, if the cause be removed, the effect is removed. But
the cause of these penalties is original sin, which is taken away by
Baptism. Therefore such like penalties should not remain.

_On the contrary,_ on Rom. 6:6, "that the body of sin may be
destroyed," a gloss says: "The effect of Baptism is that the old man
is crucified, and the body of sin destroyed, not as though the living
flesh of man were delivered by the destruction of that concupiscence
with which it has been bespattered from its birth; but that it may
not hurt him, when dead, though it was in him when he was born."
Therefore for the same reason neither are the other penalties taken
away by Baptism.

_I answer that,_ Baptism has the power to take away the penalties of
the present life yet it does not take them away during the present
life, but by its power they will be taken away from the just in the
resurrection when "this mortal hath put on immortality" (1 Cor.
15:54). And this is reasonable. First, because, by Baptism, man is
incorporated in Christ, and is made His member, as stated above (A.
3; Q. 68, A. 5). Consequently it is fitting that what takes place in
the Head should take place also in the member incorporated. Now, from
the very beginning of His conception Christ was "full of grace and
truth," yet He had a passible body, which through His Passion and
death was raised up to a life of glory. Wherefore a Christian
receives grace in Baptism, as to his soul; but he retains a passible
body, so that he may suffer for Christ therein: yet at length he will
be raised up to a life of impassibility. Hence the Apostle says (Rom.
8:11): "He that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, shall quicken
also our [Vulg.: 'your'] mortal bodies, because of His Spirit that
dwelleth in us [Vulg.: 'you']": and further on in the same chapter
(Rom. 8:17): "Heirs indeed of God, and joint heirs with Christ: yet
so, if we suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified with Him."

Secondly, this is suitable for our spiritual training: namely, in
order that, by fighting against concupiscence and other defects to
which he is subject, man may receive the crown of victory. Wherefore
on Rom. 6:6, "that the body of sin may be destroyed," a gloss says:
"If a man after Baptism live in the flesh, he has concupiscence to
fight against, and to conquer by God's help." In sign of which it is
written (Judges 3:1, 2): "These are the nations which the Lord left,
that by them He might instruct Israel . . . that afterwards their
children might learn to fight with their enemies, and to be trained
up to war."

Thirdly, this was suitable, lest men might seek to be baptized for
the sake of impassibility in the present life, and not for the sake
of the glory of life eternal. Wherefore the Apostle says (1 Cor.
15:19): "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all
men most miserable."

Reply Obj. 1: As a gloss says on Rom. 6:6, "that we may serve sin no
longer--Like a man who, having captured a redoubtable enemy, slays
him not forthwith, but suffers him to live for a little time in shame
and suffering; so did Christ first of all fetter our punishment, but
at a future time He will destroy it."

Reply Obj. 2: As the gloss says on the same passage (cf. ad 1), "the
punishment of sin is twofold, the punishment of hell, and temporal
punishment. Christ entirely abolished the punishment of hell, so that
those who are baptized and truly repent, should not be subject to it.
He did not, however, altogether abolish temporal punishment yet
awhile; for hunger, thirst, and death still remain. But He overthrew
its kingdom and power" in the sense that man should no longer be in
fear of them: "and at length He will altogether exterminate it at the
last day."

Reply Obj. 3: As we stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 81, A. 1; Q.
82, A. 1, ad 2), original sin spread in this way, that at first the
person infected the nature, and afterwards the nature infected the
person. Whereas Christ in reverse order at first repairs what regards
the person, and afterwards will simultaneously repair what pertains
to the nature in all men. Consequently by Baptism He takes away from
man forthwith the guilt of original sin and the punishment of being
deprived of the heavenly vision. But the penalties of the present
life, such as death, hunger, thirst, and the like, pertain to the
nature, from the principles of which they arise, inasmuch as it is
deprived of original justice. Therefore these defects will not be
taken away until the ultimate restoration of nature through the
glorious resurrection.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 4]

Whether Grace and Virtues Are Bestowed on Man by Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that grace and virtues are not bestowed on man
by Baptism. Because, as stated above (Q. 62, A. 1, ad 1), the
sacraments of the New Law "effect what they signify." But the
baptismal cleansing signifies the cleansing of the soul from guilt,
and not the fashioning of the soul with grace and virtues. Therefore
it seems that grace and virtues are not bestowed on man by Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, one does not need to receive what one has already
acquired. But some approach Baptism who have already grace and
virtues: thus we read (Acts 10:1, 2): "There was a certain man in
Cesarea, named Cornelius, a centurion of that which is called the
Italian band, a religious man and fearing God"; who, nevertheless,
was afterwards baptized by Peter. Therefore grace and virtues are not
bestowed by Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, virtue is a habit: which is defined as a "quality
not easily removed, by which one may act easily and pleasurably." But
after Baptism man retains proneness to evil which removes virtue; and
experiences difficulty in doing good, in which the act of virtue
consists. Therefore man does not acquire grace and virtue in Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Titus 3:5, 6): "He saved us by
the laver of regeneration," i.e. by Baptism, "and renovation of the
Holy Ghost, Whom He hath poured forth upon us abundantly," i.e. "unto
the remission of sins and the fulness of virtues," as a gloss
expounds. Therefore the grace of the Holy Ghost and the fulness of
virtues are given in Baptism.

_I answer that,_ As Augustine says in the book on Infant Baptism (De
Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. i) "the effect of Baptism is that the
baptized are incorporated in Christ as His members." Now the fulness
of grace and virtues flows from Christ the Head to all His members,
according to John 1:16: "Of His fulness we all have received." Hence
it is clear that man receives grace and virtues in Baptism.

Reply Obj. 1: As the baptismal water by its cleansing signifies the
washing away of guilt, and by its refreshment the remission of
punishment, so by its natural clearness it signifies the splendor of
grace and virtues.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (A. 1, ad 2; Q. 68, A. 2) man receives
the forgiveness of sins before Baptism in so far as he has Baptism of
desire, explicitly or implicitly; and yet when he actually receives
Baptism, he receives a fuller remission, as to the remission of the
entire punishment. So also before Baptism Cornelius and others like
him receive grace and virtues through their faith in Christ and their
desire for Baptism, implicit or explicit: but afterwards when
baptized, they receive a yet greater fulness of grace and virtues.
Hence in Ps. 22:2, "He hath brought me up on the water of
refreshment," a gloss says: "He has brought us up by an increase of
virtue and good deeds in Baptism."

Reply Obj. 3: Difficulty in doing good and proneness to evil are in
the baptized, not through their lacking the habits of the virtues,
but through concupiscence which is not taken away in Baptism. But
just as concupiscence is diminished by Baptism, so as not to enslave
us, so also are both the aforesaid defects diminished, so that man be
not overcome by them.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 5]

Whether Certain Acts of the Virtues Are Fittingly Set Down As Effects
of Baptism, to Wit--Incorporation in Christ, Enlightenment, and
Fruitfulness?

Objection 1: It seems that certain acts of the virtues are
unfittingly set down as effects of Baptism, to wit--"incorporation in
Christ, enlightenment, and fruitfulness." For Baptism is not given to
an adult, except he believe; according to Mk. 16:16: "He that
believeth and is baptized, shall be saved." But it is by faith that
man is incorporated in Christ, according to Eph. 3:17: "That Christ
may dwell by faith in your hearts." Therefore no one is baptized
except he be already incorporated in Christ. Therefore incorporation
with Christ is not the effect of Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, enlightenment is caused by teaching, according to
Eph. 3:8, 9: "To me the least of all the saints, is given this grace
. . . to enlighten all men," etc. But teaching by the catechism
precedes Baptism. Therefore it is not the effect of Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, fruitfulness pertains to active generation. But a
man is regenerated spiritually by Baptism. Therefore fruitfulness is
not an effect of Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in the book on Infant Baptism (De
Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. i) that "the effect of Baptism is that the
baptized are incorporated in Christ." And Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. ii)
ascribes enlightenment to Baptism. And on Ps. 22:2, "He hath brought
me up on the water of refreshment," a gloss says that "the sinner's
soul, sterilized by drought, is made fruitful by Baptism."

_I answer that,_ By Baptism man is born again unto the spiritual
life, which is proper to the faithful of Christ, as the Apostle says
(Gal. 2:20): "And that I live now in the flesh; I live in the faith
of the Son of God." Now life is only in those members that are united
to the head, from which they derive sense and movement. And therefore
it follows of necessity that by Baptism man is incorporated in
Christ, as one of His members. Again, just as the members derive
sense and movement from the material head, so from their spiritual
Head, i.e. Christ, do His members derive spiritual sense consisting
in the knowledge of truth, and spiritual movement which results from
the instinct of grace. Hence it is written (John 1:14, 16): "We have
seen Him . . . full of grace and truth; and of His fulness we all
have received." And it follows from this that the baptized are
enlightened by Christ as to the knowledge of truth, and made fruitful
by Him with the fruitfulness of good works by the infusion of grace.

Reply Obj. 1: Adults who already believe in Christ are incorporated
in Him mentally. But afterwards, when they are baptized, they are
incorporated in Him, corporally, as it were, i.e. by the visible
sacrament; without the desire of which they could not have been
incorporated in Him even mentally.

Reply Obj. 2: The teacher enlightens outwardly and ministerially by
catechizing: but God enlightens the baptized inwardly, by preparing
their hearts for the reception of the doctrines of truth, according
to John 6:45: "It is written in the prophets . . . They shall all be
taught of God."

Reply Obj. 3: The fruitfulness which I ascribed as an effect of
Baptism is that by which man brings forth good works; not that by
which he begets others in Christ, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 4:15):
"In Christ Jesus by the Gospel I have begotten you."
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 6]

Whether Children Receive Grace and Virtue in Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that children do not receive grace and virtues
in Baptism. For grace and virtues are not possessed without faith and
charity. But faith, as Augustine says (Ep. xcviii), "depends on the
will of the believer": and in like manner charity depends on the will
of the lover. Now children have not the use of the will, and
consequently they have neither faith nor charity. Therefore children
do not receive grace and virtues in Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, on John 14:12, "Greater than these shall he do,"
Augustine says that in order for the ungodly to be made righteous
"Christ worketh in him, but not without him." But a child, through
not having the use of free-will, does not co-operate with Christ unto
its justification: indeed at times it does its best to resist.
Therefore it is not justified by grace and virtues.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Rom. 4:5): "To him that worketh not,
yet believing in Him that justifieth the ungodly, his faith is
reputed to justice according to the purpose of the grace of God." But
a child believeth not "in Him that justifieth the ungodly." Therefore
a child receives neither sanctifying grace nor virtues.

Obj. 4: Further, what is done with a carnal intention does not seem
to have a spiritual effect. But sometimes children are taken to
Baptism with a carnal intention, to wit, that their bodies may be
healed. Therefore they do not receive the spiritual effect consisting
in grace and virtue.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Enchiridion lii): "When little
children are baptized, they die to that sin which they contracted in
birth: so that to them also may be applied the words: 'We are buried
together with Him by Baptism unto death'": (and he continues thus)
"'that as Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father,
so we also may walk in newness of life.'" Now newness of life is
through grace and virtues. Therefore children receive grace and
virtues in Baptism.

_I answer that,_ Some of the early writers held that children do not
receive grace and virtues in Baptism, but that they receive the
imprint of the character of Christ, by the power of which they
receive grace and virtue when they arrive at the perfect age. But
this is evidently false, for two reasons. First, because children,
like adults, are made members of Christ in Baptism; hence they must,
of necessity, receive an influx of grace and virtues from the Head.
Secondly, because, if this were true, children that die after
Baptism, would not come to eternal life; since according to Rom.
6:23, "the grace of God is life everlasting." And consequently
Baptism would not have profited them unto salvation.

Now the source of their error was that they did not recognize the
distinction between habit and act. And so, seeing children to be
incapable of acts of virtue, they thought that they had no virtues at
all after Baptism. But this inability of children to act is not due
to the absence of habits, but to an impediment on the part of the
body: thus also when a man is asleep, though he may have the habits
of virtue, yet is he hindered from virtuous acts through being asleep.

Reply Obj. 1: Faith and charity depend on man's will, yet so that the
habits of these and other virtues require the power of the will which
is in children; whereas acts of virtue require an act of the will,
which is not in children. In this sense Augustine says in the book on
Infant Baptism (Ep. xcviii): "The little child is made a believer,
not as yet by that faith which depends on the will of the believer,
but by the sacrament of faith itself," which causes the habit of
faith.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says in his book on Charity (Ep. Joan. ad
Parth. iii), "no man is born of water and the Holy Ghost unwillingly
which is to be understood not of little children but of adults." In
like manner we are to understand as applying to adults, that man
"without himself is not justified by Christ." Moreover, if little
children who are about to be baptized resist as much as they can,
"this is not imputed to them, since so little do they know what they
do, that they seem not to do it at all": as Augustine says in a book
on the Presence of God, addressed to Dardanus (Ep. clxxxvii).

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (Serm. clxxvi): "Mother Church lends
other feet to the little children that they may come; another heart
that they may believe; another tongue that they may confess." So that
children believe, not by their own act, but by the faith of the
Church, which is applied to them: by the power of which faith, grace
and virtues are bestowed on them.

Reply Obj. 4: The carnal intention of those who take children to be
baptized does not hurt the latter, as neither does one's sin hurt
another, unless he consent. Hence Augustine says in his letter to
Boniface (Ep. xcviii): "Be not disturbed because some bring children
to be baptized, not in the hope that they may be born again to
eternal life by the spiritual grace, but because they think it to be
a remedy whereby they may preserve or recover health. For they are
not deprived of regeneration, through not being brought for this
intention."
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 7]

Whether the Effect of Baptism Is to Open the Gates of the Heavenly
Kingdom?

Objection 1: It seems that it is not the effect of Baptism, to open
the gates of the heavenly kingdom. For what is already opened needs
no opening. But the gates of the heavenly kingdom were opened by
Christ's Passion: hence it is written (Apoc. 4:1): "After these
things I looked and behold (a great) door was opened in heaven."
Therefore it is not the effect of Baptism, to open the gates of the
heavenly kingdom.

Obj. 2: Further, Baptism has had its effects ever since it was
instituted. But some were baptized with Christ's Baptism, before His
Passion, according to John 3:22, 26: and if they had died then, the
gates of the heavenly kingdom would not have been opened to them,
since none entered therein before Christ, according to Mic. 2:13: "He
went up [Vulg.: 'shall go up'] that shall open the way before them."
Therefore it is not the effect of Baptism, to open the gates of the
heavenly kingdom.

Obj. 3: Further, the baptized are still subject to death and the
other penalties of the present life, as stated above (A. 3). But
entrance to the heavenly kingdom is opened to none that are subject
to punishment: as is clear in regard to those who are in purgatory.
Therefore it is not the effect of Baptism, to open the gates of the
heavenly kingdom.

_On the contrary,_ on Luke 3:21, "Heaven was opened," the gloss of
Bede says: "We see here the power of Baptism; from which when a man
comes forth, the gates of the heavenly kingdom are opened unto him."

_I answer that,_ To open the gates of the heavenly kingdom is to
remove the obstacle that prevents one from entering therein. Now this
obstacle is guilt and the debt of punishment. But it has been shown
above (AA. 1, 2) that all guilt and also all debt of punishment are
taken away by Baptism. It follows, therefore, that the effect of
Baptism is to open the gates of the heavenly kingdom.

Reply Obj. 1: Baptism opens the gates of the heavenly kingdom to the
baptized in so far as it incorporates them in the Passion of Christ,
by applying its power to man.

Reply Obj. 2: When Christ's Passion was not as yet consummated
actually but only in the faith of believers, Baptism proportionately
caused the gates to be opened, not in fact but in hope. For the
baptized who died then looked forward, with a sure hope, to enter the
heavenly kingdom.

Reply Obj. 3: The baptized are subject to death and the penalties of
the present life, not by reason of a personal debt of punishment but
by reason of the state of their nature. And therefore this is no bar
to their entrance to the heavenly kingdom, when death severs the soul
from the body; since they have paid, as it were, the debt of nature.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 8]

Whether Baptism Has an Equal Effect in All?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism has not an equal effect in all.
For the effect of Baptism is to remove guilt. But in some it takes
away more sins than in others; for in children it takes away only
original sins, whereas in adults it takes away actual sins, in some
many, in others few. Therefore Baptism has not an equal effect in all.

Obj. 2: Further, grace and virtues are bestowed on man by Baptism.
But some, after Baptism, seem to have more grace and more perfect
virtue than others who have been baptized. Therefore Baptism has not
an equal effect in all.

Obj. 3: Further, nature is perfected by grace, as matter by form. But
a form is received into matter according to its capacity. Therefore,
since some of the baptized, even children, have greater capacity for
natural gifts than others have, it seems that some receive greater
grace than others.

Obj. 4: Further, in Baptism some receive not only spiritual, but also
bodily health; thus Constantine was cleansed in Baptism from leprosy.
But all the infirm do not receive bodily health in Baptism. Therefore
it has not an equal effect in all.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Eph. 4:5): "One Faith, one
Baptism." But a uniform cause has a uniform effect. Therefore Baptism
has an equal effect in all.

_I answer that,_ The effect of Baptism is twofold, the essential
effect, and the accidental. The essential effect of Baptism is that
for which Baptism was instituted, namely, the begetting of men unto
spiritual life. Therefore, since all children are equally disposed to
Baptism, because they are baptized not in their own faith, but in
that of the Church, they all receive an equal effect in Baptism.
Whereas adults, who approach Baptism in their own faith, are not
equally disposed to Baptism; for some approach thereto with greater,
some with less, devotion. And therefore some receive a greater, some
a smaller share of the grace of newness; just as from the same fire,
he receives more heat who approaches nearest to it, although the
fire, as far as it is concerned, sends forth its heat equally to all.

But the accidental effect of Baptism, is that to which Baptism is not
ordained, but which the Divine power produces miraculously in
Baptism: thus on Rom. 6:6, "that we may serve sin no longer," a gloss
says: "this is not bestowed in Baptism, save by an ineffable miracle
of the Creator, so that the law of sin, which is in our members, be
absolutely destroyed." And such like effects are not equally received
by all the baptized, even if they approach with equal devotion: but
they are bestowed according to the ordering of Divine providence.

Reply Obj. 1: The least baptismal grace suffices to blot out all
sins. Wherefore that in some more sins are loosed than in others is
not due to the greater efficacy of Baptism, but to the condition of
the recipient: for in each one it looses whatever it finds.

Reply Obj. 2: That greater or lesser grace appears in the baptized,
may occur in two ways. First, because one receives greater grace in
Baptism than another, on account of his greater devotion, as stated
above. Secondly, because, though they receive equal grace, they do
not make an equal use of it, but one applies himself more to advance
therein, while another by his negligence baffles grace.

Reply Obj. 3: The various degrees of capacity in men arise, not from
a variety in the mind which is renewed by Baptism (since all men,
being of one species, are of one form), but from the diversity of
bodies. But it is otherwise with the angels, who differ in species.
And therefore gratuitous gifts are bestowed on the angels according
to their diverse capacity for natural gifts, but not on men.

Reply Obj. 4: Bodily health is not the essential effect of Baptism,
but a miraculous work of Divine providence.
_______________________

NINTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 9]

Whether Insincerity Hinders the Effect of Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that insincerity does not hinder the effect of
Baptism. For the Apostle says (Gal. 3:27): "As many of you as have
been baptized in Christ Jesus, have put on Christ." But all that
receive the Baptism of Christ, are baptized in Christ. Therefore they
all put on Christ: and this is to receive the effect of Baptism.
Consequently insincerity does not hinder the effect of Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, the Divine power which can change man's will to that
which is better, works in Baptism. But the effect of the efficient
cause cannot be hindered by that which can be removed by that cause.
Therefore insincerity cannot hinder the effect of Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, the effect of Baptism is grace, to which sin is in
opposition. But many other sins are more grievous than insincerity,
which are not said to hinder the effect of Baptism. Therefore neither
does insincerity.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Wis. 1:5): "The Holy Spirit of
discipline will flee from the deceitful." But the effect of Baptism
is from the Holy Ghost. Therefore insincerity hinders the effect of
Baptism.

_I answer that,_ As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii), "God does not
compel man to be righteous." Consequently in order that a man be
justified by Baptism, his will must needs embrace both Baptism and
the baptismal effect. Now, a man is said to be insincere by reason of
his will being in contradiction with either Baptism or its effect.
For, according to Augustine (De Bapt. cont. Donat. vii), a man is
said to be insincere, in four ways: first, because he does not
believe, whereas Baptism is the sacrament of Faith; secondly, through
scorning the sacrament itself; thirdly, through observing a rite
which differs from that prescribed by the Church in conferring the
sacrament; fourthly, through approaching the sacrament without
devotion. Wherefore it is manifest that insincerity hinders the
effect of Baptism.

Reply Obj. 1: "To be baptized in Christ," may be taken in two ways.
First, "in Christ," i.e. "in conformity with Christ." And thus
whoever is baptized in Christ so as to be conformed to Him by Faith
and Charity, puts on Christ by grace. Secondly, a man is said to be
baptized in Christ, in so far as he receives Christ's sacrament. And
thus all put on Christ, through being configured to Him by the
character, but not through being conformed to Him by grace.

Reply Obj. 2: When God changes man's will from evil to good, man does
not approach with insincerity. But God does not always do this. Nor
is this the purpose of the sacrament, that an insincere man be made
sincere; but that he who comes in sincerity, be justified.

Reply Obj. 3: A man is said to be insincere who makes a show of
willing what he wills not. Now whoever approaches Baptism, by that
very fact makes a show of having right faith in Christ, of veneration
for this sacrament, and of wishing to conform to the Church, and to
renounce sin. Consequently, to whatever sin a man wishes to cleave,
if he approach Baptism, he approaches insincerely, which is the same
as to approach without devotion. But this must be understood of
mortal sin, which is in opposition to grace: but not of venial sin.
Consequently, here insincerity includes, in a way, every sin.
_______________________

TENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 69, Art. 10]

Whether Baptism Produces Its Effect When the Insincerity Ceases?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism does not produce its effect, when
the insincerity ceases. For a dead work, which is void of charity,
can never come to life. But he who approaches Baptism insincerely,
receives the sacrament without charity. Therefore it can never come
to life so as to bestow grace.

Obj. 2: Further, insincerity seems to be stronger than Baptism,
because it hinders its effect. But the stronger is not removed by the
weaker. Therefore the sin of insincerity cannot be taken away by
Baptism which has been hindered by insincerity. And thus Baptism will
not receive its full effect, which is the remission of all sins.

Obj. 3: Further, it may happen that a man approach Baptism
insincerely, and afterwards commit a number of sins. And yet these
sins will not be taken away by Baptism; because Baptism washes away
past, not future, sins. Such a Baptism, therefore, will never have
its effect, which is the remission of all sins.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Bapt. cont. Donat. i): "Then
does Baptism begin to have its salutary effect, when truthful
confession takes the place of that insincerity which hindered sins
from being washed away, so long as the heart persisted in malice and
sacrilege."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 66, A. 9), Baptism is a
spiritual regeneration. Now when a thing is generated, it receives
together with the form, the form's effect, unless there be an
obstacle; and when this is removed, the form of the thing generated
produces its effect: thus at the same time as a weighty body is
generated, it has a downward movement, unless something prevent this;
and when the obstacle is removed, it begins forthwith to move
downwards. In like manner when a man is baptized, he receives the
character, which is like a form; and he receives in consequence its
proper effect, which is grace whereby all his sins are remitted. But
this effect is sometimes hindered by insincerity. Wherefore, when
this obstacle is removed by Penance, Baptism forthwith produces its
effect.

Reply Obj. 1: The sacrament of Baptism is the work of God, not of
man. Consequently, it is not dead in the man, who being insincere, is
baptized without charity.

Reply Obj. 2: Insincerity is not removed by Baptism but by Penance:
and when it is removed, Baptism takes away all guilt, and all debt of
punishment due to sins, whether committed before Baptism, or even
co-existent with Baptism. Hence Augustine says (De Bapt. cont. Donat.
i): "Yesterday is blotted out, and whatever remains over and above,
even the very last hour and moment preceding Baptism, the very moment
of Baptism. But from that moment forward he is bound by his
obligations." And so both Baptism and Penance concur in producing the
effect of Baptism, but Baptism as the direct efficient cause, Penance
as the indirect cause, i.e. as removing the obstacle.

Reply Obj. 3: The effect of Baptism is to take away not future, but
present and past sins. And consequently, when the insincerity passes
away, subsequent sins are indeed remitted, but by Penance, not by
Baptism. Wherefore they are not remitted, like the sins which
preceded Baptism, as to the whole debt of punishment.
_______________________

QUESTION 70

OF CIRCUMCISION
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider things that are preparatory to Baptism: and
(1) that which preceded Baptism, viz. Circumcision, (2) those which
accompany Baptism, viz. Catechism and Exorcism.

Concerning the first there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether circumcision was a preparation for, and a figure of,
Baptism?

(2) Its institution;

(3) Its rite;

(4) Its effect.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 70, Art. 1]

Whether Circumcision Was a Preparation For, and a Figure of Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that circumcision was not a preparation for,
and a figure of Baptism. For every figure has some likeness to that
which it foreshadows. But circumcision has no likeness to Baptism.
Therefore it seems that it was not a preparation for, and a figure of
Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle, speaking of the Fathers of old, says (1
Cor. 10:2), that "all were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea":
but not that they were baptized in circumcision. Therefore the
protecting pillar of a cloud, and the crossing of the Red Sea, rather
than circumcision, were a preparation for, and a figure of Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, it was stated above (Q. 38, AA. 1, 3) that the
baptism of John was a preparation for Christ's. Consequently, if
circumcision was a preparation for, and a figure of Christ's Baptism,
it seems that John's baptism was superfluous: which is unseemly.
Therefore circumcision was not a preparation for, and a figure of
Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Col. 2:11, 12): "You are
circumcised with circumcision, not made by hand in despoiling the
body of the flesh, but in the circumcision of Christ, buried with Him
in Baptism."

_I answer that,_ Baptism is called the Sacrament of Faith; in so far,
to wit, as in Baptism man makes a profession of faith, and by Baptism
is aggregated to the congregation of the faithful. Now our faith is
the same as that of the Fathers of old, according to the Apostle (2
Cor. 4:13): "Having the same spirit of faith . . . we . . . believe."
But circumcision was a protestation of faith; wherefore by
circumcision also men of old were aggregated to the body of the
faithful. Consequently, it is manifest that circumcision was a
preparation for Baptism and a figure thereof, forasmuch as "all
things happened" to the Fathers of old "in figure" (1 Cor. 10:11);
just as their faith regarded things to come.

Reply Obj. 1: Circumcision was like Baptism as to the spiritual
effect of the latter. For just as circumcision removed a carnal
pellicule, so Baptism despoils man of carnal behavior.

Reply Obj. 2: The protecting pillar of cloud and the crossing of the
Red Sea were indeed figures of our Baptism, whereby we are born again
of water, signified by the Red Sea; and of the Holy Ghost, signified
by the pillar of cloud: yet man did not make, by means of these, a
profession of faith, as by circumcision; so that these two things
were figures but not sacraments. But circumcision was a sacrament,
and a preparation for Baptism; although less clearly figurative of
Baptism, as to externals, than the aforesaid. And for this reason the
Apostle mentions them rather than circumcision.

Reply Obj. 3: John's baptism was a preparation for Christ's as to the
act done: but circumcision, as to the profession of faith, which is
required in Baptism, as stated above.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 70, Art. 2]

Whether Circumcision Was Instituted in a Fitting Manner?

Objection 1: It seems that circumcision was instituted in an
unfitting manner. For as stated above (A. 1) a profession of faith
was made in circumcision. But none could ever be delivered from the
first man's sin, except by faith in Christ's Passion, according to
Rom. 3:25: "Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through
faith in His blood." Therefore circumcision should have been
instituted forthwith after the first man's sin, and not at the time
of Abraham.

Obj. 2: Further, in circumcision man made profession of keeping the
Old Law, just as in Baptism he makes profession of keeping the New
Law; wherefore the Apostle says (Gal. 5:3): "I testify . . . to every
man circumcising himself, that he is a debtor to do the whole Law."
But the observance of the Law was not promulgated at the time of
Abraham, but rather at the time of Moses. Therefore it was unfitting
for circumcision to be instituted at the time of Abraham.

Obj. 3: Further, circumcision was a figure of, and a preparation for,
Baptism. But Baptism is offered to all nations, according to Matt.
28:19: "Going . . . teach ye all nations, baptizing them." Therefore
circumcision should have been instituted as binding, not the Jews
only, but also all nations.

Obj. 4: Further, carnal circumcision should correspond to spiritual
circumcision, as the shadow to the reality. But spiritual
circumcision which is of Christ, regards indifferently both sexes,
since "in Christ Jesus there is neither male nor female," as is
written Col. 3 [*Gal. 3:28]. Therefore the institution of
circumcision which concerns only males, was unfitting.

_On the contrary,_ We read (Gen. 17) that circumcision was instituted
by God, Whose "works are perfect" (Deut. 32:4).

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1) circumcision was a
preparation for Baptism, inasmuch as it was a profession of faith in
Christ, which we also profess in Baptism. Now among the Fathers of
old, Abraham was the first to receive the promise of the future birth
of Christ, when it was said to him: "In thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed" (Gen. 22:18). Moreover, he was the
first to cut himself off from the society of unbelievers, in
accordance with the commandment of the Lord, Who said to him (Gen.
13:1): "Go forth out of thy country and from thy kindred." Therefore
circumcision was fittingly instituted in the person of Abraham.

Reply Obj. 1: Immediately after the sin of our first parent, on
account of the knowledge possessed by Adam, who was fully instructed
about Divine things, both faith and natural reason flourished in man
to such an extent, that there was no need for any signs of faith and
salvation to be prescribed to him, but each one was wont to make
protestation of his faith, by outward signs of his profession,
according as he thought best. But about the time of Abraham faith was
on the wane, many being given over to idolatry. Moreover, by the
growth of carnal concupiscence natural reason was clouded even in
regard to sins against nature. And therefore it was fitting that
then, and not before, circumcision should be instituted, as a
profession of faith and a remedy against carnal concupiscence.

Reply Obj. 2: The observance of the Law was not to be promulgated
until the people were already gathered together: because the law is
ordained to the public good, as we have stated in the Second Part
(I-II, Q. 90, A. 2). Now it behooved the body of the faithful to be
gathered together by a sensible sign, which is necessary in order
that men be united together in any religion, as Augustine says
(Contra Faust. xix). Consequently, it was necessary for circumcision
to be instituted before the giving of the Law. Those Fathers,
however, who lived before the Law, taught their families concerning
Divine things by way of paternal admonition. Hence the Lord said of
Abraham (Gen. 18:19): "I know that he will command his children, and
his household after him to keep the way of the Lord."

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism contains in itself the perfection of salvation,
to which God calls all men, according to 1 Tim. 2:4: "Who will have
all men to be saved." Wherefore Baptism is offered to all nations. On
the other hand circumcision did not contain the perfection of
salvation, but signified it as to be achieved by Christ, Who was to
be born of the Jewish nation. For this reason circumcision was given
to that nation alone.

Reply Obj. 4: The institution of circumcision is as a sign of
Abraham's faith, who believed that himself would be the father of
Christ Who was promised to him: and for this reason it was suitable
that it should be for males only. Again, original sin, against which
circumcision was specially ordained, is contracted from the father,
not from the mother, as was stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 81,
A. 5). But Baptism contains the power of Christ, Who is the universal
cause of salvation for all, and is "The Remission of all sins"
(Post-Communion, Tuesday in Whitweek).
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 70, Art. 3]

Whether the Rite of Circumcision Was Fitting?

Objection 1: It seems that the rite of circumcision was unfitting.
For circumcision, as stated above (AA. 1, 2), was a profession of
faith. But faith is in the apprehensive power, whose operations
appear mostly in the head. Therefore the sign of circumcision should
have been conferred on the head rather than on the virile member.

Obj. 2: Further, in the sacraments we make use of such things as are
in more frequent use; for instance, water, which is used for washing,
and bread, which we use for nourishment. But, in cutting, we use an
iron knife more commonly than a stone knife. Therefore circumcision
should not have been performed with a stone knife.

Obj. 3: Further, just as Baptism was instituted as a remedy against
original sin, so also was circumcision, as Bede says (Hom. in
Circum.). But now Baptism is not put off until the eighth day, lest
children should be in danger of loss on account of original sin, if
they should die before being baptized. On the other hand, sometimes
Baptism is put off until after the eighth day. Therefore the eighth
day should not have been fixed for circumcision, but this day should
have been anticipated, just as sometimes it was deferred.

_On the contrary,_ The aforesaid rite of circumcision is fixed by a
gloss on Rom. 4:11: "And he received the sign of circumcision."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), circumcision was
established, as a sign of faith, by God "of" Whose "wisdom there is
no number" (Ps. 146:5). Now to determine suitable signs is a work of
wisdom. Consequently, it must be allowed that the rite of
circumcision was fitting.

Reply Obj. 1: It was fitting for circumcision to be performed on the
virile member. First, because it was a sign of that faith whereby
Abraham believed that Christ would be born of his seed. Secondly,
because it was to be a remedy against original sin, which is
contracted through the act of generation. Thirdly, because it was
ordained as a remedy for carnal concupiscence, which thrives
principally in those members, by reason of the abundance of venereal
pleasure.

Reply Obj. 2: A stone knife was not essential to circumcision.
Wherefore we do not find that an instrument of this description is
required by any divine precept; nor did the Jews, as a rule, make use
of such a knife for circumcision; indeed, neither do they now.
Nevertheless, certain well-known circumcisions are related as having
been performed with a stone knife, thus (Ex. 4:25) we read that
"Sephora took a very sharp stone and circumcised the foreskin of her
son," and (Joshua 5:2): "Make thee knives of stone, and circumcise
the second time the children of Israel." Which signified that
spiritual circumcision would be done by Christ, of Whom it is written
(1 Cor. 10:4): "Now the rock was Christ."

Reply Obj. 3: The eighth day was fixed for circumcision: first,
because of the mystery; since, Christ, by taking away from the elect,
not only guilt but also all penalties, will perfect the spiritual
circumcision, in the eighth age (which is the age of those that rise
again), as it were, on the eighth day. Secondly, on account of the
tenderness of the infant before the eighth day. Wherefore even in
regard to other animals it is prescribed (Lev. 22:27): "When a
bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, they shall be seven
days under the udder of their dam: but the eighth day and
thenceforth, they may be offered to the Lord."

Moreover, the eighth day was necessary for the fulfilment of the
precept; so that, to wit, those who delayed beyond the eighth day,
sinned, even though it were the sabbath, according to John 7:23:
"(If) a man receives circumcision on the sabbath-day, that the Law of
Moses may not be broken." But it was not necessary for the validity
of the sacrament: because if anyone delayed beyond the eighth day,
they could be circumcised afterwards.

Some also say that in imminent danger of death, it was allowable to
anticipate the eighth day. But this cannot be proved either from the
authority of Scripture or from the custom of the Jews. Wherefore it
is better to say with Hugh of St. Victor (De Sacram. i) that the
eighth day was never anticipated for any motive, however urgent.
Hence on Prov. 4:3: "I was . . . an only son in the sight of my
mother," a gloss says, that Bersabee's other baby boy did not count
because through dying before the eighth day it received no name; and
consequently neither was it circumcised.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 70, Art. 4]

Whether Circumcision Bestowed Sanctifying Grace?

Objection 1: It seems that circumcision did not bestow sanctifying
grace. For the Apostle says (Gal. 2:21): "If justice be by the Law,
then Christ died in vain," i.e. without cause. But circumcision was
an obligation imposed by the Law, according to Gal. 5:3: "I
testify . . . to every man circumcising himself, that he is a debtor
to do the whole law." Therefore, if justice be by circumcision,
"Christ died in vain," i.e. without cause. But this cannot be
allowed. Therefore circumcision did not confer grace whereby the
sinner is made righteous.

Obj. 2: Further, before the institution of circumcision faith alone
sufficed for justification; hence Gregory says (Moral. iv): "Faith
alone did of old in behalf of infants that for which the water of
Baptism avails with us." But faith has lost nothing of its strength
through the commandment of circumcision. Therefore faith alone
justified little ones, and not circumcision.

Obj. 3: Further, we read (Joshua 5:5, 6) that "the people that were
born in the desert, during the forty years . . . were uncircumcised."
If, therefore, original sin was taken away by circumcision, it seems
that all who died in the desert, both little children and adults,
were lost. And the same argument avails in regard to those who died
before the eighth day, which was that of circumcision, which day
could not be anticipated, as stated above (A. 3, ad 3).

Obj. 4: Further, nothing but sin closes the entrance to the heavenly
kingdom. But before the Passion the entrance to the heavenly kingdom
was closed to the circumcised. Therefore men were not justified from
sin by circumcision.

Obj. 5: Further, original sin is not remitted without actual sin
being remitted also: because "it is wicked to hope for half
forgiveness from God," as Augustine says (De Vera et Falsa Poenit.
ix). But we read nowhere of circumcision as remitting actual sin.
Therefore neither did it remit original sin.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says, writing to Valerius in answer to
Julian (De Nup. et Concup. ii): "From the time that circumcision was
instituted among God's people, as 'a seal of the justice of the
faith,' it availed little children unto sanctification by cleansing
them from the original and bygone sin; just as Baptism also from the
time of its institution began to avail unto the renewal of man."

_I answer that,_ All are agreed in saying that original sin was
remitted in circumcision. But some said that no grace was conferred,
and that the only effect was to remit sin. The Master holds this
opinion (Sent. iv, D, 1), and in a gloss on Rom. 4:11. But this is
impossible, since guilt is not remitted except by grace, according to
Rom. 3:2: "Being justified freely by His grace," etc.

Wherefore others said that grace was bestowed by circumcision, as to
that effect which is the remission of guilt, but not as to its
positive effects; lest they should be compelled to say that the grace
bestowed in circumcision sufficed for the fulfilling of the precepts
of the Law, and that, consequently, the coming of Christ was
unnecessary. But neither can this opinion stand. First, because by
circumcision children received the power of obtaining glory at the
allotted time, which is the last positive effect of grace. Secondly,
because, in the order of the formal cause, positive effects naturally
precede those that denote privation, although it is the reverse in
the order of the material cause: since a form does not remove a
privation save by informing the subject.

Consequently, others said that grace was conferred in circumcision,
also as a particular positive effect consisting in being made worthy
of eternal life; but not as to all its effects, for it did not
suffice for the repression of the concupiscence of the fomes, nor
again for the fulfilment of the precepts of the Law. And this was my
opinion at one time (Sent. iv, D, 1; Q. 2, A. 4). But if one consider
the matter carefully, it is clear that this is not true. Because the
least grace can resist any degree of concupiscence, and avoid every
mortal sin, that is committed in transgressing the precepts of the
Law; for the smallest degree of charity loves God more than cupidity
loves "thousands of gold and silver" (Ps. 118:72).

We must say, therefore, that grace was bestowed in circumcision as to
all the effects of grace, but not as in Baptism. Because in Baptism
grace is bestowed by the very power of Baptism itself, which power
Baptism has as the instrument of Christ's Passion already
consummated. Whereas circumcision bestowed grace, inasmuch as it was
a sign of faith in Christ's future Passion: so that the man who was
circumcised, professed to embrace that faith; whether, being an
adult, he made profession for himself, or, being a child, someone
else made profession for him. Hence, too, the Apostle says (Rom.
4:11), that Abraham "received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the
justice of the faith": because, to wit, justice was of faith
signified: not of circumcision signifying. And since Baptism operates
instrumentally by the power of Christ's Passion, whereas circumcision
does not, therefore Baptism imprints a character that incorporates
man in Christ, and bestows grace more copiously than does
circumcision; since greater is the effect of a thing already present,
than of the hope thereof.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument would prove if justice were of
circumcision otherwise than through faith in Christ's Passion.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as before the institution of circumcision, faith
in Christ to come justified both children and adults, so, too, after
its institution. But before, there was no need of a sign expressive
of this faith; because as yet believers had not begun to be united
together apart from unbelievers for the worship of one God. It is
probable, however, that parents who were believers offered up some
prayers to God for their children, especially if these were in any
danger. Or bestowed some blessing on them, as a "seal of faith"; just
as the adults offered prayers and sacrifices for themselves.

Reply Obj. 3: There was an excuse for the people in the desert
failing to fulfil the precept of circumcision, both because they knew
not when the camp was removed, and because, as Damascene says (De
Fide Orth. iv) they needed no distinctive sign while they dwelt apart
from other nations. Nevertheless, as Augustine says (QQ. in Josue
vi), those were guilty of disobedience who failed to obey through
contempt.

It seems, however, that none of the uncircumcised died in the desert,
for it is written (Ps. 104:37): "There was not among their tribes one
that was feeble": and that those alone died in the desert, who had
been circumcised in Egypt. If, however, some of the uncircumcised did
die there, the same applies to them as to those who died before the
institution of circumcision. And this applies also to those children
who, at the time of the Law, died before the eighth day.

Reply Obj. 4: Original sin was taken away in circumcision, in regard
to the person; but on the part of the entire nature, there remained
the obstacle to the entrance of the kingdom of heaven, which obstacle
was removed by Christ's Passion. Consequently, before Christ's
Passion not even Baptism gave entrance to the kingdom. But were
circumcision to avail after Christ's Passion, it would give entrance
to the kingdom.

Reply Obj. 5: When adults were circumcised, they received remission
not only of original, but also of actual sin: yet not so as to be
delivered from all debt of punishment, as in Baptism, in which grace
is conferred more copiously.
_______________________

QUESTION 71

OF THE PREPARATIONS THAT ACCOMPANY BAPTISM
(In Four Articles)

We have now to consider the preparations that accompany Baptism:
concerning which there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether catechism should precede Baptism?

(2) Whether exorcism should precede Baptism?

(3) Whether what is done in catechizing and exorcizing, effects
anything, or is a mere sign?

(4) Whether those who are to be baptized should be catechized or
exorcized by priests?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 71, Art. 1]

Whether Catechism Should Precede Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that catechism should not precede Baptism. For
by Baptism men are regenerated unto the spiritual life. But man
begins to live before being taught. Therefore man should not be
catechized, i.e. taught, before being baptized.

Obj. 2: Further, Baptism is given not only to adults, but also to
children, who are not capable of being taught, since they have not
the use of reason. Therefore it is absurd to catechize them.

Obj. 3: Further, a man, when catechized, confesses his faith. Now a
child cannot confess its faith by itself, nor can anyone else in its
stead; both because no one can bind another to do anything; and
because one cannot know whether the child, having come to the right
age, will give its assent to faith. Therefore catechism should not
precede Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ Rabanus says (De Instit. Cleric. i): "Before
Baptism man should be prepared by catechism, in order that the
catechumen may receive the rudiments of faith."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 70, A. 1), Baptism is the
Sacrament of Faith: since it is a profession of the Christian faith.
Now in order that a man receive the faith, he must be instructed
therein, according to Rom. 10:14: "How shall they believe Him, of
Whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
preacher?" And therefore it is fitting that catechism should precede
Baptism. Hence when our Lord bade His disciples to baptize, He made
teaching to precede Baptism, saying: "Go ye . . . and teach all
nations, baptizing them," etc.

Reply Obj. 1: The life of grace unto which a man is regenerated,
presupposes the life of the rational nature, in which man is capable
of receiving instruction.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as Mother Church, as stated above (Q. 69, A. 6, ad
3), lends children another's feet that they may come, and another's
heart that they may believe, so, too, she lends them another's ears,
that they may hear, and another's mind, that through others they may
be taught. And therefore, as they are to be baptized, on the same
grounds they are to be instructed.

Reply Obj. 3: He who answers in the child's stead: "I do believe,"
does not foretell that the child will believe when it comes to the
right age, else he would say: "He will believe"; but in the child's
stead he professes the Church's faith which is communicated to that
child, the sacrament of which faith is bestowed on it, and to which
faith he is bound by another. For there is nothing unfitting in a
person being bound by another in things necessary for salvation. In
like manner the sponsor, in answering for the child, promises to use
his endeavors that the child may believe. This, however, would not be
sufficient in the case of adults having the use of reason.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 71, Art. 2]

Whether Exorcism Should Precede Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that exorcism should not precede Baptism. For
exorcism is ordained against energumens or those who are possessed.
But not all are such like. Therefore exorcism should not precede
Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, so long as man is a subject of sin, the devil has
power over him, according to John 8:34: "Whosoever committeth sin is
the servant of sin." But sin is taken away by Baptism. Therefore men
should not be exorcized before Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, Holy water was introduced in order to ward off the
power of the demons. Therefore exorcism was not needed as a further
remedy.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Celestine says (Epist. ad Episcop. Galliae):
"Whether children or young people approach the sacrament of
regeneration, they should not come to the fount of life before the
unclean spirit has been expelled from them by the exorcisms and
breathings of the clerics."

_I answer that,_ Whoever purposes to do a work wisely, first removes
the obstacles to his work; hence it is written (Jer. 4:3): "Break up
anew your fallow ground and sow not upon thorns." Now the devil is
the enemy of man's salvation, which man acquires by Baptism; and he
has a certain power over man from the very fact that the latter is
subject to original, or even actual, sin. Consequently it is fitting
that before Baptism the demons should be cast out by exorcisms, lest
they impede man's salvation. Which expulsion is signified by the
(priest) breathing (upon the person to be baptized); while the
blessing, with the imposition of hands, bars the way against the
return of him who was cast out. Then the salt which is put in the
mouth, and the anointing of the nose and ears with spittle, signify
the receiving of doctrine, as to the ears; consent thereto as to the
nose; and confession thereof, as to the mouth. And the anointing with
oil signifies man's ability to fight against the demons.

Reply Obj. 1: The energumens are so-called from "laboring inwardly"
under the outward operation of the devil. And though not all that
approach Baptism are troubled by him in their bodies, yet all who are
not baptized are subject to the power of the demons, at least on
account of the guilt of original sin.

Reply Obj. 2: The power of the devil in so far as he hinders man from
obtaining glory, is expelled from man by the baptismal ablution; but
in so far as he hinders man from receiving the sacrament, his power
is cast out by the exorcisms.

Reply Obj. 3: Holy water is used against the assaults of demons from
without. But exorcisms are directed against those assaults of the
demons which are from within. Hence those who are exorcized are
called energumens, as it were "laboring inwardly."

Or we may say that just as Penance is given as a further remedy
against sin, because Baptism is not repeated; so Holy Water is given
as a further remedy against the assaults of demons, because the
baptismal exorcisms are not given a second time.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 71, Art. 3]

Whether What Is Done in the Exorcism Effects Anything, or Is a Mere
Sign?

Objection 1: It seems that what is done in the exorcism does not
effect anything, but is a mere sign. For if a child die after the
exorcisms, before being baptized, it is not saved. But the effects of
what is done in the sacraments are ordained to the salvation of man;
hence it is written (Mk. 16:16): "He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved." Therefore what is done in the exorcism effects
nothing, but is a mere sign.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing is required for a sacrament of the New Law,
but that it should be a sign and a cause, as stated above (Q. 62, A.
1). If, therefore, the things done in the exorcism effect anything,
it seems that each of them is a sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the exorcism is ordained to Baptism, so if
anything be effected in the exorcism, it is ordained to the effect of
Baptism. But disposition must needs precede the perfect form: because
form is not received save into matter already disposed. It would
follow, therefore, that none could obtain the effect of Baptism
unless he were previously exorcized; which is clearly false.
Therefore what is done in the exorcisms has no effect.

Obj. 4: Further, just as some things are done in the exorcism before
Baptism, so are some things done after Baptism; for instance, the
priest anoints the baptized on the top of the head. But what is done
after Baptism seems to have no effect; for, if it had, the effect of
Baptism would be imperfect. Therefore neither have those things an
effect, which are done in exorcism before Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Symbolo I): "Little children
are breathed upon and exorcized, in order to expel from them the
devil's hostile power, which deceived man." But the Church does
nothing in vain. Therefore the effect of these breathings is that the
power of the devils is expelled.

_I answer that,_ Some say that the things done in the exorcism have
no effect, but are mere signs. But this is clearly false; since in
exorcizing, the Church uses words of command to cast out the devil's
power, for instance, when she says: "Therefore, accursed devil, go
out from him," etc.

Therefore we must say that they have some effect, but, other than
that of Baptism. For Baptism gives man grace unto the full remission
of sins. But those things that are done in the exorcism remove the
twofold impediment against the reception of saving grace. Of these,
one is the outward impediment, so far as the demons strive to hinder
man's salvation. And this impediment is removed by the breathings,
whereby the demon's power is cast out, as appears from the passage
quoted from Augustine, i.e. as to the devil not placing obstacles
against the reception of the sacrament. Nevertheless, the demon's
power over man remains as to the stain of sin, and the debt of
punishment, until sin be washed away by Baptism. And in this sense
Cyprian says (Epist. lxxvi): "Know that the devil's evil power
remains until the pouring of the saving water: but in Baptism he
loses it all."

The other impediment is within, forasmuch as, from having contracted
original sin, man's sense is closed to the perception of the
mysteries of salvation. Hence Rabanus says (De Instit. Cleric. i)
that "by means of the typifying spittle and the touch of the priest,
the Divine wisdom and power brings salvation to the catechumen, that
his nostrils being opened he may perceive the odor of the knowledge
of God, that his ears be opened to hear the commandments of God, that
his senses be opened in his inmost heart to respond."

Reply Obj. 1: What is done in the exorcism does not take away the sin
for which man is punished after death; but only the impediments
against his receiving the remission of sin through the sacrament.
Wherefore exorcism avails a man nothing after death if he has not
been baptized.

Praepositivus, however, says that children who die after being
exorcized but before being baptized are subjected to lesser darkness.
But this does not seem to be true: because that darkness consists in
privation of the vision of God, which cannot be greater or lesser.

Reply Obj. 2: It is essential to a sacrament to produce its principal
effect, which is grace that remits sin, or supplies some defect in
man. But those things that are done in the exorcism do not effect
this; they merely remove these impediments. Consequently, they are
not sacraments but sacramentals.

Reply Obj. 3: The disposition that suffices for receiving the
baptismal grace is the faith and intention, either of the one
baptized, if it be an adult, or of the Church, if it be a child. But
these things that are done in the exorcism, are directed to the
removal of the impediments. And therefore one may receive the effect
of Baptism without them.

Yet they are not to be omitted save in a case of necessity. And then,
if the danger pass, they should be supplied, that uniformity in
Baptism may be observed. Nor are they supplied to no purpose after
Baptism: because, just as the effect of Baptism may be hindered
before it is received, so can it be hindered after it has been
received.

Reply Obj. 4: Of those things that are done after Baptism in respect
of the person baptized, something is done which is not a mere sign,
but produces an effect, for instance, the anointing on the top of the
head, the effect of which is the preservation of baptismal grace. And
there is something which has no effect, but is a mere sign, for
instance, the baptized are given a white garment to signify the
newness of life.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 71, Art. 4]

Whether It Belongs to a Priest to Catechize and Exorcize the Person
to Be Baptized?

Objection 1: It seems that it does not belong to a priest to
catechize and exorcize the person to be baptized. For it belongs to
the office of ministers to operate on the unclean, as Dionysius says
(Eccl. Hier. v). But catechumens who are instructed by catechism, and
"energumens" who are cleansed by exorcism, are counted among the
unclean, as Dionysius says in the same place. Therefore to catechize
and to exorcize do not belong to the office of the priests, but
rather to that of the ministers.

Obj. 2: Further, catechumens are instructed in the Faith by the Holy
Scripture which is read in the church by ministers: for just as the
Old Testament is recited by the Readers, so the New Testament is read
by the Deacons and Subdeacons. And thus it belongs to the ministers
to catechize. In like manner it belongs, seemingly, to the ministers
to exorcize. For Isidore says (Epist. ad Ludifred.): "The exorcist
should know the exorcisms by heart, and impose his hands on the
energumens and catechumens during the exorcism." Therefore it belongs
not to the priestly office to catechize and exorcize.

Obj. 3: Further, "to catechize" is the same as "to teach," and this
is the same as "to perfect." Now this belongs to the office of a
bishop, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. v). Therefore it does not
belong to the priestly office.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Nicolas I says: "The catechizing of those who
are to be baptized can be undertaken by the priests attached to each
church." And Gregory says (Hom. xxix super Ezech.): "When priests
place their hands on believers for the grace of exorcism, what else
do they but cast out the devils?"

_I answer that,_ The minister compared to the priest, is as a
secondary and instrumental agent to the principal agent: as is
implied in the very word "minister." Now the secondary agent does
nothing without the principal agent in operating. And the more mighty
the operation, so much the mightier instruments does the principal
agent require. But the operation of the priest in conferring the
sacrament itself is mightier than in those things that are
preparatory to the sacrament. And so the highest ministers who are
called deacons co-operate with the priest in bestowing the sacraments
themselves: for Isidore says (Epist. ad Ludifred.) that "it belongs
to the deacons to assist the priests in all things that are done in
Christ's sacraments, in Baptism, to wit, in the Chrism, in the Paten
and Chalice"; while the inferior ministers assist the priest in those
things which are preparatory to the sacraments: the readers, for
instance, in catechizing; the exorcists in exorcizing.

Reply Obj. 1: The minister's operation in regard to the unclean is
ministerial and, as it were, instrumental, but the priest's is
principal.

Reply Obj. 2: To readers and exorcists belongs the duty of
catechizing and exorcizing, not, indeed, principally, but as
ministers of the priest in these things.

Reply Obj. 3: Instruction is manifold. One leads to the embracing of
the Faith; and is ascribed by Dionysius to bishops (Eccl. Hier. ii)
and can be undertaken by any preacher, or even by any believer.
Another is that by which a man is taught the rudiments of faith, and
how to comport himself in receiving the sacraments: this belongs
secondarily to the ministers, primarily to the priests. A third is
instruction in the mode of Christian life: and this belongs to the
sponsors. A fourth is the instruction in the profound mysteries of
faith, and on the perfection of Christian life: this belongs to
bishops _ex officio,_ in virtue of their office.
_______________________

QUESTION 72

OF THE SACRAMENT OF CONFIRMATION
(In Twelve Articles)

We have now to consider the Sacrament of Confirmation. Concerning
this there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Confirmation is a sacrament?

(2) Its matter;

(3) Whether it is essential to the sacrament that the chrism should
have been previously consecrated by a bishop?

(4) Its form;

(5) Whether it imprints a character?

(6) Whether the character of Confirmation presupposes the character
of Baptism?

(7) Whether it bestows grace?

(8) Who is competent to receive this sacrament?

(9) In what part of the body?

(10) Whether someone is required to stand for the person to be
confirmed?

(11) Whether this sacrament is given by bishops only?
