creation, preservation and redemption, but also by the right of covenant
and association. I will make you Mine by promise and oath. And surely he
that will break these bonds is as bad as the man possessed with the
devil in the gospel, whom no chains could keep fast. When we enter into
covenant with God, we take the oath of supremacy, and swear unto Him,
that He should be our chief lord and governor, and that we will admit of
no sovereign power or jurisdiction, but that God shall be all in all. We
likewise take the oath of allegiance, to be His servants and vassals,
and that He shall be our supreme in spirituals and temporals. Now, for a
Christian that believes there is a God, to break both these oaths of
allegiance and supremacy, it is cursed treason against the God of
heaven, which surely God will be avenged of. Amongst the Romans, when
any soldier was pressed, he took an oath to serve the captain
faithfully, and not to forsake him, and he was called _miles per
sacramentum_. Sometimes one took an oath for all the rest, and the
others only said, the same oath that A.B. took, the same do I. And these
were called _milites per conjurationem_. And when any soldier forsook
his captain, he had the martial law executed upon him. Thus it is with
every Christian: he is a professed soldier of Christ, he hath taken
press-money, he hath sworn and taken the sacrament upon it to become the
Lord's, he is _miles per sacramentum_, and _miles per conjurationem_:
and if he forsake his captain and break covenant, the great Lord of
Hosts will be avenged of him, as it is written, "Cursed be the man that
obeyeth not the words of the covenant." To break covenant is a sin of
perjury, which is a sin of an high nature; and if for oaths the land
mourneth, much more for breach of oaths. To break covenant is a sin of
spiritual adultery; for by covenanting with God, we do as it were,
"join ourselves in marriage to God," as the Hebrew word signifieth. Now,
to break the marriage knot is a sin for which God may justly give a bill
of divorce to a nation. To break covenant is a sin of injustice; for by
our covenant we do enter, as it were, into bond to God, and engage
ourselves as a creditor to his debtor; now the sin of injustice is a
land-destroying sin.

The Fourth reason why God must needs be avenged on those that are
covenant-breakers, is, It is an act of the highest sacrilege that can be
committed. For, by virtue of the covenant, the Lord lays claim to us as
His peculiar inheritance. "I sware unto thee, and entered into covenant
with thee, and thou becamest Mine." "I will be their God, and they shall
be My people." It is a worthy observation, that in the covenant there is
a double surrender, one on God's part, and another on our part. God
Almighty makes a surrender of Himself, and of his Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Behold, saith God, I am wholly thy God; all My power, and mercy,
and goodness, all is thine; My Son is thine, and all His rich purchases;
My Spirit is thine, and all His graces: this is God's surrender. On our
part, when we take hold of the covenant, we make a delivery of our
bodies and souls into the hands of God; we choose Him to be our Lord and
Governor, we resign up ourselves into His hands. Lord, we are Thine at
Thy disposing: we alienate ourselves, and make a deed of gift of
ourselves, and give Thee lock and key of head, heart, and affections.
This is the nature of every religious covenant, but especially of the
covenant of grace. But now, for a Christian to call in, as it were, his
surrender, to disclaim his resignation, to steal away himself from God,
and lay claim to himself after his alienation; to fulfil his own lusts,
to walk after his own ways, to do what he lists, and not what he hath
covenanted to do, and so to rob God of what is His: this is the highest
degree of sacrilege, which God will never suffer to go unpunished. And
surely if the stick-gatherer, that did but alienate a little of God's
time; and Ananias and Sapphira, that withheld but some part of their
estate: and if Belshazzar for abusing the consecrated vessels of the
temple, were so grievously punished; how much more will God punish those
that alienate themselves from the service of that God to whom they have
sworn to be obedient? It is observed by a learned author, of the famous
commanders of the Romans, that they never prospered after they had
defiled and robbed the temple of Jerusalem. First, Pompey the Great,
went into the _sanctum sanctorum_, a place never before entered by any
but the high-priest, and the Lord blasted him in all his proceedings,
"that he that before that time wanted earth to overcome, had not at last
earth enough to bury him withal." The next was Crassus, who took away
10,000 talents of gold from the temple, and afterward died, by having
gold poured down his throat. The third was Cassius, who afterwards
killed himself. If then God did thus avenge Himself of those that
polluted His consecrated temple; much more will He not leave them
unpunished, that are the living temples of the Holy Ghost, consecrated
to God by covenant, and afterwards proving sacrilegious, robbing God of
that worship and service, which they have sworn to give Him.

The Fifth reason why this sin makes the times perilous, is; Because
covenant-breakers are reckoned amongst the number of those that have the
mark of reprobation upon them. I do not say that they are all
reprobates, yet I say, that the apostle makes it to be one of those sins
which are committed by those that are given up "to a reprobate mind."
The words are spoken of the heathen, and are to be understood of
covenants made between man and man; and then the argument will hold _a
fortiori_. If it be the brand of a reprobate to break covenant with man,
much more a covenant made with the great Jehovah by the lifting up of
our hands to heaven.

The Last reason is, because it is a sin against such infinite mercy. It
is said, "Which my covenant they brake, although I was an husband unto
them;" that is, although I had chosen them for my spouse, and married
myself unto them with an everlasting covenant of mercy, and entailed
heaven unto them, yet they have broken my covenant. This was a great
provocation. Thus, "When thou wast in thy blood, and no eye pitied thee,
to have compassion upon thee, I said unto thee when thou wast in thy
blood, Live: Yea, I said unto thee, Live." It is twice repeated. As if
God should say, "Mark it, O Israel, when no eye regarded thee, then I
said unto thee, Live." Behold, saith God, "Thy time was the time of
love." Behold, and wonder at it. "And I spread my skirt over thee, and
covered thy nakedness: yea, I sware unto thee, and entered into covenant
with thee, saith the Lord, and thou becamest Mine." And yet for all
this, thou has sinned grievously against Me. "Wo, wo unto thee, saith
the Lord God."

There is a fivefold mercy in the covenant, especially in the covenant of
grace, that makes the sin of covenant-breaking to be so odious.

1. It is a mercy that the great God will vouchsafe to enter into
covenant with dust and ashes. As David saith in another case, "Is it a
light thing to be the son-in-law of a king?" So may I say, "Is it a
light matter for the Lord of heaven and earth to condescend so far as to
covenant with His poor creatures, and thereby to become their debtors,
and to make them, as it were, His equals?" When Jonathan and David
entered into a covenant of friendship, though one was a king's son, the
other a poor shepherd, yet there was a kind of equality between them.
But this must be understood warily, according to the text. "Blessed be
God, who hath called us unto the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ our
Lord." He is still our Lord, though in fellowship with us. It is a
covenant of infinite condescension on God's part, whereby He enters into
a league of friendship with His people.

2. The mercy is the greater, because this covenant was made after the
fall of Adam. After we had broken the first covenant, that the Lord
should try us the second time, is not only an act of infinite goodness
of God, but of infinite mercy. There is a difference between the
goodness and the mercy of God. Goodness may be shewed to those that are
not in misery: but mercy supposeth misery. And this was our condition
after the breach of the first covenant.

3. That God should make this covenant with man, and not with devils.

4. This sets out the mercy of the covenant, because it contains such
rare and glorious benefits, and therefore it is called a covenant of
life and peace. "An everlasting covenant even the sure mercies of
David." It is compared to the waters of Noah, Isa. liv. 6. Famous are
those two texts; Exod. xix. 5, 6; Jer. xxxii. 40, 41--texts that hold
forth strong consolation. By virtue of the covenant, heaven is not only
made possible, but certain to all believers, and certain by way of oath.
It is by virtue of the covenant that we call Him Father, and may lay
claim to all the power, wisdom, goodness and mercy, that are in God. As
Jehoshaphat told the king of Israel, to whom he was joined in covenant,
"I am as thou art, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses:" so
doth God say to all that are in covenant with Him, "My power is thine,
My holiness is thine." By virtue of this covenant, whatsoever thou
wantest, God cannot deny it thee, if it be good for thee. Say unto God,
Lord, Thou hast sworn to take away my heart of stone, and to give me a
heart of flesh, Thou hast sworn to write Thy law in my heart, Thou hast
sworn to circumcise my heart, Thou hast sworn to give me Christ, to be
my king, priest and prophet. And God cannot but be a covenant-keeper.
By virtue of this covenant, God cannot but accept of a poor penitent
sinner, laying hold upon Christ for pardon. In a word, we may challenge
pardon and heaven by our covenant. God is not only merciful but just to
forgive us; we may challenge heaven through Christ, out of justice. And

5. That the condition of the covenant on our part should be upon such
easy terms, therefore it is called a covenant of free grace, and all
that God requires of us is to take hold of this covenant; to receive
this gift of righteousness; to take all Christ, as He is tendered in the
covenant; and, that which is the greatest consolation of all, God hath
promised in His covenant to do our part for us. Therefore it is called a
testament, rather than a covenant. In the New Testament, the word
_diatheke_, is always used by the apostle, and not _syntheke_. Heaven is
conveyed into the elect by way of legacy. It is part of God's testament,
to write His law in our hearts, and to cause us to walk in His ways. Put
these together, seeing there is such infinite mercy in the covenant. A
mercy, for God to enter into covenant with us, to do it with us, and not
the angels; with us fallen, with us upon, such easy terms, and to make
such a covenant that contains so many, and not only so but all blessings
here and hereafter, in the womb of it. It must needs be a
land-destroying, and soul-destroying sin, to be a covenant-breaker.

The use and application of this doctrine is fourfold. 1. Of information.
If it be such a land-destroying sin to be a covenant-breaker, let us
from hence learn the true cause of all the miseries that have happened
unto England in these late years. The womb out of which all our
calamities are come--England hath broken covenant with God, and now God
is breaking England in pieces, even as a potter breaks a vessel in
pieces. "God hath sent His sword to avenge the quarrel of His covenant,"
as Christ whipped the buyers and sellers out of the temple, with whips
made of the cords which they had brought to tie their oxen and sheep
withal. A covenant is a cord to tie us to God; and now God hath made an
iron whip of that covenant which we have broken asunder, to whip us
withal.

We are a nation in covenant with God, we have the books of the covenant,
the Old and New Testament; we have the seals of the covenant, baptism,
and the Lord's supper; we have the messengers of the covenant, the
ministers of the Gospel; we have the angel of the covenant, the Lord
Jesus Christ, fully, freely, and clearly set out before us in the
ministry of the word: but alas! are not these blessings amongst us, as
the ark was amongst the Philistines, rather as prisoners, than as
privileges, rather _in testimonium et ruinam, quam in salutem_; rather
for our ruin, than for our happiness? May it not be said of us, as
reverend Mulin said of the French protestants, "While they burned us
(saith he) for reading the scriptures, we burned with zeal to be reading
of them; now with our liberty is bred also negligence and disesteem of
God's word." So is it with us, while we were under the tyranny of
bishops; Oh! how sweet was a fasting day? How beautiful were the feet of
them that brought the gospel of peace unto you? How dear and precious
were God's people one to another? But now, how are our fasting days
slighted and vilified? How are the people of God divided one from
another, railing upon (instead of loving) one another? And is not the
godly ministry as much persecuted by the tongues of some that would be
accounted godly, as heretofore by the bishop's hands? Is not the Holy
Bible by some rather wrested than read? Wrested, I say, by ignorant and
unstable souls, to their own destruction? And as for the seals of the
covenant, 1. For the Lord's supper, how oft have we spilt the blood of
Christ by our unworthy approaches to His table? And hence it is, that He
is now spilling our blood; how hard a matter is it, to obtain power to
keep the blood of Christ from being profaned by ignorant and scandalous
communicants? And can we think, that God will be easily entreated to
sheath up His bloody sword, and to cease shedding our blood? 2. For the
sacrament of baptism; how cruel are men grown to their little infants,
by keeping of them from the seal of entrance into the kingdom of heaven,
and making their children to be just in the same condition with the
children of Turks and Infidels? I remember, at the beginning of these
wars there was a great fear fell upon godly people about their little
children, and all their care was for their preservation and their
safety; and for the continuance of the gospel to them. But now, our
little children are likely to be in a worse condition than ever. And all
this is come upon us as a just punishment of our baptismal
covenant-breaking. And as for Jesus Christ, who is the angel of the
covenant: are there not some amongst us that ungod Jesus Christ? And is
it not fit and equal that God should unchurch us and unpeople us? Are
there not thousands that have sworn to be Christ's servants, and yet are
in their lives the vassals of sin and Satan? And shall not God be
avenged of such a nation as this? These things considered, it is no
wonder our miseries are so great, but the wonder is that they are not
greater.

2. An use of examination. Days of humiliation ought to be days of
self-examination. Let us therefore upon such a day as this, examine,
whether we be not amongst the number of those that make the times
perilous, whether we be not covenant-breakers? Here I will speak of
three covenants; 1. Of the covenant we have made with God in our
baptism. 2. Of the covenant we have made with God in our distresses. 3.
And especially of this covenant you are to renew this day.

1. Of the covenant which we made in baptism, and renew every time we
come to the Lord's supper, and upon our solemn days of fasting. There
are none here, but I may say of them, "the vows of God are upon you."
You are _servi nati, empti, jurati_, you are the born, bought, and sworn
servants of God, you have made a surrender of yourselves unto God and
Christ. The question I put to you is this: How often have you broken
covenant with God? It is said, "The sinners in Zion are afraid; who
shall dwell with everlasting torments? Who shall dwell with devouring
fire?" When God comes to a church-sinner, to a sinner under the Old
Testament, much more to a Christian sinner, a sinner under the New
Testament, and layeth to his charge his often covenant-breaking,
fearfulness shall possess him, and he will cry out, "Oh! woe is me, who
can dwell with everlasting burnings? Our God is a consuming fire, and we
are as stubble before Him; who can stand before His indignation? Who can
abide in the fierceness of His anger? When His fury is poured forth like
fire, and the rocks are thrown down before Him. Who can stand?" Of all
sorts of creatures, a sinful Christian shall not be able to stand before
the Lord, when He comes to visit the world for their sins. For when a
Christian sins against God, he sins not only against the commandment but
against the covenant. And in every sin he is a commandment-breaker, and
a covenant-breaker. And therefore, whereas the apostle saith,
"tribulation and anguish upon every soul that sinneth: but first upon
the Jews," I may add, first, upon the Christian, then upon the Jew, and
then upon the Grecian, because the covenant made with the Christian is
called a better covenant: and therefore his sins have a higher
aggravation in them. There is a notable passage in Austin, in which he
brings in the devil thus pleading with God, against a wicked Christian
at the day of judgment. Oh! Thou righteous Judge, give righteous
judgment; judge him to be mine who refused to be Thine, even after he
had renounced me in his baptism; what had he to do to wear my livery?
What had he to do with gluttony, drunkenness, pride, wantonness,
incontinency, and the rest of my ware? All these things he hath
practised, since he renounced the devil and all his works. Mine he is,
judge righteous judgment; for he whom Thou hast not disdained to die
for, hath obliged himself to me by his sins.

Now, what can God say to this charge of the devil's, but take him,
devil, seeing he would be thine; take him, torment him with everlasting
torments. Cyprian brings in the devil thus speaking to Christ in the
great day of judgment. I have not (saith the devil) been whipped, and
scourged, and crucified, neither have I shed my blood for those whom
Thou seest with me; I do not promise them a kingdom of heaven, and yet
these men have wholly consecrated themselves to me and my service.
Indeed, if the devil could make such gainful covenants with us, and
bestow such glorious mercies upon us as are contained within the
covenant, our serving of Satan and sin might have some excuse. But,
whereas his covenant is a covenant of bondage, death, hell, and
damnation; and God's covenant is a covenant of liberty, grace, and
eternal happiness, it must needs be a sin inexcusable to be willingly
and wilfully such a covenant-breaker.

2. Let us examine concerning the vows which we have made to God in our
distresses; in our personal distresses, and our national distresses. Are
we not like the children of Israel, of whom it is said, "When He slew
them, then they sought Him, and they returned and inquired early after
God. Nevertheless they did flatter Him with their mouth. For their heart
was not right with Him, neither were they stedfast in His covenant." Are
we not like little children that, while they are being whipped, will
promise any thing; but, when the whipping is over, will perform nothing?
Or like unto iron that is very soft and malleable while it is in the
fire, but, when it is taken out of the fire, returns presently to its
former hardness? This was Jacob's fault: he made a vow when he was in
distress, but he forgot his covenant, and God was angry with him, and
chastised him in his daughter, Dinah, and in his two sons, Simeon and
Levi; and at last God Himself was fain to call him from heaven to keep
covenant; and after that time God blessed Jacob exceedingly. We read of
David, that he professes of himself, "That he would go to God's house,
and pay the vows which his lips uttered, and his mouth had spoken, when
he was in trouble." But, how few are there that imitate David in this
thing.

3. Let us examine ourselves concerning this Solemn League and Covenant
which we are to renew this day. And here I demand an answer to this
question. Quest. Are we not covenant-breakers? Do we not make the times
perilous by our falsifying of our oath and covenant with God? In our
covenant we swear to six things.

1. "That we will endeavour to be humbled for our own sins, and for the
sins of the kingdom:" But where shall we find a mourner in England for
his own abominations, and for the abominations that are committed in the
midst of us? It is easy to find a censurer of the sins of the land, but
hard to find a true mourner for the sins of the land.

2. We swear "that we will endeavour to go before one another in the
example of a real reformation." But who makes conscience of this part of
the oath? What sin hast thou left, or in what one thing hast thou
reformed since thou didst take this covenant? We read, "That they
entered into a covenant to put away their wives and children by them,"
which was a very difficult and hard duty, and yet they did it. But what
bosom-sin, what beloved sin, as dear to thee as thy dear wife and
children, hast thou left for God's sake, since thou tookest this oath? I
read, That the people took an oath to make restitution, which was a
costly duty, and yet they performed it. But alas! where is the man that
hath made restitution of his ill-gotten goods since he took this
covenant? I read, that king Asa deposed his mother Maachah, her even,
from being queen, after he had entered into covenant: and that the
people, after they had sworn a covenant, brake in pieces all the altars
of Baal thoroughly. But where is this thorough reformation. We say, we
fight for a reformation, but I fear lest in a little time, we fight away
our reformation. Or, if we fight it not away, yet we should dispute it
away. For all our religion is turned into questions, in so much that
there are some that call all religion into question, and in a little
while will lose all religion in the crowd of questions. There was a time
not many years ago, when God did bless our ministry in the city, to the
conversion of many people unto God; but now there are many that study
more to gain parties to themselves, than to gain souls to God. The great
work of conversion is little thought on, and never so few, if any at
all, converted as in these days wherein we talk so much of reformation.
And is this to keep covenant with God?

3. We swear "to endeavour to amend our lives, and reform not only
ourselves, but also those that are under our charge." But where is that
family reformation? Indeed I read of Jacob that when he went to perform
his vow and covenant, he first reformed his family. And that Joshua
resolved, and performed it, "for himself and his family to serve the
Lord." And so did Josiah. And oh! that I could add, And so do we. But
the wickedness committed in our families proclaims the contrary to all
the world. What noblemen, what aldermen, what merchants, families, are
more reformed since the covenant than before? We speak and contend much
for a church-reformation, but how can there be a church-reformation,
unless there be a family-reformation? What though the church-worship be
pure, yet if the worshippers be impure, God will not accept of the
worship? And if families be not reformed, how will your worshippers be
pure?

4. We swear to endeavour "to bring the churches of God in the three
kingdoms to the nearest uniformity in religion confession of faith, form
of church government, directory for worship, and catechising." But are
there not some that write against an uniformity in religion, and call it
an idol? Are there not many that walk professedly contrary to this
clause of the covenant? There are three texts of scripture that people
keep quite the contrary way. The first is, "Take no thought what ye
shall eat; take no thought for to-morrow." And most people take thought
for nothing else. The second is, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God and
His righteousness;" and most people seek this last of all. The third
text is, "Labour not for the meat that perisheth, but for the meat that
endureth for ever;" and most people labour not for the meat that
endureth for ever, but for the meat that perisheth. As these three texts
are kept, so do many people keep this part of the oath; for there were
never more divisions and differences in the church, never more
deformity, and pleading against uniformity, than now there is.

5. We swear "to endeavour the extirpation of popery, prelacy,
superstition, heresy, and schism." And yet, notwithstanding, there are
some that have taken the oath that contend earnestly for a toleration of
all religions.

6. We swear "against a detestable indifferency and neutrality in this
cause, which so much concerneth the glory of God." And yet how many are
there amongst us like unto Gallio, that care not what becomes of the
cause of God, so they may have peace and quiet? That will not be the
backwardest of all, and yet will be sure not to be too forward; for fear
lest, if the times turn, they should be noted amongst the chief of the
faction? That are very indifferent which side prevail, so they may have
their trading again? That say as the politicians say, That they would be
careful not to come too near the heels of religion, lest it should dash
out their brains: and as the king of Arragon told Beza, That he would
wade no further into the sea of religion, than he could safely return to
shore. In all these six particulars, let us seriously search and try our
hearts, whether we be not among the number of those that make the times
perilous.

The third use is for humiliation. Let the consideration of our
covenant-breaking be a heart-breaking consideration to every one of us
this day: let this be a mighty and powerful argument to humble us upon
this day of humiliation. There are five considerations that are
exceedingly soul-humbling, if God bless them to us.

1. The consideration of the many commandments of God, that we have often
and often broken. 2. The consideration of the breaking of Jesus Christ
for our sins, how He was rent and torn for our iniquities. 3. The
consideration of the breaking of the bread, and pouring out of the wine
in the sacrament, which is a heart-breaking motive and help. 4. The
broken condition that the kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland, and
Germany, are in at this time. 5. The many vows and covenants that we
have broken; our sacrament-covenants, our fasting-covenants, our
sick-bed covenants; and especially the consideration of our often
breaking our national covenant, which you come this day to renew. This
is a sin in folio, a sin of a high nature: and if ever God awaken our
conscience in this life, a sin that will lie like a heavy _incubus_ upon
it. A greater sin than to sin against a commandment, or against an
ordinance. A sin not only of disobedience, but of perjury; a sin of
injustice, of spiritual adultery, a sin of sacrilege, a sin of great
unkindness, a sin that not only makes us disobedient, but dishonest; for
we account him a dishonest man, that keeps not his word. A sin that not
only every good Christian, but every good heathen doth abhor; a sin that
not only brings damnation upon us, but casteth such an horrible disgrace
and reproach upon God, that it cannot stand with God's honour not to be
avenged of a covenant-breaker. Tertullian saith, "That when a Christian
forsakes his covenant, and the colours of Christ, and turns to serve as
the devil's soldier, he puts an unspeakable discredit upon God and
Christ." For it is as much as if he should say, "I like the service of
the devil better than the service of God." And it is just as if a
soldier that hath waged war under a captain, and afterwards forsakes
him, and turns to another; and after that, leaves this other captain,
and turns to his former captain. This is to prefer the first captain
before the second. This makes God complain, "What iniquity have your
fathers found in Me, that they have gone far from Me?" And, "Hath any
nation changed their god, which yet are no gods? But My people have
changed their glory for that which doth not profit." Basil brings in the
devil insulting over Christ, and saying, "I never created nor redeemed
these men, and yet they have obeyed me and contemned Thee, O Christ,
even after they have covenanted to be Thine." And then he adds, "I
esteem this honouring of the devil over Jesus Christ at the great day,
to be more grievous to a true saint than all the torments in hell." A
saying worthy to be written in letters of gold. Seeing then that
covenant-breaking is so great an abomination, the Lord give us hearts to
be humbled for this great abomination this day. And this will be a
notable preparation to fit you for the renewing of your covenant. For we
read, that Nehemiah first called his people to fast before he drew them
unto a covenant: according to which pattern, you are here met to pray
and humble your souls for your former covenant-breaking; and then to
bind yourselves anew unto the Lord our God. As wax, when it is melted,
will receive the impression of a seal, which it will not do before: so
will your hearts, when melted into godly sorrow for our sins, receive
the seal of God abidingly upon them which they will not do when hardened
