Brahmana. Methinks he is a man of men, and a lord of earth. He hath
neither slaves, nor cars, nor elephants with him, yet he shineth like
the very Indra. The marks on his person indicate him to be one whose
coronal locks have undergone the sacred investiture. Even this is my
belief. He approacheth me without any hesitation, even as an elephant in
rut approacheth an assemblage of lotuses!'

"And as the king was indulging in these thoughts, that bull among men,
Yudhishthira, came before Virata and addressed him, saying, 'O great
king, know me for a Brahmana who, having lost his all hath come to thee
for the means of subsistence. I desire, O sinless one, to live here
beside thee acting under thy commands,[11] O lord.' The king then,
well-pleased, replied unto him saying, 'Thou art welcome. Do thou then
accept the appointment thou seekest!' And having appointed the lion
among kings in the post he had prayed for, king Virata addressed him
with a glad heart, saying, 'O child, I ask thee from affection, from the
dominions of what king dost thou come hither? Tell me also truly what is
thy name and family, and what thou hast a knowledge of.'

    [11] _Kamachara_ is explained by Nilakantha thus, although in
    other places it bears a quite different meaning.

"Yudhishthira said, 'My name is Kanka, and I am a Brahmana belonging to
the family known by the name of _Vaiyaghra_. I am skilled in casting
dice, and formerly I was a friend of Yudhishthira.'

"Virata replied, 'I will grant thee whatever boon thou mayst desire. Do
thou rule the Matsyas.--I shall remain in submission to thee. Even
cunning gamblers are liked by me. Thou, on the other hand, art like a
god, and deservest a kingdom.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'My first prayer, O lord of earth, is that I may not
be involved in any dispute (on account of dice) with low people.
Further, a person defeated by me (at dice) shall not be permitted to
retain the wealth (won by me). Let this boon be granted to me through
thy grace.'

"Virata replied, 'I shall certainly slay him who may happen to displease
thee, and should he be one of the twice-born ones, I shall banish him
from my dominions. Let the assembled subjects listen! Kanka is as much
lord of this realm as I myself. Thou (Kanka) shalt be my friend and
shalt ride the same vehicles as I. And there shall also be at thy
disposal apparel in plenty, and various kinds of viands and drinks. And
thou shalt look into my affairs, both internal and external. And for
thee all my doors shall be open. When men out of employ or of strained
circumstances will apply to thee, do thou at all hours bring their words
unto me, and I will surely give them whatever they desire. No fear shall
be thine as long as thou residest with me.'"

Vaisampayana said, "Having thus obtained an interview with Virata's
king, and received from him boons, that heroic bull among men, began to
live happily, highly regarded by all. Nor could any one discover him as
he lived there."


SECTION VIII

Vaisampayana said, "Then another endued with the dreadful strength and
blazing in beauty, approached king Virata, with the playful gait of the
lion. And holding in hand a cooking ladle and a spoon, as also an
unsheathed sword of sable hue and without a spot on the blade, he came
in the guise of a cook illumining all around him by his splendour like
the sun discovering the whole world. And attired in black and possessed
of the strength of the king of mountains, he approached the king of the
Matsyas and stood before him. And beholding that king-like person before
him, Virata addressed his assembled subjects saying, 'Who is that youth,
that bull among men, with shoulders broad like those of a lion, and so
exceedingly beautiful? That person, never seen before, is like the sun.
Revolving the matter in my mind, I cannot ascertain who he is, nor can I
with even serious thoughts guess the intention of that bull among men
(in coming here). Beholding him, it seems to me that he is either the
king of the Gandharvas, or Purandara himself. Do ye ascertain who it is
that standeth before my eyes. Let him have quickly what he seeks.' Thus
commanded by king Virata, his swift-footed messengers went up to the son
of Kunti and informed that younger brother of Yudhishthira of everything
the king had said. Then the high-souled son of Pandu, approaching
Virata, addressed him in words that were not unsuited to his object,
saying, 'O foremost of kings, I am a cook, Vallava by name. I am skilled
in dressing dishes. Do thou employ me in the kitchen!'

"Virata said, 'I do not believe, O Vallava, that cooking is thy office.
Thou resemblest the deity of a thousand eyes; and in grace and beauty
and prowess, thou shinest among these all as a king!'

"Bhima replied, 'O king of kings, I am thy cook and servant in the first
place. It is not curries only of which I have knowledge, O monarch,
although king Yudhishthira always used in days gone by to taste my
dishes. O lord of earth, I am also a wrestler. Nor is there one that is
equal to me in strength. And engaging in fight with lions and elephants,
I shall, O sinless one, always contribute to thy entertainment.'

"Virata said, 'I will even grant thee boons. Thou wilt do what thou
wishest, as thou describest thyself skilled in it. I do not, however,
think, that this office is worthy of thee, for thou deservest this
(entire) earth girt round by the sea. But do as thou likest. Be thou the
superintendent of my kitchen, and thou art placed at the head of those
who have been appointed there before by me.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus appointed in the kitchen, Bhima soon
became the favourite of king Virata. And, O king, he continued to live
there unrecognised by the other servants of Virata as also by other
people!"


SECTION IX

Vaisampayana said, "Binding her black, soft, fine, long and faultless
tresses with crisped ends into a knotted braid, Draupadi of black eyes
and sweet smiles, throwing it upon her right shoulders, concealed it by
her cloth. And she wore a single piece of a black and dirty though
costly cloth. And dressing herself as a _Sairindhri_, she began to
wander hither and thither in seeming affliction. And beholding her
wandering, men and women came to her hastily and addressed her, saying,
'Who are you? And what do you seek?' And she replied, 'I am a king's
_Sairindhri_. I desire to serve any one that will maintain me.' But
beholding her beauty and dress, and hearing also her speech that was so
sweet, the people could not take her for a maid-servant in search of
subsistence. And it came to pass that while looking this way and that
from the terrace, Virata's beloved queen, daughter of the king of
Kekaya, saw Draupadi. And beholding her forlorn and clad in a single
piece of cloth, the queen addressed her saying, 'O beautiful one, who
are you, and what do you seek?' Thereupon, Draupadi answered her,
saying, 'O foremost of queens, I am _Sairindhri_. I will serve anybody
that will maintain me.' Then Sudeshna said, 'What you say (regarding
your profession) can never be compatible with so much beauty. (On the
contrary) you might well be the mistress of servants both, male and
female. Your heels are not prominent, and your thighs touch each other.
And your intelligence is great, and your navel deep, and your words
solemn. And your great toes, and bust and hips, and back and sides, and
toe-nails, and palms are all well-developed. And your palms, soles, and
face are ruddy. And your speech is sweet even as the voice of the swan.
And your hair is beautiful, and your bust shapely, and you are possessed
of the highest grace. And your hips and bust are plump. And like a
Kashmerean mare you are furnished with every auspicious mark. And your
eye-lashes are (beautiful) bent, and your nether-lip is like the ruddy
ground. And your waist is slender, and your neck bears lines that
resemble those of the conch. And your veins are scarcely visible.
Indeed, your countenance is like the full moon, and your eyes resemble
the leaves of the autumnal lotus, and your body is fragrant as the lotus
itself. Verily, in beauty you resemble _Sri_ herself, whose seat is the
autumnal lotus. Tell me, O beautiful damsel, who thou art. Thou canst
never be a maidservant. Art thou a _Yakshi_, a Goddess, a _Gandharvi_,
or an _Apsara_? Art thou the daughter of a celestial, or art thou a
female _Naga_? Art thou the guardian goddess of some city, a
_Vidyadhari_, or a _Kinnari_,--or art thou _Rohini_ herself? Or art thou
Alamvusha, or Misrakesi, Pundarika, or Malini, or the queen of Indra, or
of Varuna? Or, art thou the spouse of Viswakarma, or of the creative
Lord himself? Of these goddesses who art renowned in the celestial
regions, who art thou, O graceful one?'

"Draupadi replied, 'O auspicious lady, I am neither a goddess nor a
_Gandharvi_, nor a _Yakshi_, nor a _Rakshasi_. I am a maid-servant of
the _Sairindhri_ class. I tell thee this truly. I know to dress the
hair, to pound (fragrant substances) for preparing unguents, and also to
make beautiful and variegated garlands, O beauteous lady, of jasmines
and lotuses and blue lilies and _Champakas_. Formerly I served Krishna's
favourite queen Satyabhama, and also Draupadi, the wife of the Pandavas
and the foremost beauty of the Kuru race. I wander about alone, earning
good food and dress; and as long as I get these, I continue to live in
the place where they are obtainable. Draupadi herself called me Malini
(maker of garlands).'

"Hearing this, Sudeshna said, 'I would keep thee upon my head itself, if
the doubt did not cross my mind that the king himself would be attracted
towards thee with his whole heart. Attracted by thy beauty, the females
of the royal household and my maids are looking at thee. What male
person then is there that can resist thy attraction? Surely, O thou of
well-rounded hips, O damsel of exquisite charms, beholding thy form of
superhuman beauty, king Virata is sure to forsake me, and will turn to
thee with his whole heart. O thou of faultless limbs, O thou that art
endued with large eyes casting quick glances, he upon whom thou wilt
look with desire is sure to be stricken. O thou of sweet smiles, O thou
that possessest a faultless form, he that will behold thee constantly,
will surely catch the flame. Even as a person that climbs up a tree for
compassing his own destruction, even as the crab conceives for her own
ruin, I may, O thou of sweet smiles, bring destruction upon myself by
harbouring thee.'

"Draupadi replied, 'O fair lady, neither Virata nor any other person
will be able to have me, for my five youthful husbands, who are
_Gandharvas_ and sons of a _Gandharva_ king of exceeding power, always
protect me. None can do me a wrong. It is the wish of my _Gandharva_
husbands that I should serve only such persons as will not give me to
touch food already partaken of by another, or tell me to wash their
feet. Any man that attempts to have me like any common woman, meeteth
with death that very night. No one can succeed in having me, for, O
beautiful lady, O thou of sweet smiles, those beloved _Gandharvas_,
possessed of great energy and mighty strength always protect me
secretly.'

"Sudeshna said, 'O thou that bringest delight to the heart, if it is as
thou sayest, I will take thee into my household. Thou shalt not have to
touch food that hath been partaken of by another, or to wash another's
feet.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Virata's wife, O Janamejaya,
Krishna (Draupadi) ever devoted to her lords, began to live in that
city. Nor could anyone ascertain who in reality she was!"


SECTION X

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then clad in a cowherd's dress, and speaking the
dialect of cowherds, Sahadeva came to the cowpen of Virata's city. And
beholding that bull among men, who was shining in splendour, the king
was struck with amazement. And he directed his men to summon Sahadeva.
And when the latter came, the king addressed him, saying, 'To whom dost
thou belong? And whence dost thou come? And what work dost thou seek? I
have never seen thee before. O bull among men, tell me truly about
thee.'

"Having come before the king that afflicter of foes, Sahadeva answered
in accents deep as the roar of the cloud, 'I am a Vaisya, Arishtanemi by
name. I was employed as a cowherd in the service of those bulls of the
Kuru race, the sons of Pandu. O foremost of men, I intend now to live
beside thee, for I do not know where those lions among kings, the sons
of Pritha, are. I cannot live without service, and, O king, I do not
like to enter into the service of anyone else save thee.'

"Hearing these words, Virata said, 'Thou must either be a Brahmana or a
Kshatriya. Thou lookest as if thou wert the lord of the entire earth
surrounded by the sea. Tell me truly, O thou that mowest down thy foes.
The office of a Vaisya is not fit for thee. Tell me from the dominions
of what king thou comest, and what thou knowest, and in what capacity
thou wouldst remain with us, and also what pay thou wouldst accept.'

"Sahadeva answered, 'Yudhishthira, the eldest of the five sons of Pandu,
had one division of kine numbering eight hundred and ten thousand, and
another, ten thousand, and another, again, twenty thousand, and so on. I
was employed in keeping those cattle. People used to call me Tantripala.
I know the present, the past, and the future of all kine living within
ten _Yojanas_, and whose _tale_ has been taken. My merits were known to
that illustrious one, and the Kuru king Yudhishthira was well-pleased
with me. I am also acquainted with the means which aid kine in
multiplying within a short time, and by which they may enjoy immunity
from disease. Also these arts are known to me. I can also single out
bulls having auspicious marks for which they are worshipped by men, and
by smelling whose urine, the barren may conceive.'

"Virata said, 'I have a hundred thousand kine divided into distinct
herds. All those together with their keepers, I place in thy charge.
Henceforth my beasts will be in thy keep.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then, O king, undiscovered by that monarch,
that lord of men, Sahadeva, maintained by Virata, began to live happily.
Nor did anyone else (besides his brothers) recognise him."


SECTION XI

"Vaisampayana said, 'Next appeared at the gate of the ramparts another
person of enormous size and exquisite beauty decked in the ornaments of
women, and wearing large ear-rings and beautiful conch-bracelets
overlaid with gold. And that mighty-armed individual with long and
abundant hair floating about his neck, resembled an elephant in gait.
And shaking the very earth with his tread, he approached Virata and
stood in his court. And beholding the son of the great Indra, shining
with exquisite lustre and having the gait of a mighty elephant,--that
grinder of foes having his true form concealed in disguise, entering the
council-hall and advancing towards the monarch, the king addressed all
his courtiers, saying, 'Whence doth this person come? I have never heard
of him before.' And when the men present spoke of the newcomer as one
unknown to them, the king wonderingly said, 'Possessed of great
strength, thou art like unto a celestial, and young and of darkish hue,
thou resemblest the leader of a herd of elephants. Wearing
conch-bracelets overlaid with gold, a braid, and ear-rings, thou shinest
yet like one amongst those that riding on chariots wander about equipped
with mail and bow and arrows and decked with garlands and fine hair. I
am old and desirous of relinquishing my burden. Be thou like my son, or
rule thou like myself all the Matsyas. It seemeth to me that such a
person as thou can never be of the neuter sex.'

"Arjuna said, 'I sing, dance, and play on instruments. I am proficient
in dance and skilled in song. O lord of men, assign me unto (the
princess) Uttara. I shall be dancing-master to the royal maiden. As to
how I have come by this form, what will it avail thee to hear the
account which will only augment my pain? Know me, O king of men, to be
Vrihannala, a son or daughter without father or mother.'

"Virata said, 'O Vrihannala, I give thee what thou desirest. Instruct my
daughter, and those like her, in dancing. To me, however, this office
seemeth unworthy of thee. Thou deservest (the dominion of) the entire
earth girt round by the ocean.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "The king of the Matsyas then tested Vrihannala
in dancing, music, and other fine arts, and consulting with his various
ministers forthwith caused him to be examined by women. And learning
that this impotency was of a permanent nature, he sent him to the
maiden's apartments. And there the mighty Arjuna began giving lessons in
singing and instrumental music to the daughter of Virata, her friends,
and her waiting-maids, and soon won their good graces. And in this
manner the self-possessed Arjuna lived there in disguise, partaking of
pleasures in their company, and unknown to the people within or without
the palace."


SECTION XII

Vaisampayana said, "After a while, another powerful son of Pandu was
seen making towards king Virata in haste. And as he advanced, he seemed
to everyone like solar orb emerged from the clouds. And he began to
observe the horses around. And seeing this, the king of the Matsyas said
to his followers, 'I wonder whence this man, possessed of the effulgence
of a celestial, cometh. He looks intently at my steeds. Verily, he must
be proficient in horse-lore. Let him be ushered into my presence
quickly. He is a warrior and looks like a god!' And that destroyer of
foes then went up to the king and accosted him, saying, 'Victory to
thee, O king, and blest be ye. As a trainer of horses, I have always
been highly esteemed by kings. I will be a clever keeper of thy horses.'

"Virata said, 'I will give thee vehicles, wealth, and spacious quarters.
Thou shalt be the manager of my horses. But first tell me whence thou
comest, who thou art, and how also thou happenest to come here. Tell us
also all the arts thou art master of.' Nakula replied, 'O mower of
enemies, know that Yudhishthira is the eldest brother of the five sons
of Pandu. I was formerly employed by him to keep his horses. I am
acquainted with the temper of steeds, and know perfectly the art of
breaking them. I know also how to correct vicious horses, and all the
