     "Thou shalt love thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
     and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength."

     See also Luke XIII. 24: "Strive to enter in at the straight gate."

[Sidenote: (4) The Bee, XVI, 108, 111.]

     16. "Whoso after he hath believed in God denieth Him if he were
     forced to it, and if his heart remain steadfast in the faith, shall
     be guiltless; but whoso openeth his heart to infidelity--on them,
     in that case, shall be wrath from God, and a severe punishment
     awaiteth them."

     "To those also who after their trials fled their country, then
     (_Jahadoo_) toiled and endured with patience. Verily, thy Lord will
     afterwards be forgiving, gracious."

Dr. Sprenger (Life of Mohammad, p. 159) explains this verse of the seven
slaves purchased and manumitted by Abu Bekr. They had been tortured for
professing Islam, shortly after Mohammad assumed the prophetic office.
The flight referred to in verse 111th is the early Abyssinian flight.
These verses relate to the persecutions endured by humble and needy
Moslems from their townspeople of Mecca. These Moslems, after being
persecuted and forced as far as denying God, while their remaining
steadfast in the faith, had to flee elsewhere, and then suffered much in
their wanderings; but they endured their labours and fatigues, losses,
disadvantages both in body and mind, patiently. There is no allusion to
fighting or waging war. The Rev. Mr. Rodwell and Mr. Palmer are both
wrong in translating '_Jahadoo_' as fighting. Sale is right in not
translating it as fighting, but he is too paraphrastic when he
translates, "and who have since fought _in defence of the true
religion_," as their "Jihad" was only their great exertion and toil in
suffering from persecutions.

[Sidenote: (5) The Spider, XXIX, 5.]

     17. "And whoso ('_Jahada_') labours ('_Yojahido_') toils for his
     own good only. Verily God is independent of all the worlds."

Mr. Palmer is wrong in making _Jahada_ and _Yojahido_ to mean fighting
strenuously. Mr. Sale and the Rev. W. Rodwell are right in translating
by "striveth" and "efforts" respectively, and so is Sir W. Muir in
taking it into, what he styles, the general sense of the verse (The Life
of Mahomet, Vol. III, p. 32).

[Sidenote: (6) The Spider, XXIX, 7.]

     18. "Moreover We have enjoined on man to show kindness to parents,
     but if they (_Jahada_) strive with thee in order that thou join
     that with Me of which thou hast no knowledge, then obey them not.
     To Me do ye return, and I will tell you of your doings."

None of the commentators take the word _Jahada_ in this passage to mean
fighting or crusade, and it is difficult, therefore, to understand why
the word should have been distorted from its proper literal and
classical meaning in other places of the same book.

[Sidenote: (7) The Spider, XXIX, 69.]

     19. "And those who (_Jahadoo_) made efforts for Us, in our path
     will we surely guide; for verily God is with those who do righteous
     deeds."

Mr. Palmer translates the word here as meaning "fought," contrary to Mr.
Sale, the Rev. Mr. Rodwell, and Sir William Muir, who translate it
"endeavour," "effort," and "strive." The conventional term Jihad,
meaning crusade or warfare, was not in use in the time of the revelation
of the Koran.

[Sidenote: (8) The Bee, XVI, 40.]

     20. "And they swear by God with their (_Jahd_) utmost oaths that
     'God will never raise him who once is dead.' Nay; but on Him is a
     promise binding though most men know it not."

Sale renders the word "most solemnly;" Rodwell, "most sacred oath;"
Palmer, "most strenuous oath."

[Sidenote: (9) Creator, XXXV, 40.]

     21. "They swore by God with their (_Jahd_) utmost oath that should
     a preacher come to them they would yield to guidance more than any
     people: but when the preacher came to them, it only increased in
     them their estrangement."

Sale's rendering is "most solemn oath," Rodwell's, "mightiest oath," and
Palmer's, "most strenuous oath."

II.--THE MEDINITE SURAS.

[Sidenote: (10) The Cow or Heifer, II, 215.]

     22. "But they who believe, and who fly their country, and
     (_Jahadoo_) exert their utmost in the way of God, may hope for
     God's mercy, and God is Gracious and Merciful."

Mr. Sale and the Rev. Mr. Rodwell translate _Jahadoo_ as those who
_fight_, and Mr. Palmer as those who _wage war_; but there is no reason
to change the proper meaning of the word. Sir William Muir translates
the verse thus:--

     "But they that believe and they who emigrate for the sake of their
     faith and strive earnestly in the way of God, let them hope in the
     mercy of God, for God is forgiving, merciful."[330]

In a footnote he says:--"The word Jihad is the same as that subsequently
used for a religious war; but it had not yet probably acquired its fixed
application. It was employed in its _general_ sense before the Hejira,
and probably up to the battle of Badr."[331] I have only to add that the
word never acquired its fixed application during the lifetime of the
Prophet, nor is it used as such in any chapter of the Koran either
before or after the Hejira.

The connection of flight mentioned in the verse as put together with
Jihad, shows that it means the labour, toil, and distress which befel
the fugitives in leaving their families unprotected in the hands of
their persecutors on their expulsion from their country.

[Sidenote: (11) A'l Amran, III, 136.]

     23. "Do ye think that ye could enter Paradise without God taking
     knowledge of those among you who (_Jahadoo_) have toiled and of
     those who steadfastly endured."

The Rev. Mr. Rodwell translates _Jahadoo_, "did valiantly," and does not
agree with Sale and Palmer, who translate it, "fought strenuously," or
"fought well."

By the connection of enduring patiently, the word _Jahadoo_ probably
means those who toiled and suffered in their exile from Mecca.

[Sidenote: (12) The Spoils, VIII, 73.]

     24. "Verily, they who believe and have fled their homes and
     (_Jahadoo_) toiled with their substance and themselves in the way
     of God, and they who have taken in and have helped, shall be near
     of kin the one to the other. And they who have believed, but have
     not fled their homes, shall have no rights of kindred with you at
     all, _until_ they too fly their country. Yet if they seek aid from
     you, on account of the faith, your part is to give them aid, except
     against a people between whom and yourself there may be a treaty.
     And God beholdeth your actions."

     Sale renders the word _Jihad_ (or _Jahadoo_) in this passage as
       meaning "employed their substance and their persons in
       fighting."
     Rodwell ... "Spent their substance and themselves."
     Palmer ... "Fought strenuously with their wealth and person."

As the word _Jihad_ has been applied here to both one's-self and his
substance or wealth, it cannot mean "fighting," even if taken in the
technical signification.

[Sidenote: (13) The Spoil, VIII, 75.]

     25. "But as for those who have believed and fled their country and
     (_Jahadoo_) took pains in the way of God, and have been a refuge or
     help, these are the faithful, mercy is their due and a noble
     provision."

           Sale     ... "Fought."
           Rodwell  ... "Fought."
           Palmer   ... "Fought strenuously."

There is nothing in this passage to warrant a departure from the literal
and proper signification of the word _Jahadoo_, and using it in a
post-Koranic sense.

[Sidenote: (14) The Spoil, VIII, 76.]

     26. "And they who have believed and have since fled their country,
     (_Jahadoo_) toiled with you, these also are of you. Those who are
     united by the ties of blood are the nearest of kin to each other.
     This is in the Book of God. Verily God knoweth all things."

           Sale     ... "Fought."
           Rodwell  ... "Fought."
           Palmer   ... "Fought strenuously."

There is no valid excuse here for changing the signification of the word
_Jahadoo_ into that which is never used in the Koran or in the classical
Arabic.

[Sidenote: (15) The Cattle, VI, 109.]

     27. "With their (_Jahd_) most binding oath have they sworn by
     God...."

           Sale     ... "Most solemn oath."
           Rodwell  ... "Most binding oath."
           Palmer   ... "Most strenuous oath."

[Sidenote: (16) Mohammad, XLVII, 33]

     28. "And We will surely test you until We know (_Mojahideena_) who
     did their utmost, and who were the steadfast among you; and We will
     test the reports."

           Sale    ... "Who fight valiantly."
           Rodwell ... "Valiant."
           Palmer  ... "Fought valiantly."

"_Mojahid_" is not synonymous with "_Mokatil_"

[Sidenote: (17) Battle Array, LXI, 11.]

     29. "Believe in God and His Apostle and (_Jahidoo_) do strive in
     the way of God with your wealth and your persons!"

           Sale    ... "Who fought valiantly."
           Rodwell ... "Who fought valiantly."
           Palmer  ... "Fight strenuously."

Devotion or worship has been divided into two kinds,--bodily, which also
includes mental; and pecuniary or monetary, and the believers are
exhorted here to worship God both bodily and mentally.

[Sidenote: (18) Women, IV, 97.]

     30. "Those believers who sit at home free from trouble and those
     who (1, _Mojahidoona_) toil in the way of God with their substance
     and their persons shall not be treated alike. God has assigned to
     those who (2, _Majahadoona_) strive with their persons and with
     their substance a rank above those who sit at home. Goodly promises
     hath He made to all; but God hath assigned to those (3,
     _Mojahadina_) who make efforts a rich recompense above those who
     sit at home."

         Sale: _1st_ ... "Those who employ their fortune and their
                                 substance for the religion of God."

               _2nd_ ... "Those who employ their fortune and their
                                 substance."

               _3rd_ ... "Those who fight."

         Rodwell: _1st_ ... "Those who fight valiantly."

                  _2nd_ ... "Contend earnestly."

                  _3rd_ ... "Strenuous."

         Palmer:  _1st_ ... "Strenuous."

                  _2nd_ ... "Strenuous."

                  _3rd_ ... "Strenuous."

I have already explained the two sorts of worship or service of
God--bodily and mental. The same applies here too.

[Sidenote: (19) Light, XXIV, 52.]

     31. "And they swore by God with their utmost oath...."

           Sale    ... "Most solemn oath."

           Rodwell ... "Most solemn oath."

           Palmer  ... "Most strenuous oath."

[Sidenote: (20) The Forbidding, LXVI, 9.]

     32. "O Prophet, (_Jahid_) do thy utmost with the unbelievers and
     hypocrites, and be strict towards them."

           Sale    ... "Attack the infidels with arms and the
                         hypocrites with arguments."

           Rodwell ... "Make war."

           Palmer  ... "Fight strenuously."

[Sidenote: (21) The Immunity, IX, 74.]

     33. The same verse, word for word.

           Sale    ... "Wage war."

           Rodwell ... "Contend against."

           Palmer  ... "Strive strenuously."

The word _Jahid_ is the same in both the passages, yet the translators
differ in their interpretation of it. As there had been no war against
the hypocrites, the word cannot be held to bear the construction they
put on it, even if we deprived it of its proper signification. In one
place Sale takes _Jahid_ to mean "attacking with arms," and in another
he takes it in the sense of attacking with arguments.

There is no signification of "attacking" in _Jihad_, but only that of
"exerting," and the verse simply means, "exert thyself in preaching to,
and remonstrating with, the unbelievers and hypocrites, and also be
strict towards them,"--_i.e._, not to be smooth with them, nor to be
beguiled by them.[332]

[Sidenote: (22) The tried, LXI.]

     34. "O Ye believers! take not my foe and your foe for friends: ye
     show them kindness although they believe not that truth which hath
     come to you: they drive forth the Apostle and yourself because ye
     believe in God your Lord! If ye have come forth[333] (_Jihadan_)
     labouring in my cause, and from a desire to please Me, ye show them
     kindness in private, then I well know what ye conceal and what ye
     discover! And whoso of you doth this hath verily, therefore, gone
     astray from the even way."

     Sale translates _Jihadan_ as meaning "to fight in the
     defence of my religion."
     Rodwell ... "To fight on my path."
     Palmer  ... "Fighting strenuously."

The translators quoted above say that Hatib had informed the Meccans of
an intended surprise of Mecca on the part of Mohammad with the view of
making terms for his own family, which had been left there. On this
occasion the passage was revealed. This shows that the campaign of Mecca
is termed _Jihad_. But Sir William Muir does not agree with them. He
says in a footnote:--"The opening verses of the sixtieth Sura are said
to refer to Hatib; but they appear to have a general bearing against too
great intimacy with the Coreish during the truce and to be, therefore,
of a prior date."[334]

35. Hatib's story. The story regarding Hatib's revelation of the
intended attack upon Mecca by Mohammad, is not supported by authentic
and trustworthy traditions. The authentic tradition of Bokhari[335] only
states that the occasion of the verse being revealed was in the case of
Hatib, but does not say that it was during the campaign of Mecca, nor
that the information contained anything about the intended campaign. The
authentic tradition only says that the report contained information
regarding some of the affairs of the Prophet.

Besides this, it is wrong to translate _in kun tum kharajtum Jihadan fi
Sabili_, as "if ye go forth to fight in defence of my religion," or "if
ye go forth to fight on my path," or "if ye go forth fighting
strenuously in my cause." It simply means, "if you have come out
striving in my cause," and the sentence is a complement or correlative
of the verse, meaning, if you have come out of Mecca, striving, or to
strive, in my cause, suffering from exile and undergoing the afflictions
and distresses of living homeless, leaving your family and property
unprotected, and all these pains (_Jihad_) you have taken to please me,
then you should not make friends with my foes and your foes, who do not
believe in the truth which has come to you, and have driven out the
Prophet and yourselves (from Mecca, your home) only for the reason that
you believe in God your Lord.

[Sidenote: (23) The Apartment, XLIX, 15.]

     36. "The true believers are those only who believe in God and his
     Apostle and afterwards doubt not; and who (_Jahadoo_) strive with
     their substance and their persons on the path of God. These are the
     sincere."

     Sale here translates _Jahadoo_ those "who employ their substance
     and their persons in the defence of God's true religions."

     Rodwell ... "Contend with their substance and their persons."

     Palmer ... "Fight strenuously with their wealth and persons."

See my observations under No. 17, para. 28.

[Sidenote: (24) The Immunity, IX, 16.]

     37. "Think not that ye shall be forsaken and that God doth not yet
     know those among you who (_Jahadoo_) do their utmost and take none
     for their intimate friends besides God and His Apostles and the
     faithful. But God is well apprised of your doings."

           Sale    ... "Fought for his religion."

           Rodwell ... "Fought valiantly."

           Palmer  ... "Fought strenuously."

[Sidenote: (25) _Ibid_, 19.]

     38. "Do ye place the giving drink to the pilgrims and the
     visitation of the sacred temple on the same level with him who
     believeth in God and the last day, and (_Jahada_) taketh pains in
     the way of God. They are not held equal by God, and God guideth not
     the unrighteous."

           Sale    ... "Fighteth."

           Rodwell ... "Fighteth."

           Palmer  ... "Is strenuous."

[Sidenote: (26) The Immunity, IX, 20.]

     39. "They who have believed and fled their homes and (_Jahadoo_)
     toiled with their substance and with their persons on the path of
     God are of the highest degree with God, and these are they who
     shall enjoy felicity!"

           Sale ... "Employ their substance and their
             persons in the defence of God's true
             religion."

           Rodwell ... "And striven with their substance and
             with their persons in the path of
             God."

           Palmer ... "Been strenuous in the way of God
             with their wealth and their persons."

[Sidenote: (27) _Ibid_, 24.]

     40. "Say, if your father and your sons and your brethren and your
     wives, and your kindred and wealth which ye have gained, and
     merchandise which ye fear may be unsold, and dwellings wherein ye
     may delight be dearer to you than God and His Apostle and
     (_Jihadan_) toiling in My cause, then wait until God shall Himself
     enter on His work; God guideth not the impious."

           Sale ... "Advancement of his religion."

           Rodwell ... "Efforts on his path."

           Palmer ... "Fighting strenuously."

[Sidenote: (28) _Ibid_, 41.]

     41. "March ye forth light and heavy and (_Jahidoo_) toil with your
     substance and persons on the way of God. This, if ye knew it, will
     be best for you."

           Sale ... "Employ your substance and your persons
             for the advancement of God's
             true religion."

           Rodwell ... "Contend with your...."

           Palmer ... "Fight strenuously with your wealth
             and persons."

[Sidenote: (29) The Immunity, IX, 44.]

     42. "They who believe in God and in the last day will not ask leave
     to be exempt from (_Yojahadoo_) toiling with their substance and
     their persons. But God knoweth them that fear Him."

           Sale    ... "Employ their substance and their persons
                       for the advancement of God's
                       true religion."

           Rodwell ... "Contending with their substance and
                       persons."

           Palmer  ... "Fighting strenuously."

[Sidenote: (30) _Ibid_, 82.]
