soul, and that no true, solid, or constant peace can be found except in
Him. This cannot be learned any where but in this school of temptation; in
which alone the truest knowledge is to be acquired. And whosoever is
unacquainted with this, knows not God and Christ as they ought to be
known.

10. And would to God, that for his glory, and our own unspeakable
advantage, we would readily submit to this visitation, which is designed
for the trial of our faith, even as gold in the furnace is tried! Then we
should quickly reap the amazing benefits of such a cleansing. For the
faithful soul that can hold out, and not faint under it, comes forth
glorious as gold out of the fire, cleansed from all its dross; so that
neither fire, nor water, nor the cross, nor death, nor Satan, can hurt it.
Such a one will learn how to behave himself ever afterwards with patience
and humility, both in prosperity and adversity; not to sink under the
cross; not to be presumptuous in prosperity; not to depend upon himself,
or be puffed up with his own fancied perfections; but to look up
steadfastly to God, the everlasting fountain and giver of all goodness;
and to embrace every dispensation of Providence, whether sweet or bitter,
as his only happiness; and, in every state or condition of soul or body,
to rejoice in God alone.

11. Secondly, whensoever it shall please God to cast any of us, his
creatures, into this trying furnace, it will be much more consistent and
profitable for us to pray for patience under it, than for deliverance from
it. For when once the fire of temptation has purged away the dross of our
iniquities, our pride, luxury, covetousness, and envy, it will be much
easier for us to endure afterwards other fiery trials, by having our own
will swallowed up in the will and good pleasure of God. But when from an
excessive indulgence of the infirmities of our corrupt nature, we endeavor
to avoid this fiery trial, it often happens that before we can receive any
benefit from it, we are contriving to make our escape. So that if God did
not often keep us under the trial against our will, we should fly from it,
without considering whether we were sufficiently purified, according to
the will of God and the necessities of our corrupt nature: like children,
who, if their parents or physicians did not prevent, would throw away that
bitter cup which alone can cure their disorders. But God knows our case,
and what is proper for us, better than we ourselves; and therefore he has
appointed certain measures of affliction, to which he confines the soul,
till he sees it proper to release her. So that we ought not so much to
pray for deliverance from temptations, as for patience under them.

12. Thirdly, our deliverance is so certain, that we have not the least
reason to doubt of it; for "though the Lord cause grief, yet will he have
compassion, according to the multitude of his mercies." Lam. 3:32. This is
the promise of God, who is truth itself, and it therefore ought diligently
to be weighed and considered by us. It is much better to know and digest
some few comfortable passages of Scripture, or even only one of this kind,
than to burden our memory with a great many without true spiritual relish.
For when a man has by a lively faith digested one, he will easily
understand and digest all the rest; and he that can derive comfort from
_one_ text, will thereby learn to do the same by all the rest. It will be
very useful to repeat frequently, with lively affection, the 88th Psalm,
where thou wilt see the state of thy soul described. There thou wilt find
that there have been others in the world before thee, who have been tried
and afflicted as thou art, and yet have afterwards been delivered and
comforted of God, as we find in Psalm 89, where the holy man, rejoicing in
the divine comfort, begins, as in a rapture, "I will sing of the mercies
of the Lord for ever." Be thou confident, therefore, and believe that God
will also in due time comfort thee with the same consolation. For the Evil
spirit, who always delights to afflict the souls of men, has, from the
beginning of the world, made it his business to gall and wound them with
his fiery darts. As in a tempestuous sea one wave is continually rolling
upon another, so do the various temptations of Satan pursue the afflicted
soul; sometimes oppressing it with fearful and melancholy thoughts; at
others, with impatience, unbelief, blasphemous and wicked thoughts. The
terrors and miseries of such a soul are sometimes so great, that no
creature can give it comfort; yea, those very things which give joy and
delight to others, are to such a man, not only joyless, but burdensome.
The whole world is to him but one bitter cross; yea, even God himself
appears dreadful to him. Thus Job bitterly complains (chap. 7:13, etc.);
and the agony is increased by the sting of his own conscience, which
terrifies him with this dreadful sentence, "There is no help for thee in
thy God." Ps. 3:2.

13. Against these wiles of the devil there is no better remedy than to
endeavor to strengthen thyself after the examples of Job, David, and other
holy men. (1) By bearing thy affliction as long as it shall please God;
and waiting patiently till the clouds of darkness be driven away. Isa. 54:
11. "I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him, until he bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness." Micah 7:9. Where God afflicteth, it is in no man's power
to comfort. "The Lord killeth, and maketh alive; he bringeth down to the
grave, and bringeth up." 1 Sam. 2:6.

14. (2) We must, in this case, stop our ears against the opinions of the
world, and, with Job, disregard the accusations of our friends, the
terrors of the devil, who is the enemy of all peace and comfort, the
reflections of our own hearts, the stings of our own consciences, and all
the objections of flesh and blood. For, "if our heart condemn us, God is
greater than our heart" (1 John 3:20), yea, than all the world, or the
devil himself. Rather call to mind what God himself has promised to such
afflicted souls. "To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of
a contrite spirit." Isa. 66:2. "I have chosen thee in the furnace of
affliction." Isa. 48:10.

15. (3) Consider also the examples of holy men. Did not they suffer as
thou dost, and were they not at last delivered? Does not David complain,
"How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever?" Ps. 13:1. And did God
forsake him in his troubles? No; for he adds, "I have trusted in thy
mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation!" Ver. 5. He complains,
"Hath God forgotten to be gracious?" Ps. 77:9. But did God leave him in
this extremity? No, certainly, for after his deliverance he adds, "I will
remember the years of the right hand of the Most High." Ver. 10. Thus when
God discovered himself in terrors to Jeremiah, he prays, "Be not a terror
unto me!" (Jer. 17:17), but immediately adds, "Thou art my hope in the day
of evil." Did not Jesus Christ himself cry out, "My God, my God, why hast
thou forsaken me?" Ps. 22:1. But was he forsaken of God? No; for he adds,
"I will declare thy name unto my brethren" (Ps. 22:22): and "I shall not
die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord." Ps. 118:17.

16. Thou also, after this example of thy Saviour, must be content to drink
the wine mingled with gall and myrrh (Matt. 27:34), that thou mayest
hereafter sit down with him at his royal supper in the kingdom of heaven.
Isa. 65:13. Learn, therefore, to bear his reproach (Heb. 13:13); and thou
shalt be a partaker of his glory. Learn to be conformed to Christ
crucified, that thou mayest be conformed to Christ glorified. Rom. 8:29;
Phil. 3:21.




Chapter LIII.


   Consolations For Those Who Labor Under Great Spiritual Temptations.


    _When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their
    tongue faileth for thirst, I the Lord will hear them; I the God of
    Israel will not forsake them._--ISA. 41:17.


In these words, the Holy Spirit comforts all those that are broken in
heart, miserable, tempted, and thirsting after God; by whom they look upon
themselves as forsaken and rejected, so that they cry out, "My soul is
full of troubles; and my life draweth nigh unto the grave." Ps. 88:3. For
the sake of such as these, I shall touch upon some few heads, by way of
comfort and advice under these spiritual temptations.

2. (1) We are to remember, that no kinds of spiritual temptations,
melancholy thoughts, terrors of soul, and stings of conscience, can happen
to us without the particular permission and gracious will of God our
heavenly Father, notwithstanding all the malice and fury of the Evil
Spirit. For God has expressly told us in his Word, that the devil has not
the least power over any creature; nor can he hurt even a hair of our
heads. Matt. 10:30. All creatures are in the hand of God, and not in the
power of the devil. Heb. 1: 3. Much less has he any power over man, unless
by the permission of God, for a certain season, as in the case of the
Gergesenes (Matt. 8:32), and Job. Job 1:12.

3. Now, if he has no power of himself over a hair of our heads, or the
least part of our bodies; much less can he of himself afflict, disquiet,
or torment our souls. Hence David says, "The angel of the Lord encampeth
round about them that fear him, and delivereth them." Ps. 34:7. And
Zechariah, "I, the Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about."
Zech. 2:5. So David prays, "Keep me as the apple of the eye." Ps. 17:8.
And he acknowledges God to be the author of all the heavy trials of his
spirit: "Thou hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.
Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, and thou hast afflicted me with all thy
waves." Ps. 88:6, 7. So likewise, "Thou which hast shewed me great and
sore troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from
the depths of the earth." Ps. 71:20. Agreeable to which is the song of
Hannah, "The Lord killeth, and maketh alive; he bringeth down to the
grave, and bringeth up." 1 Sam. 2:6. For as the Son of God himself
descended first into hell, before he ascended up into heaven; so likewise
must the true members of his body experience the same, in the following
manner. When a man's conscience is so awakened and enlightened by the
Lord, as to feel in himself the strength of sin, the sting of death, the
curse of the law, and the fiery darts of the devil; then is his wretched
soul so oppressed with grief and horror, that with David (Ps. 77:3), it
refuses to be comforted, and looks upon itself as rejected and persecuted
by every creature of God. The man who is in this state, does not enjoy the
least glimpse of comfort, believing that he deserves it not; he struggles
with despair, he contends with hell, and has already a taste of its agony.
This is the sting of hell, yea, hell itself, full of terror and amazement,
darkness and despair. He that suffers this, is not indeed corporeally, but
spiritually, and in his soul, brought down into hell; so that with his
blessed Saviour at the mount of Olives, he is in an agony, is very heavy
and sorrowful, even unto death. Luke 22:44.

4. But you will say, Is it not strange, that God should suffer his
believing children, who have been baptized into Christ, who through him
obtained remission of their sins, being justified through faith, and
redeemed to eternal life--to be thus miserably tempted and afflicted by the
devil, oppressed with dreadful thoughts, and to undergo this spiritual
martyrdom? In answer to this, we must consider, that it is not our
business to inquire into the secret reasons of God's ways, but to rest
satisfied with what he has told us, namely, that all these kinds of
affliction proceed from him. Now we may rest assured, that whatsoever
comes from him, promotes our spiritual welfare, according to what we are
told, that "all things work together for good, to them that love God."
Rom. 8:28. There are, however, some reasons revealed, why God suffers his
beloved children to fall into temptations so bitter.

5. The first may be to bring us to a true sense of the strength of sin,
which is the sting of death (1 Cor. 15:56); of the curse of the law; of
the wrath and justice of God; and of the cruel tyranny of Satan. These
hang together, as it were, in a chain, as Hezekiah complains (Isaiah
38:14), when he chattered as a crane or a swallow, and mourned as a dove.

6. Secondly, That we may have worthy conceptions of the value and
greatness of our blessed Saviour's passion, and of all the merits of our
redemption; and hence learn that by the agony of his own soul, he has
delivered us from the punishments of hell. Ps. 22:2.

7. Thirdly, That we may be conformed to the image of Christ. Rom. 8:29.

8. Fourthly, That we may learn to taste the efficacy of God's Holy Word,
and the comforts that flow from it. Thus we are told, "by vexation (or
temptation) only we shall understand the report" (or word). Isa. 28:19.

9. Fifthly, That we may learn to exercise faith, hope, charity, humility,
and patience, that so "the trial of our faith may be found much more
precious than gold that perisheth, though it be tried with fire." 1 Pet.
1:7.

10. Sixthly, That we may afterwards have a more lively perception of the
divine comforts, even as St. Paul says, "As the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolation also aboundeth by Christ." 2 Cor. 1:5.

11. Seventhly, That we may obtain greater degrees of glory in the life to
come, according to Rom. 8:17: "If so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorified together."

12. Though we even did not know that God intended these particular
advantages by our sufferings; yet we ought to be satisfied with this one
consideration, that our sufferings are ordered by the will of God. For if
"the very hairs of our head are all numbered" (Matt. 10:30), how much more
care, may we suppose, will God take of our souls, that the devil may not
precipitate us into despair? Hence we may further learn, not to expect
deliverance from any but God himself, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who
has overcome the world and the devil. John 12:31; 16:11. He, therefore,
that labors under temptation, must fly unto Jesus Christ; and from him
alone expect that help, comfort, and peace, which nothing in this world
can give him.

13. (2) These trials are not to be looked upon as tokens of God's _anger_,
but rather of his infinite _mercy_, since he is hereby fitting us to be
partakers with them who have through many temptations entered into glory.
Such was David, who complains, "The sorrows of death compassed me." Psalm
18:4. And the whole 88th Psalm is full of lamentations of the pains and
agony which he underwent in his soul. This, too, was the prophet
Jeremiah's case, when he wished that his mother's womb had been his grave
(Jer. 20:17); that he had never seen the light, that so he might have
avoided his many bitter sufferings. Thus it was with Job, when he cried
out: "O that my grief were thoroughly weighed, and my calamity laid in the
balances together. For now it would be heavier than the sand of the sea."
Job 6:2, 3. And "My soul chooseth strangling, and death, rather than my
life." Job 7:15. Thus St. Paul was buffeted by "the messenger of Satan." 2
Cor. 12:7. Nor, lastly, did the Son of God himself, escape severe trials,
when his holy body trembled, and his soul was exceeding sorrowful (Matt.
26:38), and when he cried out, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?" Matt. 27:46.

14. From these examples we may learn that we are not the only persons who
have been so severely tempted; but that saints and servants of God before
us have been visited in the same manner. And as God forsook not them in
their extreme agony, so we may assure ourselves that he will in his own
time deliver us, as well as them. This is an argument full of consolation.
As bodily diseases and persecutions are marks of the divine favor, since
by them God endeavors to make us conformable to his Son (and on that
account we ought to bear them with patience), so it is a much greater
token of the divine favor, and of the glory that shall follow it, when he
sends affliction on our souls, as well as on our bodies, and by a variety
of crosses brings us to an entire conformity, both in body and soul, to
Christ our Head. For as the body of the blessed Jesus, at the time of his
passion, was overwhelmed with all kinds of pains, and sufferings, and his
soul was full of anguish, distress, and sorrow: so must his spiritual
body, in all its true and living members, be made partaker of the same
sufferings, whether internal or external, so that the whole spiritual
body, as well as the Head, may contribute, each member in its proportion,
to fill up the measure of sufferings. This is what St. Paul means, "I fill
up that which is behind of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh" (Col.
1:24): so that every living member of Christ must expect to bear his share
of Christ's cross, in order to perfect that which is yet lacking in such
sufferings. It ought, therefore, to make us rejoice in affliction, when we
consider that "the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us." Rom. 8:18. We
should, when these spiritual storms blow hard upon us, bear with patience
the paternal chastisement of God (Micah 7:9), expect his help, not faint
in prayer, but think thus with ourselves: This is a season of sufferings;
but when wrath has passed away, it will end in joy unspeakable and full of
glory. Isa. 54:7, 8.

15. (3) We must support ourselves under this internal conflict, with the
comforting promises of Jesus Christ, that in due time we shall conquer if
we hold out and faint not. Gal. 6:9. Thus he tells us, "The prince of this
world cometh, and hath nothing in me." John 14:30. And, "Be of good cheer;
I have overcome the world." John 16:33. For as all the host of Israel
triumphed in the person of David, when he slew Goliath, and routed the
Philistines (1 Sam. 17:51); so the victory of our Lord is the victory of
all true believers. Hence we are told, "Now is come salvation, and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the
accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God
day and night. And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of their testimony." Rev. 12:10, 11. Whenever, therefore, thou
findest thyself assaulted by the fiery darts of the Evil One, and thy soul
is afflicted with such suggestions as these: "Thou art damned;--thou art
undone;--God hath forsaken thee;--thou art mine;--it is in vain for thee to
hope, believe, or pray any longer," then take courage, and answer boldly:
"O thou enemy of mankind, thou hast no power to condemn me. God hath not
appointed thee to be my judge; but the faithful shall judge the world, and
thee, at the last great day" (1 Cor. 6:3), yea, prince of this world, thou
art judged already by the Son of God. John 16:11.

16. (4) As the nature of this spirit of blasphemy is such, that a
Christian is forced to undergo it sorely against his will, and does all
that in him lies to resist and oppose it; hence let him comfort himself,
when he is tempted with the thought, that God will never lay it to his
charge; since it is not he that acts, but the devil; for the soul is
passive, and may, therefore, be assured that such thoughts shall never be
imputed for sin. As people in a besieged town, cannot hinder the enemy
from throwing fire into the town, though they may do what they can to
quench it, and prevent its spreading; and as Hezekiah (Isa. 36:11) could
not hinder the blasphemy of Rabshakeh; so we cannot hinder the devil from
shooting his envenomed arrows at us. All that we have to do is, to bear it
with penitential sorrow, and to take all the care we can, not to suffer
our thoughts to vent themselves in blasphemous words; but, on the other
hand, having set a guard upon our tongues, we should endeavor so to stifle
these murmurings, that they break not out into a flame, as we read of
Jeremiah. (Lam. 3:28.) Moreover, forasmuch as thou art assaulted against
thy will, it is plain, that thou hast yet a living and struggling faith.

17. (5) We ought to be comforted, if we find but _one single aspiration of
our hearts towards God_, or any devout affection springing up in our souls
by the reading of any text of Holy Scripture. For this is that spark of
faith and divine grace, which, like the smoking of flax, God will not
quench, but preserve it in its weakest state, when it seems to be almost
dead. Isa. 42:3. One devout aspiration such as this, is a certain sign
that the Holy Spirit is still present with us, though in a manner almost
undiscernible in the deepest ground and centre of the soul. For as the
body is not looked upon as dead, whilst there is the least breath or pulse
remaining; so we must believe that the Spirit of God, and faith, are not
yet entirely gone, if only a feeble prayer and a word of God remain; for
then the soul retains a spiritual and internal life, and is not entirely
dead. And the soul ought to be content with the smallest spark of this
inward light and life, till the Spirit of joy and liberty return to him,
and comfort him with all the consolations of God. Let us suppose a man in
such a case, that he can neither pray, nor even think a good thought; and
that this inability is matter of the greatest grief to him; the anguish of
such a soul, because it cannot pray, is in itself a true and effectual
prayer. These are the unutterable sighs and groanings which St. Paul
mentions. Rom. 8:26. And to this belongs what the prophet says, "When the
poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue faileth for
thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake
them." Isa. 41:17.

18. (6) Be the temptations and afflictions of the heart ever so great, yet
the Scripture assures us that it is the habitation of God, and not of the
devil. That Satan has no possession of it, appears from the furious
assaults he makes upon the afflicted soul, by which he endeavors to subdue
it; but "greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the world." 1
John 4:4. "Fear thou not, for I am with thee." Isa. 41:10. Therefore,
though this trial of the soul is the greatest affliction that can possibly
befall it in this life, yet, forasmuch as we are assured that God will
look unto those that are of contrite hearts, and will dwell with them
(Isa. 57:15), that he sent the blessed Jesus from heaven to comfort the
afflicted, and to preach glad tidings to the distressed (Isa. 61:2); and
that He himself invites weary souls to come unto him (Matt. 11:28),
therefore let no man despair when he finds himself plunged into this
furnace of affliction. These are they whom God commanded his prophet to
comfort: "Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say
to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not." Isa. 35:3, 4.
And God tells us that "his strength is made perfect in weakness;" which
induced St. Paul to say, "When I am weak, then am I strong." 2 Cor. 12:10.
Yea, the grace of God is so far from forsaking a man, even when he is
buffeted (2 Cor. 12:7) by Satan: that it was at that time particularly,
that God told Paul, "My grace is sufficient for thee." 2 Cor. 12:7-9.

19. (7) There is not so much as one instance to be produced, of any man
forsaken of God under this spiritual conflict; but, on the contrary, He
has always restored his servants, "whom he has thus chosen in the furnace
of affliction" (Isa. 48:10), to the same and to higher degrees of grace,
than those whence they thought they had fallen. This ought to be matter of
great comfort to us, and persuade us that when the hour of trial is ended,
the season of joy and redemption will quickly follow. "Happy is the man
whom God correcteth: therefore despise not thou the chastening of the
Almighty. For he maketh sore, and bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands
make whole. He shall deliver thee in six troubles; yea, in seven there
shall no evil touch thee." Job 5:17-19; Micah 7:9. Let no man, therefore,
faint under tribulation, but bear "the indignation of the Lord" for a
little while (Ps. 112:4; 97:11), till the Sun of righteousness (Mal. 4:2)
arise upon him again with healing and consolation in his wings, for "light
is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart!"

20. (8) Tauler reckons these spiritual afflictions and trials among the
singular gifts and favors of God, speaking thus of them: "In these great
temptations, God deprives a man of all that he has given him, forcing him
to descend into himself and see his own poverty and weakness; and also
trying him, to discover how he will behave himself in this desolate state.
And this is done when a man is forsaken; so that he knows nothing of God,
his grace, his comforts, or the gifts which he once bestowed upon him; but
which are now taken away, and concealed from his eyes, so that he knows
not whither to fly or which way to turn. When a man is once brought into
this state, there is nothing better for him than cheerfully and willingly
to submit himself to the order and decree of God. It was, indeed, a great
thing in the holy martyrs to lay down their lives for God; but they were
so abundantly strengthened by the comforts of his Holy Spirit, that the
most exquisite torments were to them but trifling and contemptible, and
death itself had lost its terrors. But to have God hide his face, and
deprive us of his grace and comfort, is a martyrdom much greater than
theirs. This occurs when all the sins, all the infirmities and
temptations, which a man has long ago conquered, assault him afresh, with
greater violence than when he was the servant of sin. In this case, the
best way is to suffer with patience, and to be entirely resigned to the
all-wise providence of God." Such sufferers as these, Tauler calls
"spiritual martyrs," from the bitter trials they undergo whilst deprived
of the light of God's countenance, and the comfortable influences of his
Spirit, which are so severe that they know not which way to turn for
relief; and when they see and consider the gifts and graces bestowed upon
others, they fall into bitter dejection of spirit, reckoning that it is
their own fault that they are thus barren and destitute of spiritual joy.
And though they take ever so much pains, they still seem to labor in vain;
for they find their dryness and hardness of heart still increasing upon
them; so that at last, being quite void of comfort, and having lost all
patience, they fall into a secret distrust of God's mercy, and believe
that he is offended with everything they do. At length they submit in
patience, until God may make a change; for they themselves are utterly
helpless. This is that which brings them to a conformity, not only with
the saints, but with Christ, whose whole life was nothing but affliction.
These spiritual martyrs, though in the sight of the world they are of all
men most miserable, and seem to be forsaken and cast off by God; yet are,
in truth, the richest towards God. In their own opinion they are, indeed,
at the same time, the most unfaithful to him; though in reality they have
the firmest faith, and most ardent zeal for his honor and service, and
upon that account undergo these heavy sufferings. From this faith and love
towards God (of which they themselves are ignorant), it arises, that they
are tormented with divers temptations to which they will not consent, so
that even death itself would not be so bitter to them, as the anguish they
feel upon that account. They labor with their utmost strength to amend
their lives, and practise every Christian virtue; and when they find their
labor to be in vain, they relapse into the old sense of their infirmities,
attended with the most exquisite pain of mind. All this, they suffer from
a principle of love towards God; esteeming themselves the worst of all
men, though they are most precious in the sight of God.

21. No wiser counsel can be given to these than that, with humble patience
and resignation they bear the troubles which they cannot help, and which
are but aggravated by impatience. After this dark night of unspeakable
affliction, the Sun of righteousness shall arise, refreshing and filling
their hearts with inexpressible light and glory.




Chapter LIV.


      Comforts Under Secret And Spiritual Temptations Of The Devil.


    _Behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he may sift you as
    wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not; and
    when thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren._--LUKE 22:31, 32.


How great and implacable the enmity of the devil is to all mankind, we are
abundantly informed, not only by Scripture (as 1 Pet. 5:8, "Be sober, be
vigilant; because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh
about, seeking whom he may devour." Eph. 6:12, and Rev. 12:12, "Woe to the
earth, and to the sea, for the devil is come down unto you, having great
wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time;" and from the
history of Job), but also more particularly by daily experience, and the
many grievous and dangerous temptations with which he assaults the souls
of good men in their spiritual warfare. At one time he assaults our faith,
at another time our Christian calling, and then interrupts and disturbs us
in the exercise of our devotions; all which is clearly expressed in the
history of our Lord's temptation. Matt. 4:3, etc. Hence we may learn that
no man is safe from his temptations. For if he spared not Christ our Head,
how can sinful men expect to escape him? For which reason our Lord himself
advises us, "Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation." Matt.
26:41.

2. Among the various temptations with which the devil afflicts the soul,
this is one, namely, the tormenting a man with blasphemous, profane,
impure, and troublesome thoughts, so as to sink him deep into melancholy
and wretchedness. And these abominable suggestions are so crafty, sudden,
and violent, that they will not give a man a moment's rest. Upon this
account St. Paul calls them, "the fiery darts of the wicked one." Eph.
6:16. As a public enemy is perpetually casting fire into a besieged town;
so the devil is continually vexing such souls with his hellish
suggestions. And as the wounds of an envenomed arrow are most exquisitely
painful; so the wounds caused by the fiery darts of Satan, are far more
sharp and intolerable than the severest bodily sufferings. Wherefore we
shall here present some select heads of comfort against these secret and
internal temptations, all drawn from the Word of God. _First_, as to the
words prefixed to this chapter, it is plain that they were uttered by our
blessed Saviour, with the utmost tenderness, and most ardent compassion.
Whence we may gather, that the being afflicted with these temptations, is
no mark of God's displeasure, much less that he designs to destroy us
thereby, and deliver us up into the hands of the enemy. On the contrary,
such a temptation is nothing but a chastising rod, whereby God intends to
humble a man, and to draw him to Himself. This appears from the example of
St. Peter, whose confidence and self-conceit opened a door to the most
grievous temptation, and to the sin which followed. And St. Paul tells us
of himself, "Lest I should be exalted (saith he) above measure through the
abundance of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh,
the messenger of Satan to buffet me. For this thing I besought the Lord
thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me, My grace is
sufficient for thee." 2 Cor. 12:7-9. From which words we may learn three
things: 1. That St. Paul, and all others that are exercised with these
trials, are humbled thereby. 2. That all those sufferings come upon us by
the counsel of God. 3. That the utmost fury of the devil against a man who
is so tempted, cannot exclude him from God's favor, which is expressed in
these words, "My grace is sufficient for thee."

3. The _second_ ground of comfort is contained in these words: "Satan hath
desired you." From these words we may learn, that though the devil is
always desirous and ready to cast his fiery darts at us, yet has he no
power without the particular leave and permission of God; who never gives
him more than a limited permission, beyond which he cannot go. To this
belongs that place of St. Paul, "God is faithful, who will not suffer you
to be tempted above that ye are able." 1 Cor. 10:13. To which we may add
the example of Job, against whom the devil dared not attempt anything,
till he had first obtained leave of God; and even that clogged with a
limitation. See chap. 1:12.

4. The _third_ consolation arises from these words of our Lord: "I have
prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not." In what manner, and with what
affection the blessed Jesus prayed for us to his Heavenly Father, we are
told in John (chapter 17), namely, that He would be pleased to keep his
faithful servants from the evil of the world; that he would dwell in them,
and they in him; and that of those whom he had received of his Father, he
might lose none. This prayer, were it but heartily applied to the
distressed soul, would support it with a divine courage so as to abide in
Christ by faith, not doubting but that Christ in her, by the same faith,
would conquer and triumph over all her enemies.

5. The _fourth_ comfort may be drawn from John 17:21, where our blessed
Lord prays for us, and begs of his heavenly Father, that we may abide in
Christ, and Christ in us. And St. John tells us, that "greater is he that
is in us, than he that is in the world." 1 John 4:4. Christ dwells in
every believing soul by faith; and all the assaults of the devil cannot
dispossess this illustrious guest. And as Christ himself, in whom God
himself, that is, all "the fulness of the Godhead dwelt bodily" and
personally (Col. 2:9), was tempted by Satan, thou must not, therefore,
think that Christ is not in thee, because thou thyself art likewise
tempted. And if Christ be in thee of a truth, thou needest not fear what
the devil can do unto thee: for Christ will certainly defend the place of
his own residence, against all opposers. Moreover, thou hast within thee
the Holy Spirit, who "helpeth thine infirmities, and maketh intercession
for thee with groanings that cannot be uttered." Rom. 8:26. Whensoever
thou findest these within thee, thou mayest assure thyself, that the Holy
Spirit dwelleth in thee, and he will not forsake thee, as our blessed Lord
assures us: "The Father shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you forever." John 14:16. Lastly, God has promised, that he
will dwell in the humble and contrite heart: "I dwell with him that is of
a contrite and humble spirit." Isa. 57:15; 66:2. And such, undoubtedly,
are all those who are tormented with these temptations of Satan.

6. The _fifth_ ground of comfort, is contained in our Saviour's promise:
"I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not." O divine comfort! as if
our Lord had said: "Your infirmities shall never be so great, but that
there shall be some sparks of faith left. Yea, though you feel in
yourselves no comfort, and, on that account, are apt to think your faith
quite extinct, yet will I never suffer the smoking flax to be entirely
quenched." Isa. 42:3. But, now, if you ask, How shall I know this? I
answer, 1. By the earnest longing of your soul after faith. For, to desire
and pray for faith above all other things, arises from a living spark of
remaining faith. 2. By your resistance of temptation, which is a certain
token of the presence of faith; and this resistance and opposition appear
plainly in this, that all these wicked and blasphemous thoughts arise in
your soul sorely against your will, and that you bear them with more pain,
than you would any external violence offered to your body. Now whatsoever
a man suffers of this kind against his will, is resisted by faith, and
shall never be imputed to him as sin; for nothing but a voluntary
violation of the divine law, makes a man sinful in the sight of God. If
Adam had not yielded to the suggestions of Satan, he had not had sin; but
as soon as he submitted his will to that of the tempter, he fell into the
transgression. Whence it follows, that it cannot be sin, which is not
attended with the consent of the will. A besieged city cannot hinder the
enemy from throwing fire into it, but the inhabitants must endeavor to
prevent it from spreading, and burning the town to ashes. So we cannot
avoid the fiery darts of the devil, with which he delights to afflict the
heart; but as we do not consent to them, but rather resist, they must at
last be quenched, and can do us no harm. By such tokens as these we may
discover, that our faith, however weak, is not extinct.

7. Being once assured of this, we may likewise certainly depend upon
victory; and this opens to us a _sixth_ fountain of comfort. To this,
therefore, refers that comfortable saying of our Saviour: "The prince of
this world cometh, and hath nothing in me." John 14:30. "Be of good cheer;
I have overcome the world." John 16:33. Whatsoever Christ did, he did for
our sakes; that he himself, with all his benefits and merits, might be
entirely ours. Since, therefore, he has conquered Satan, it follows that
he has conquered him not only for himself, but for us also: his conquest
is ours. All this was prefigured in the contest between David and Goliath.
1 Sam. 17:8, 9, 50-53. The conditions were, that if Goliath overcame
David, the people of Israel should be the servants of the Philistines; but
if David overcame Goliath, the Philistines should serve Israel. Now, even
as David's victory was counted as the victory of all Israel, so the
victory of Christ avails as the victory of all believers. Hence St. Paul
says: "Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might." Eph. 6:10.
And, "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ." 1 Cor. 15:57.

8. _Seventhly_, we ought to be comforted by the examples of the saints,
who have also been cruelly tempted. Of these our blessed Saviour speaks,
saying, "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren." By these
words, our Saviour plainly sends us to be instructed by the examples of
our brethren, who have been tempted and persecuted by the devil in like
manner with us. Hence St. Peter says: "Knowing that the same afflictions
are accomplished in your brethren that are in the world." 1 Peter 5:9.

9. _Lastly_, we ought to be comforted by the example of Jesus Christ
himself. Matt. 4:1, etc. Over him, though he was the beloved Son of God,
the devil had so much power, as to hurry him from place to place, and use
him with so much insolence, that it is wonderful the Son of God should
suffer it from that rebellious, apostate spirit. But this was the
condition of the humble Jesus, who emptied himself of all his glory and
majesty, that he might be tempted as man, and be made like unto his
brethren.




Chapter LV.


  The Reasons For Which God Sometimes Delays His Comfort And Assistance.


    _For the vision is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it
    shall speak, and not lie; though it tarry, wait for it; because it
    will surely come, it will not tarry. Behold, his soul which is
    lifted up, is not upright in him: but the just shall live by his
    faith._--HAB. 2:3, 4.


In these words the Holy Spirit comforts us, under the _delays_ of Divine
assistance: for so we are apt to call (1) those very methods by which God
hastens to help and save us. He has, in his unsearchable wisdom, appointed
to every man his cross in weight and measure. He delivers it out to him in
meet proportions, sending one affliction after another, till the measure
of his sufferings be accomplished; that so, by a gradual conquest, he may
at last obtain a complete victory. This dealing of God with us, we are apt
to call _his delaying_ to help us; not considering that this is the
quickest method of accomplishing the measure of our sufferings, and
completing our victory. That which to us seems to be delay, is in the
sight of God, _making haste to help us_.

2. Now he that is refractory and impatient under the cross, has no peace
in his soul. For as patience renders the soul easy and quiet, so
impatience makes it restless and uneasy. Thus our Lord tells us, "Learn of
me; for I am meek and lowly in heart; and ye shall find rest unto your
souls." Matt. 11:29. And, whereas, the prophet adds, that "the just shall
live by his faith;" this relates to the promises of divine grace and
assistance, which we lay hold on by faith. And from this consolation the
soul derives life and joy; as Hezekiah says: "O Lord, by these things men
live, and in all these things is the life of my spirit." Isa. 38:16. On
the other hand, unbelief produces impatience; impatience, disquiet;
disquiet, despair; and despair, everlasting death. So that we may most
truly say, that "the just lives by faith;" that is, by the grace of God,
which he patiently expects and waits for.

3. (2) Solomon tells us: "To every thing there is a season, and a time to
every purpose under heaven." Eccles. 3:1. Whence we may learn, that
crosses and afflictions come not by chance; but that every season of
affliction is appointed to us by God. Wherefore, in our troubles let us
lift up our eyes unto Him, in whose hand are our happiness and misery, our
riches and poverty, our life and death; yea, and every moment of our
afflictions. This is illustrated in the case of Joseph, whom, for thirteen
years together, God visited with remarkable afflictions (Gen. 37:36;
41:1): "until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord tried
him," as the Psalmist tells us. Ps. 105:19. By his example we may learn
how useful and necessary it is for us that God should sometimes delay his
help. For when he was sold, he was seventeen years old; and when, by the
hand of God he was brought out of prison, he was thirty; and the bearing
of his cross all that season, was the very thing that qualified him for
the glorious advancement that followed. In that honorable post he
continued eighty years; whence we may observe, that his thirteen years of
suffering, were recompensed with many years of glory and honor: for he
lived a hundred and ten years. Therefore let the devout Christian that
suffers imprisonment or any kind of persecution for the testimony of a
good conscience, or shame, or sickness, call to mind the wonderful
providence of God to Joseph, and satisfy himself that the all-wise God,
who has appointed his season of affliction, has likewise determined the
set time of his deliverance. For as a skilful builder knows well by what
time his laborers will have finished their task, so has God measured out
the weight and duration of every man's cross, and appointed the season of
his deliverance. As soon as that comes, the light of divine grace will
immediately break forth, and will comfort the afflicted soul.

4. (3) As God has determined the number of our crosses; so He has been
pleased to conceal from us the time of our deliverance, satisfying us with
that declaration of our blessed Lord, "It is not for you to know the times
or the seasons, which the Father hath put in his own power." Acts 1:7.
Agreeably to this are the words of God, who when he had threatened the
children of Israel with the Babylonish captivity, adds, "Is not this laid
up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures?" Deut. 32:34.
Thence we may learn, with what great and unsearchable wisdom God governs
and corrects the children of men. To this also may be referred that saying
of St. Paul: "God hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell
on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before
appointed, and the bounds of their habitation." Acts 17:26. In these words
we are instructed, that not only the period of every man's life, but even
the place and manner of it, are appointed by God. And this general
determination of time and place, includes in it the crosses and
afflictions appointed to every person.

5. (4) And as God has appointed the period, time, and place, of the
sufferings of his servants; so has He also of the persecutions and
oppressions of the wicked. When these have for a season been breathing out
oppressions and slaughter, then that God to whom vengeance belongeth,
awaketh and riseth to judgment; according to Deut. 32:35: "To me belongeth
vengeance and recompense; their foot shall slide in due time: for the day
of their calamity is at hand, and the things that shall come upon them,
make haste." This is abundantly confirmed by the examples of heretics and
tyrants that have most grievously persecuted the church of God; and when
the devil has raged long enough, and his time is expired, then has the
divine vengeance so confounded him and all his accomplices, that the whole
world has been amazed and astonished at the righteous judgments of God.
"Be ye also patient; stablish your hearts; for the coming of the Lord
draweth nigh. Grudge not one against another, brethren, lest ye be
condemned: behold the Judge standeth before the door." Jas. 5:8, 9.




Chapter LVI.


Showing That In Seasons Of Trial The Consideration Of The Exalted Patience
Of Christ, And Of The Future And Eternal Glory, Will Alleviate The Burden
                              Of The Cross.


    _Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into
    his glory?_--LUKE 24:26.


The eternal Son of God, by his most holy incarnation, took upon him all
the miseries and calamities of mankind: and this not of compulsion and
necessity, but of pure love, that by his example he might teach us
patience, and enable us to bear the cross, and overcome the calamities of
this mortal life. As he was to become man, so he willingly subjected
himself to all those miseries to which man is exposed; and as he came down
from heaven for the sake of all, so he took upon him the infirmities of
all; so that from the moment of his birth, to the hour of his death, he
was, as the prophet truly expresses it, "despised and rejected of men; a
man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief." Isa. 53:3. There was no
calamity incident to human nature, which he did not suffer, and,
particularly, extreme poverty. He says of himself, "The foxes have holes,
and the birds of the air have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to
lay his head." Matt. 8:20. In the discharge of his office, he underwent
the most bitter persecutions, being exposed to hatred, calumnies, and
reproaches. In his last days he submitted to the most ignominious
sufferings, so that, as the prophet expresses it, "We did esteem him
stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted." Isa. 53:4. His transcendent love
met with the highest ingratitude, his illustrious miracles were rewarded
with revilings, and his heavenly doctrines with calumnies and lies. And
since our blessed Lord suffered all this, why shall we expect to be
exempted from sufferings and injuries?

2. Thus the blessed Jesus, by his example, has shown us the true and only
path to heaven. 1 Pet. 2:21. Let us therefore tread in his steps, and
learn to imitate him in all the different scenes of his most holy and
afflicted life. He went before, that we might in holy patience follow him.
Whence we may learn, how far they are from the true and right way, who
never regard this blessed pattern, but refuse to follow it. If men will
still walk on in darkness and shut their eyes against this light, how
great must their darkness be! The blessed Jesus himself calls to them,
saying, "I am the light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk
in darkness, but shall have the light of life." John 8:12.

3. All the sufferings of true Christians in this life, are not worthy to
be compared with the eternal glories reserved for them in the world to
come; for their temporal afflictions are but for a moment, but their
glorious reward shall endure forever. 2 Cor. 4:17, 18. An everlasting
possession is well worth contending for. Couldest thou but for a moment
behold what eternal glories they enjoy, who in this life were exposed to
all torments and sufferings, thou wouldest cheerfully submit to them all,
and take up thy cross with joy; thinking all things but as dross, that
thou mightest win Christ and be a partaker of his glory.

4. Lift up, therefore, the eyes of thy mind to heaven, and view, with St.
John, that vast company clothed in white garments, and following the Lamb,
concerning whom this account is given to the inquiring Evangelist: "These
are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes,
and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. Therefore are they before
the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple." Rev. 7:14,
15. Such are the proper meditations for devout souls. Thus we read of
Moses, "By faith, Moses, when he was come to years, refused to be called
the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in
Egypt; for he had respect to the recompense of the reward." Heb. 11:24-26.

5. Hence we learn that the saints in all ages have esteemed the reproach
of the cross of Christ as their greatest treasure. And we may depend upon
it, that no man can be admitted to the joys of the next world, who has not
fought manfully under the banner of the cross in this world. How can we
imagine that those blessed spirits will own us to be of their company in
heaven, if we did not bring with us the sign of the cross? They would not
know us, and we would be strangers among them. "He that overcometh," saith
the Lord, "the same shall be clothed in white raiment; and I will not blot
out his name out of the book of life." Rev. 3:5. And what does St. Paul
say? "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to
me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." 2 Tim. 4:7, 8.




Chapter LVII.


                 Consolations Against The Fears Of Death.


    _Christ hath abolished death, and hath brought life and
    immortality to light through the gospel._--2 TIM. 1:10.


This sentence is full of divine comfort against the fears of temporal
death. For if "Christ hath abolished death," why should we fear it? And if
"life and immortality be brought to light," why should we not rejoice to
pass through the gates of death, to take possession of them? But since
there is no man so holy, but that at some time or other he is afraid of
death, I shall here subjoin the chief heads of consolation, which I shall
divide into two parts. The first contains those consolations which arise
from _Christ's sufferings and death, and the fruits of them_. The second,
those that arise from the consideration of _the vanity of the world_. Each
of these parts shall comprehend seven arguments of comfort.

2. I. The first and most powerful remedy against the fear of death, is the
most holy and innocent death of Jesus Christ, by which he destroyed the
power of death. The power of death consists in the continual dread,
anxiety, terror, and trembling that arise from the thought of the severe
judgment that is to follow. With this the soul is oftentimes so afflicted,
that it is, as it were, continually dying, yet cannot die. This is the
power of death, yea, is even the second and eternal death: and this
terrible state the devil makes yet more dreadful by his suggestions. Upon
this account he is said "to have the power of death" (Heb. 2:14); that is,
to terrify and torment the conscience with hellish fears and terrors. This
was David's case, as he complains, "My heart is sore pained within me; and
the terrors of death are fallen upon me." Ps. 55:4. So again, "The sorrows
of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me afraid." Ps.
18:3, 4. Now the blessed Jesus has taken away this power of death,
changing it into a calm sleep, a blessed rest of soul and body. When the
soul is at rest, the body sleeps peacefully, so that the peace of the soul
gives peace also to the body. Hence every true and faithful Christian may
be properly said not to taste of death; according to that promise of our
blessed Lord, "Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my sayings,
he shall never see death." John 8:51.

3. The second ground of comfort is, the resurrection of our bodies. For
Christ has so far destroyed the power of death, that it not only cannot
torment our souls, but cannot even keep our bodies perpetually. As the
power of Christ's death in us protects us from tasting the bitterness of
it; so, by the power of his resurrection, our mortal bodies shall also be
raised again to a glorious immortality.

4. For (1), the foundation of our resurrection is the resurrection of
Jesus Christ, as he himself says, "Because I live, ye shall live also."
John 14:19. "I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me,
though he were dead, yet shall he live." John 11:25. "I know that my
Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth;
and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God." Job 19:25. "For since by man came death, by man came also the
resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall
all be made alive." 1 Cor. 15:21, 22.

5. (2) This is also founded upon God's veracity. "Thy dead men shall
live." Isa. 26:19. "Thus saith the Lord God unto these bones: Behold, I
will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. Behold, I will
open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O my
people." Ezek. 37:5, 12. "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the
earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and
everlasting contempt." Dan. 12:2. "Verily, verily, I say unto you, The
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son
of God: and they that hear shall live. The hour is coming in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth; they
that have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have
done evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." John 5:25, 28, 29. "And I
saw the dead, both small and great, stand before God." Rev. 20:12.

6. (3) It is also founded upon the omnipotence and glory of Jesus Christ.
As in the resurrection of Lazarus, he was glorified, when he cried out,
"Lazarus, come forth" (John 11:43); so will he also, in the last great
day, manifest his power and glory, by showing himself to be the Lord of
the dead and living. Rom. 14:9. "I will ransom them from the power of the
grave; I will redeem them from death; O death, I will be thy plagues; O
grave, I will be thy destruction." Hosea 13:14.

7. (4) The divine justice is also engaged for the confirmation of this
truth. As it has received fulfilment in that sentence, "Thou shalt surely
die" (Gen. 2:17); so also must it be fulfilled in our resurrection after a
complete satisfaction for sin. For when sin itself is at an end, the wages
of sin ought to have an end likewise. This is strictly agreeable to the
justice of God.

8. (5) This is also further confirmed to us by the examples of those who
have been already raised from death unto life. Such was the case of the
widow's son (1 Kings 17:22); the Shunammite's son (2 Kings 4:35-37); the
dead body that was raised by touching the bones of Elisha (2 Kings 13:21);
the daughter of Jairus (Matt. 9:25); the widow's son at Nain (Luke 7:15);
Lazarus (John 11:43); and Tabitha (Acts 9:41).

9. (6) Christ hath redeemed both soul and body to everlasting life.

10. (7) The beautiful parables derived from nature, as the grain of wheat,
in John 12:24, claim attention. The apostle says: "Thou fool, that which
thou sowest is not quickened except it die," etc. 1 Cor. 15:36, etc. Upon
this account, burying-places are, in the German tongue, called _God's
fields_ (_Gottesacker_).

11. A third comfort against the fears of death is, the fruit of Christ's
resurrection; that is, that eternal, incorruptible, and immortal state
purchased for us by Jesus Christ. For as by the transgression of the first
Adam, all his posterity were made subject to death; so by the obedience of
the second, all are restored to life and immortality. Upon which account
it is said, "Behold, I make all things new." Rev. 21:5. This renovation
consists in an entire freedom from sin, misery, and death, and is a state
of righteousness, joy, and eternal life. For this cause it is also called
Paradise: "In thy presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are
pleasures for evermore." Ps. 16:11. If it be Paradise, it follows, that no
grief, pain, sorrow, or sighing: no hunger, thirst, cold, heat, or any
other evil, can enter there. These all belong to this transitory life, but
that eternal life is "an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and
that fadeth not away;" as we are told by St. Peter. (1 Peter 1:4.) This
is, indeed, the glorious fruit of Christ's resurrection: for by Christ all
things are renewed and restored; corruption is changed into incorruption;
that which was transitory, into that which is eternal; our filthiness,
into spotless purity; our grief, into joy; our sorrows, into triumphs; our
sins, into righteousness; the divine anger into mercy; the curse into
blessings; our poverty into riches; our diseases into health; our contempt
into honor; our reproach into glory; our disquiet into everlasting rest;
our miseries into pleasures; our death into life. Now death is the
entrance into this blessed state: so that temporal death is the gate to
everlasting life, and all these joys.

12. The fourth consolation against the fear of death, is prayer. So we
read of the Son of God, that "being in an agony, he prayed more
earnestly." Luke 22:44. And "in the days of his flesh, he offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto him that was
able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared." Heb. 5:7.
Indeed, the prayers of dying people are strong and earnest; they proceed
from the bottom of the heart, ascend through the clouds, and reach the
ears of the Almighty. "The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him,
to all that call upon him in truth." Ps. 145:18. "I will be with him in
trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him." Ps. 91:15. "Fear thou not,
for I am with thee; I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I
will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness." Isa. 41:10.

13. The fifth consolation is, the glorification of our bodies. "Our
conversation is in heaven; from whence also we look for the Saviour, the
Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working, whereby
he is able to subdue all things unto himself." Phil. 3:20, 21. What
greater glory can we conceive, than that our bodies shall be, like the
glorified body of Jesus Christ? He showed us his glorified body upon Mount
Tabor (Matt. 17:2; Mark 9:2, 3), that he might inflame us with a desire of
the same glory. Oh! what a glorious temple of God shall our body then be!
Of this, the royal and priestly garments under the law, were but a faint
shadow and resemblance.

14. The sixth is, the presence of the holy angels, who carry our departing
souls into Abraham's bosom. Our soul enters into the regions of eternal
glory, and joins the society of blessed spirits. This is what is meant by
"Abraham's bosom." Luke 16:22. That rest of the soul consists entirely in
a freedom from the fears and terrors of death. So "Return unto thy rest, O
my soul. For the Lord hath dealt bountifully with thee: for thou hast
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from
falling. I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living." Ps.
