the divine government--and how the guilty could be rescued from wrath,
without a forfeiture of the divine veracity. Never indeed was the divine
law so completely vindicated, or the claims of justice so awfully
asserted, as when the Lawgiver offered himself as a ransom. And no other
possible manifestation of the malignity and atrocity of sin, of the
divine abhorrence of all iniquity, and, at the same time, of the
exhaustless treasures of redeeming mercy, could equal that which was
witnessed on Calvary. As, therefore, Moses lifted up the serpent in the
wilderness, so is the cross to be held up now, by its heralds, to a
perishing world. Its atoning sacrifice is to be proclaimed, and its
purchased blessings offered to lost sinners, as their only hope--their
only remedy.

Another important part of _the preaching of the cross_ consists in a
full disclosure of _the entire depravity and helplessness of our fallen
nature_. This doctrine lies at the foundation of Christianity. It is
from the corruption of our race, the dominion of spiritual death, and
the actual sentence of condemnation, that the necessity arises for so
_great salvation_. If hope could have been afforded from any other
source, if there had been any possibility of the sinner's expiating his
own guilt, and restoring himself to the divine favour, the great
Sacrifice would never have been offered. But until men are convinced of
their apostacy and corruption, they will never be persuaded of the truth
and necessity of the great atonement. And until they feel themselves
justly condemned, and utterly helpless, they will never come as humble
suppliants to a Saviour's feet.

The work of the _Holy Spirit, in enlightening and renewing the hearts of
sinners_, and thus carrying on to their accomplishment the purposes of
divine mercy, forms also an important portion of the message of the
Gospel. It is the glorious achievement of the cross, to slay the enmity
and subdue the stubbornness of the sinful heart: and the infinite
blessing purchased by the Saviour's blood, is the gift of the Holy
Spirit, to effectuate that transformation of character, that spiritual
regeneration, without which salvation is utterly impossible. The
preaching of the cross, therefore, must include an unwavering
declaration, that _the working of regeneration and the renewing of the
Holy Ghost_ are indispensable to salvation.

It is moreover essential to a faithful _preaching of the cross_, that
_justification by faith in Christ_, should be distinctly declared as the
only ground of a sinner's hope. That view of the Gospel which represents
it as bestowing upon man a power of fulfilling God's holy law--or as so
lowering its demands as to render his imperfect obedience acceptable--is
most dishonourable to God, and ruinous to the souls of men. No such
provisions are found in the treaty of reconciliation sent from Heaven.
So far from abrogating, the Gospel exalts and honours the law. So far
from diminishing its strictness, it adds emphasis to its claims, and
fully meets its unmitigated requisitions. Most gloriously has Christ
vindicated the divine justice, by receiving its avenging sword in his
own bosom, as the Substitute, or surety for sinners; and most
effectually has he provided for their salvation, by rendering the
exercise of pardoning mercy consistent with the principles of the divine
government, and by working out for them a perfect righteousness, which
may render them just before God. By faith, the penitent sinner receives
all these blessings--is rescued from wrath, delivered from the guilt and
bondage of sin, and made a child of God, and an heir of eternal life.
Thus the triumph of the cross is complete, the pride of human merit is
humbled in the dust, and all the glory of the salvation of sinners is
rendered to the riches of redeeming mercy.

In fine, _the preaching of the cross_ includes a faithful denunciation
of _eternal misery_, as the inevitable doom of all who pass from this
state of probation, unrenewed by the Spirit of grace, unwashed in the
blood of the Lamb.

Such are the essential principles of that system of redemption, which
engaged the counsels of heaven from eternity; and which was carried into
effect, not like the work of creation, by a single word of the Son of
God, but by his assuming human nature, enduring a long exile of toil and
reproach, and humbling himself unto death, even the death of the cross.

With what gratitude, then, ought this Gospel to be received by the
guilty, perishing creatures, for whose rescue from perdition it is
designed. How should this display of divine compassion melt and
captivate the hearts of those, whose sins have been thus expiated, and
for whom an offer of free pardon and endless blessedness has been thus
dearly purchased.

But _be astonished, O heavens, at this_--these tidings of salvation are
received by many with chilling indifference--the sufferings of the cross
are regarded with unconcern--the treaty of reconciliation, written in
atoning blood, is by some contemptuously disregarded--by others repelled
with determined opposition. These appalling facts display more of the
malignity of sin, its blinding, deadening influence, and more of the
rancorous enmity of the carnal heart against God, than all the other
enormities which blacken the world's history. All other crimes appear
less atrocious than this scorn of a Saviour's love--this _trampling
under foot the blood of the covenant_. While no finite mind could have
conceived it possible, that Almighty love should be so slighted, yet the
Spirit of prophecy announced this impious ingratitude, long before the
incarnation. When Isaiah _saw the glory of Christ, and spake of him_, he
also saw that he would be _despised and rejected of men_. And by all
their hostility to the doctrines of grace, sinners are only verifying
the description, which inspiration gave long ago, of their blindness and
perverseness. By all their vain reasonings and presumptuous objections,
they just corroborate revealed truth, and evince the desperate
wickedness of the natural heart.

As in the days of the apostles, so in this period of increased light,
_the preaching of the cross_ is esteemed _foolishness_. The message of
redeeming mercy is often received with utter listlessness--often with an
evident disgust--and sometimes with an openly avowed hostility. In the
apostolic age, it might be supposed that the resistance, with which the
Gospel had to contend, arose from the prejudices of a Heathen or Jewish
education, and from a very imperfect knowledge of Christianity. But, at
the present period, the undiminished hostility, which is displayed
against the pure doctrines of redemption, can be attributed to nothing,
but that hatred to the ways of God, which the Scriptures represent as
rankling in the natural heart, and for which they contain the only
remedy.

It requires but a transient view of the religious state, even of
enlightened and refined society, to see that to very many, now, _the
preaching of the cross is foolishness_. While any temporal interest
excites feeling, this theme is listened to with apathy. O, how often are
those statements, which fill heaven with ecstasy, rehearsed to vacant,
listless hearers! How many weep at fictitious woes, who contemplate the
bloody scene of Calvary without a tear! How many hearts glow in
admiration of the benevolence or heroism of a fellow worm, while
entirely unaffected alike by the sacrifice or the triumph of the Son of
God! How often do men express sentiments of the most fervent gratitude
towards earthly benefactors, who would be ashamed of uttering one
emotion of thanks to Him who _gave himself to die_ for them! And is not
this treating the Gospel as _foolishness_? But this heartless unconcern,
criminal as it undoubtedly is, in the sight of God, is not so fearfully
impious--affords not so appalling a disclosure of depravity, as the
absolute disgust and contempt, with which the doctrines of the cross are
sometimes received. In almost every community, there are those who
utterly despise the whole system--who do not disguise their
abhorrence--and who evidently hate the very mention of the subject. How
indignant are such at any effort, in private conversation, to urge upon
their attention themes connected with the dying love of Christ! How
chilling is the effect, when such discourse is attempted, in many
circles of refinement and elegance? And what a brand of infamy is
affixed to the human character, by the fact, that from most such circles
all these topics are absolutely excluded! Let a man confine his
conversation to such subjects as engaged the attention of Christ and his
apostles--such subjects as now employ the hosts of heaven,--let him be
accustomed in company, to bring forward the holy mysteries of
redemption,--and by how many would he be shunned like a pestilence? And
with what scornful hatred are those churches avoided by many, where
nothing is heard but _Jesus Christ and him crucified_? Such are the
open, unequivocal expressions of contempt and disgust, with which many
treat the doctrines of the cross. Do not _they_ esteem them
_foolishness_?

But there is a class of the contemners of evangelical truth,
characterized by more active zeal and decided measures. Far from the
giddy thoughtlessness of those who hardly reflect upon the subject at
all, and from the strange inconsistency of such, as profess to respect
what they really despise and hate,--these feel and express a deep
interest in religious opinions; devote time and attention to theological
studies; and, as the result of their investigations, avow their utter
disbelief of the peculiar doctrines of the cross; and undertake to
demonstrate their falsehood and absurdity. They tell you, they have
maturely examined the whole subject--that they have brought to the
investigation all the aid that extensive reading and critical research
can furnish--that they have carried the lights of science and philosophy
into the dark regions of fanaticism--and have become perfectly
convinced, that the whole system is an assemblage of the grossest
errors. When, however, the array of argument is produced, its force
seems to consist in the unwelcome impressions which the pure Gospel
itself makes upon their minds. They can see no wisdom or fitness in such
an atonement. They see nothing so very terrible in sin, as to require
