This plan, however, was changed within a few months. It was decided to
call upon the priests of the Dominican Order to take charge of the
Jesuit Missions, while the Franciscans put all their strength and energy
into the founding of the new Missions in Alta California.

Thus it came to pass that the Franciscans took charge of the founding of
the California Missions, and that Junipero Serra became the first real
pioneer of what is now so proudly denominated "The Golden State."

The orders that Galvez had received were clear and positive:

"Occupy and fortify San Diego and Monterey for God and the King of
Spain." He was a devout son of the Church, full of enthusiasm, having
good sense, great executive ability, considerable foresight, untiring
energy, and decided contempt for all routine formalities. He began his
work with a truly Western vigor. Being invested with almost absolute
power, there were none above him to interpose vexatious formalities to
hinder the immediate execution of his plans.

[Illustration: JUNIPERO SERRA Founder and First Padre Presidente of the
Franciscan Missions of California From the Schumacker crayon]

[Illustration: MAP OF THE COAST OF CALIFORNIA, SHOWING THE FRANCISCAN
MISSION ESTABLISHMENTS. Map originally made for Palou's Life of Padre
Junipero Serra, published in Mexico in 1787.]

In order that the spiritual part of the work might be as carefully
planned as the political, Galvez summoned Serra. What a fine
combination! Desire and power hand in hand! What nights were spent by
the two in planning! What arguments, what discussions, what final
agreements the old adobe rooms occupied by them must have heard! But it
is by just such men that great enterprises are successfully begun and
executed. For fervor and enthusiasm, power and sense, when combined,
produce results. Plans were formulated with a completeness and rapidity
that equalled the best days of the _Conquistadores_. Four expeditions
were to go: two by land and two by sea. So would the risk of failure be
lessened, and practical knowledge of both routes be gained. Galvez had
two available vessels: the "San Carlos" and the "San Antonio."

For money the visitor-general called upon the Pious Fund, which, on the
expulsion of the Jesuits, he had placed in the hands of a governmental
administrator. He had also determined that the Missions of the peninsula
should do their share to help in the founding of the new Missions, and
Serra approved and helped in the work.

When Galvez arrived, he found Gaspar de Portola acting as civil and
military governor, and Fernando Javier Rivera y Moncada, the former
governor, commanding the garrison at Loreto. Both were captains, Rivera
having been long in the country. He determined to avail himself of the
services of these two men, each of them to command one of the land
expeditions. Consequently with great rapidity, for those days,
operations were set in motion. Rivera in August or September, 1768, was
sent on a commission to visit in succession all the Missions, and gather
from each one all the provisions, live-stock, and implements that could
be spared. He was also to prevail upon all the available families he
could find to go along as colonists. In the meantime, others sent out by
Galvez gathered in church furniture, ornaments, and vestments for the
Missions, and later Serra made a tour for the same purpose. San Jose was
named the patron saint of the expedition, and in December the "San
Carlos" arrived at La Paz partially laden with supplies.

The vessel was in bad condition, so it had to be unloaded, careened,
cleaned, and repaired, and then reloaded, and in this latter work both
Galvez and Serra helped, the former packing the supplies for the Mission
of San Buenaventura, in which he was particularly interested, and Serra
attending to those for San Carlos. They joked each other as they worked,
and when Galvez completed his task ahead of Serra he had considerable
fun at the Padre Presidente's expense. In addition to the two Missions
named, one other, dedicated to San Diego, was first to be established.
By the ninth of January, 1769, the "San Carlos" was ready. Confessions
were heard, masses said, the communion administered, and Galvez made a
rousing speech. Then Serra formally blessed the undertaking, cordially
embraced Fray Parron, to whom the spiritual care of the vessel was
intrusted, the sails were lowered, and off started the first division of
the party that meant so much to the future California. In another vessel
Galvez went along until the "San Carlos" doubled the point and started
northward, when, with gladness in his heart and songs on his lips, he
returned to still further prosecute his work.

The fifteenth of February the "San Antonio," under the command of Perez,
was ready and started. Now the land expeditions must be moved. Rivera
had gathered his stock, etc., at Santa Maria, the most northern of the
Missions, but finding scant pasturage there, he had moved eight or ten
leagues farther north to a place called by the Indians Velicata. Fray
Juan Crespi was sent to join Rivera, and Fray Lasuen met him at Santa
Maria in order to bestow the apostolic blessing ere the journey began,
and on March 24 Lasuen stood at Velicata and saw the little band of
pilgrims start northward for the land of the gentiles, driving their
herds before them. What a procession it must have been! The animals,
driven by Indians under the direction of soldiers and priests,
straggling along or dashing wildly forward as such creatures are wont to
do! Here, as well as in the starting of the "San Carlos" and "San
Antonio," is a great scene for an artist, and some day canvases worthy
the subjects should be placed in the California State Capitol at
Sacramento.

Governor Portola was already on his way north, but Serra was delayed by
an ulcerated foot and leg, and, besides, he had not yet gathered
together all the Mission supplies he needed, so it was May 15 before
this division finally left Velicata. The day before leaving, Serra
established the Mission of San Fernando at the place of their
departure, and left Padre Campa in charge.

Padre Serra's diary, kept in his own handwriting during this trip from
Loreto to San Diego, is now in the Edward E. Ayer Library in Chicago.
Some of his expressions are most striking. In one place, speaking of
Captain Rivera's going from Mission to Mission to take from them
"whatever he might choose of what was in them for the founding of the
new Missions," he says: "Thus he did; and altho it was with a somewhat
heavy hand, it was undergone for God and the king."

The work of Galvez for Alta California was by no means yet accomplished.
Another vessel, the "San Jose," built at his new shipyard, appeared two
days before the "San Antonio" set sail, and soon afterwards Galvez went
across the gulf in it to secure a load of fresh supplies. The sixteenth
of June the "San Jose" sailed for San Diego as a relief boat to the "San
Carlos" and "San Antonio," but evidently met with misfortune, for three
months later it returned to the Loreto harbor with a broken mast and in
general bad condition. It was unloaded and repaired at San Blas, and in
the following June again started out, laden with supplies, but never
reached its destination, disappearing forever without leaving a
trace behind.

[Illustration: SERRA MEMORIAL CROSS, MONTEREY, CALIF]

[Illustration: SERRA CROSS ON MT. RUBIDOUX, RIVERSIDE, CALIF. Under
which sunrise services are held at Easter and Christmastide.]

[Illustration: SERRA STATUE. Erected by Mrs. Leland Stanford, at
Monterey]

[Illustration: STATUE TO JUNIPERO SERRA. The gift of James D. Phelan, in
Golden Gate Park San Francisco.]

The "San Antonio" first arrived at San Diego. About April 11, 1769, it
anchored in the bay, and awakened in the minds of the natives strange
feelings of astonishment and awe. Its presence recalled to them the
"stories of the old," when a similar apparition startled their
ancestors. That other white-winged creature had come long generations
ago, and had gone away, never to be seen again. Was this not to do
likewise? Ah, no! in this vessel was contained the beginning of the end
of the primitive man. The solitude of the centuries was now to be
disturbed and its peace invaded; aboriginal life destroyed forever. The
advent of this vessel was the death knell of the Indian tribes.

Little, however, did either the company on board the "San Antonio" or
the Indians themselves conceive such thoughts as these on that memorable
April day.

But where was the "San Carlos," which sailed almost a month earlier than
the "San Antonio"? She was struggling with difficulties,--leaking
water-casks, bad water, scurvy, cold weather. Therefore it was not until
April 29 that she appeared. In vain the captain of the "San Antonio"
waited for the "San Carlos" to launch a boat and to send him word as to
the cause of the late arrival of the flagship; so he visited her to
discover for himself the cause. He found a sorry state of affairs. All
on board were ill from scurvy. Hastily erecting canvas houses on the
beach, the men of his own crew went to the relief of their suffering
comrades of the other vessel. Then the crew of the relieving ship took
the sickness, and soon there were so few well men left that they could
scarcely attend the sick and bury the dead. Those first two weeks in the
new land, in the month of May, 1769, were never to be forgotten. Of
about ninety sailors, soldiers, and mechanics, less than thirty
survived; over sixty were buried by the wash of the waves of the Bay of
Saint James.

Then came Rivera and Crespi, with Lieutenant Fages and twenty-five
soldiers.

Immediately a permanent camp was sought and found at what is now known
as Old San Diego, where the two old palms still remain, with the ruins
of the _presidio_ on the hill behind. Six weeks were busily occupied in
caring for the sick and in unloading the "San Antonio." Then the fourth
and last party of the explorers arrived,--Governor Portola on June 29,
and Serra on July 1. What a journey that had been for Serra! He had
walked all the way, and, after two days out, a badly ulcerated leg began
to trouble him. Portola wished to send him back, but Serra would not
consent. He called to one of the muleteers and asked him to make just
such a salve for his wound as he would put upon the saddle galls of one
of his animals. It was done, and in a single night the ointment and the
Father's prayers worked the miracle of healing.

After a general thanksgiving, in which exploding gunpowder was used to
give effect, a consultation was held, at which it was decided to send
back the "San Antonio" to San Blas for supplies, and for new crews for
herself and the "San Carlos." A land expedition under Portola was to go
to Monterey, while Serra and others remained at San Diego to found the
Mission. The vessel sailed, Portola and his band started north, and on
July 16, 1769, Serra raised the cross, blessed it, said mass, preached,
and formally established the Mission of San Diego de Alcala.

It mattered not that the Indians held aloof; that only the people who
came on the expedition were present to hear. From the hills beyond,
doubtless, peered and peeped the curious natives. All was mysterious to
them. Later, however, they became troublesome, stealing from the sick
and pillaging from the "San Carlos." At last, they made a determined
raid for plunder, which the Spanish soldiers resisted. A flight of
arrows was the result. A boy was killed and three of the new-comers
wounded. A volley of musket-balls killed three Indians, wounded several
more, and cleared the settlement. After such an introduction, there is
no wonder that conversions were slow. Not a neophyte gladdened the
Father's heart for more than a year.



CHAPTER III

THE MISSIONS FOUNDED BY PADRE JUNIPERO SERRA

San Diego Mission founded, Serra was impatient to have work begun
elsewhere. Urging the governor to go north immediately, he rejoiced when
Portola, Crespi, Rivera, and Pages started, with a band of soldiers and
natives. They set out gaily, gladly. They were sure of a speedy journey
to the Bay of Monterey, discovered by Cabrillo, and seen again and
charted by Vizcaino, where they were to establish the second Mission.

[Illustration: EASTER SUNRISE SERVICE, 1913, UNDER SERRA CROSS, MT.
RUBIDOUX, RIVERSIDE, CALIF.]

[Illustration: MEMORIAL TABLET AND GRAVES OF PADRES SERRA, CRESPI, AND
LASUEN, IN MISSION SAN CARLOS BORROMEO, CARMEL VALLEY, MONTEREY.]

Strange to say, however, when they reached Monterey, in the words of
Scripture, "their eyes were holden," and they did not recognize it. They
found a bay which they fully described, and while we to-day clearly see
that it was the bay they were looking for, they themselves thought it
was another one. Believing that Vizcaino had made an error in his chart,
they pushed on further north. The result of this disappointment was of
vast consequence to the later development of California, for, following
the coast line inland, they were bound to strike the peninsula and
ultimately reach the shores of what is now San Francisco Bay. This
was exactly what was done, and on November 2, 1769, one of Portola's
men, ascending ahead of the others to the crest of a hill, caught sight
of this hitherto unknown and hidden body of water. How he would have
shouted had he understood! How thankful and joyous it would have made
Portola and Crespi and the others. For now was the discovery of that
very harbor that Padre Serra had so fervently hoped and prayed for, the
harbor that was to secure for California a Mission "for our father Saint
Francis." Yet not one of them either knew or seemed to comprehend the
importance of that which their eyes had seen. Instead, they were
disheartened and disappointed by a new and unforeseen obstacle to their
further progress. The narrow channel (later called the Golden Gate by
Fremont), barred their way, and as their provisions were getting low,
and they certainly were much further north than they ought to have been
to find the Bay of Monterey, Portola gave the order for the return, and
sadly, despondently, they went back to San Diego.

On the march south, Portola's mind was made up. This whole enterprise
was foolish and chimerical. He had had enough of it. He was going back
home, and as the "San Antonio" with its promised supplies had not yet
arrived, and the camp was almost entirely out of food, he announced the
abandonment of the expedition and an immediate return to Lower
California.

Now came Serra's faith to the fore, and that resolute determination and
courage that so marked his life. The decision of Portola had gone to his
heart like an arrow. What! Abandon the Missions before they were fairly
begun? Where was their trust in God? It was one hundred and sixty-six
years since Vizcaino had been in this port, and if they left it now,
when would another expedition be sent? In those years that had elapsed
since Vizcaino, how many precious Indian souls had been lost because
they had not received the message of salvation? He pleaded and begged
Portola to reconsider. For awhile the governor stood firm. Serra also
had a strong will. From a letter written to Padre Palou, who was left
behind in charge of the Lower California Missions, we see his intention:
"_If we see that along with the provisions hope vanishes, I shall remain
alone_ with Father Juan Crespi and hold out to the last breath."

With such a resolution as this, Portola could not cope. Yielding to
Serra's persuasion, he consented to wait while a _novena_ (a nine days'
devotional exercise) was made to St. Joseph, the holy patron of the
expedition. Fervently day by day Serra prayed. On the day of San Jose
(St. Joseph) a high mass was celebrated, and Serra preached. On the
fourth day the eager watchers saw the vessel approach. Then, strange to
say, it disappeared, and as the sixth, seventh and eighth days passed
and it did not reappear again, hope seemed to sink lower in the hearts
of all but Serra and his devoted brother Crespi. On the ninth and last
day--would it be seen? Bowing himself in eager and earnest prayer Serra
pleaded that his faith be not shamed, and, to his intense delight,
doubtless while he prayed, the vessel sailed into the bay.

Joy unspeakable was felt by every one. The provisions were here, the
expedition need not be abandoned; the Indians would yet be converted to
Holy Church and all was well. A service of thanksgiving was held, and
happiness smiled on every face.

With new energy, vigor, and hope, Portola set out again for the search
of Monterey, accompanied by Serra as well as Crespi. This time the
attempt was successful. They recognized the bay, and on June 3, 1770, a
shelter of branches was erected on the beach, a cross made ready near an
old oak, the bells were hung and blessed, and the services of founding
began. Padre Serra preached with his usual fervor; he exhorted the
natives to come and be saved, and put to rout all infernal foes by an
abundant sprinkling of holy water. The Mission was dedicated to San
Carlos Borromeo.

Thus two of the long desired Missions were established, and the passion
of Serra's longings, instead of being assuaged, raged now all the
fiercer. It was not long, however, before he found it to be bad policy
to have the Missions for the Indian neophytes too near the _presidio_,
or barracks for the soldiers. These latter could not always be
controlled, and they early began a course which was utterly demoralizing
to both sexes, for the women of a people cannot be debauched without
exciting the men to fierce anger, or making them as bad as their women.
Hence Serra removed the Missions: that of San Diego six miles up the
valley to a point where the ruins now stand, while that of San Carlos he
re-established in the Carmelo Valley.

The Mission next to be established should have been San Buenaventura,
but events stood in the way; so, on July 14, 1771, Serra (who had been
zealously laboring with the heathen near Monterey), with eight soldiers,
three sailors, and a few Indians, passed down the Salinas River and
established the Mission of San Antonio de Padua. The site was a
beautiful one, in an oak-studded glen, near a fair-sized stream. The
passionate enthusiasm of Serra can be understood from the fact that
after the bells were hung from a tree, he loudly tolled them, crying the
while like one possessed: "Come, gentiles, come to the Holy Church, come
and receive the faith of Jesus Christ!" Padre Pieras could not help
reminding his superior that not an Indian was within sight or hearing,
and that it would be more practical to proceed with the ritual. One
native, however, did witness the ceremony, and he soon brought a large
number of his companions, who became tractable enough to help in
erecting the rude church, barracks and houses with which the priests and
soldiers were compelled to be content in those early days.

[Illustration: MISSION SAN CARLOS AND BAY OF MONTEREY.]

[Illustration: JUNIPERO OAK, SAN CARLOS PRESIDIO MISSION, MONTEREY]

[Illustration: STATUE OF SAN LUIS REY, AT PALA MISSION CHAPEL _See page
246._]

On September 8, Padres Somera and Cambon founded the Mission of San
Gabriel Arcangel, originally about six miles from the present site.
Here, at first, the natives were inclined to be hostile, a large force
under two chieftains appearing, in order to prevent the priests from
holding their service. But at the elevation of a painting of the Virgin,
the opposition ceased, and the two chieftains threw their necklaces at
the feet of the Beautiful Queen. Still, a few wicked men can undo in a
short time the work of many good ones. Padre Palou says that outrages by
soldiers upon the Indian women precipitated an attack upon the
Spaniards, especially upon two, at one of whom the chieftain (whose wife
had been outraged by the man) fired an arrow. Stopping it with his
shield, the soldier levelled his musket and shot the injured husband
dead. Ah! sadness of it! The unbridled passions of men of the new race
already foreshadowed the death of the old race, even while the good
priests were seeking to elevate and to Christianize them. This attack
and consequent disturbance delayed still longer the founding of San
Buenaventura.

On his way south (for he had now decided to go to Mexico), Serra
founded, on September 1, 1772, the Mission of San Luis Obispo de Tolosa.
The natives called the location Tixlini, and half a league away was a
famous canyada in which Fages, some time previously, had killed a number
of bears to provide meat for the starving people at Monterey. This act
made the natives well disposed towards the priests in charge of the new
Mission, and they helped to erect buildings, offered their children for
baptism, and brought of their supply of food to the priests, whose
stores were by no means abundant.

While these events were transpiring, Governor Portola had returned to
Lower California, and Lieutenant Fages was appointed commandant in his
stead. This, it soon turned out, was a great mistake. Fages and Serra
did not work well together, and, at the time of the founding of San Luis
Obispo, relations between them were strained almost to breaking. Serra
undoubtedly had just cause for complaint. The enthusiastic, impulsive
missionary, desirous of furthering his important religious work,
believed himself to be restrained by a cold-blooded, official-minded
soldier, to whom routine was more important than the salvation of the
Indians. Serra complained that Fages opened his letters and those of his
fellow missionaries; that he supported his soldiers when their evil
conduct rendered the work of the missionaries unavailing; that he
interfered with the management of the stations and the punishment of
neophytes, and devoted to his own uses the property and facilities of
the Missions.

In the main, this complaint received attention from the Junta in
Mexico. Fages was ultimately removed, and Rivera appointed governor in
his place. More missionaries, money, and supplies were placed at Serra's
disposal, and he was authorized to proceed to the establishment of the
additional Missions which he had planned. He also obtained authority
from the highest powers of the Church to administer the important
sacrament of confirmation. This is a right generally conferred only upon
a bishop and his superiors, but as California was so remote and the
visits of the bishop so rare, it was deemed appropriate to grant this
privilege to Serra.

Rejoicing and grateful, the earnest president sent Padres Fermin
