ugly blossoms.  It is so with animals and men.  Each of them is
placed in the condition best for his appointed mission.

The newly-born baby sucks, sleeps, and cries.  It can do no more nor
less.  Is it not best for it to do so?  When it attained to its
boyhood, he goes to school and is admitted to the first-year class.
He cannot be put in a higher nor lower class. It is best for him to
be the first-year class student.  When his school education is over,
he may get a position in society according to his abilities, or may
lead a miserable life owing to his failure of some sort or other.  In
any case he is in a position best for his special mission ordained by
Providence or the Hum-total of the fruits of his actions and
reactions since all eternity.  He should be contented and happy, and
do what is right with might and main.  Discontent and vexation only
make him more worthy of his ruin Therefore our positions, no matter,
how high or low, no matter how favourable or unfavourable our
environment, we are to be cheerful.  "Do thy best and leave the rest
to Providence," says a Chinese adage. Longfellow also says:

"Do thy best; that is best.
Leave unto thy Lord the rest."





CHAPTER VIII



THE TRAINING OF THE MIND AND THE PRACTICE OF MEDITATION


1. The Method of Instruction Adopted by Zen Masters.

Thus far we have described the doctrine of Zen inculcated by both
Chinese and Japanese masters, and in this chapter we propose to
sketch the practice of mental training and the method of practising
Dhyana or Meditation.  Zen teachers never instruct their pupils by
means of explanation or argument, but urge them to solve by
themselves through the practice of Meditation such problems as--'What
is Buddha?'  What is self?'  'What is the spirit of Bodhidharma?'
'What is life and death?'  'What is the real nature of mind?'  and so
on.  Ten Shwai (To-sotsu), for instance, was wont to put three
questions[FN#229] to the following effect: (1) Your study and
discipline aim at the understanding of the real nature of mind.
Where does the real nature of mind exist?  (2) When you understand
the real nature of mind, you are free from birth and death.  How can
you be saved when you are at the verge of death?  (3) When you are
free from birth and death, you know where you go after death.  Where
do you go when your body is reduced to elements?  The pupils are not
requested to express their solution of these problems in the form of
a theory or an argument, but to show how they have grasped the
profound meaning implied in these problems, how they have established
their conviction, and how they can carry out what they grasped in
their daily life.


[FN#229]  The famous three difficult questions, known as the Three
Gates of Teu Shwai (To Sotsu San Kwan), who died in 1091. See Mu Mon
Kwan, xlvii.


A Chinese Zen master[FN#230] tells us that the method of instruction
adopted by Zen may aptly be compared with that of an old burglar who
taught his son the art of burglary.  The burglar one evening said to
his little son, whom he desired to instruct in the secret of his
trade: "Would you not, my dear boy, be a great burglar like myself?"
"Yes, father," replied the promising young man."  "Come with me,
then. I will teach you the art."  So saying, the man went out,
followed by his son.  Finding a rich mansion in a certain village,
the veteran burglar made a hole in the wall that surrounded it.
Through that hole they crept into the yard, and opening a window with
complete ease broke into the house, where they found a huge box
firmly locked up as if its contents were very valuable articles.  The
old man clapped his hands at the lock, which, strange to tell,
unfastened itself.  Then he removed the cover and told his son to get
into it and pick up treasures as fast as he could.  No sooner had the
boy entered the box than the father replaced the cover and locked it
up.  He then exclaimed at the top of his voice: "Thief! thief! thief!
thief!"  Thus, having aroused the inmates, he went out without taking
anything.  All the house was in utter confusion for a while; but
finding nothing stolen, they went to bed again.  The boy sat holding
his breath a short while; but making up his mind to get out of his
narrow prison, began to scratch the bottom of the box with his
finger-nails.  The servant of the house, listening to the noise,
supposed it to be a mouse gnawing at the inside of the box; so she
came out, lamp in hand, and unlocked it.  On removing the cover, she
was greatly surprised to find the boy instead of a little mouse, and
gave alarm.  In the meantime the boy got out of the box and went down
into the yard, hotly pursued by the people.  He ran as fast as
possible toward the well, picked up a large stone, threw it down into
it, and hid himself among the bushes.  The pursuers, thinking the
thief fell into the well, assembled around it, and were looking into
it, while the boy crept out unnoticed through the hole and went home
in safety.  Thus the burglar taught his son how to rid himself of
overwhelming difficulties by his own efforts; so also Zen teachers
teach their pupils how to overcome difficulties that beset them on
all sides and work out salvation by themselves.


[FN#230]  Wu Tsu (Go So), the teacher of Yuen Wu (En Go).



2. The First Step in the Mental Training.

Some of the old Zen masters are said to have attained to supreme
Enlightenment after the practice of Meditation for one week, some for
one day, some for a score of years, and some for a few months.  The
practice of Meditation, however, is not simply a means for
Enlightenment, as is usually supposed, but also it is the enjoyment
of Nirvana, or the beatitude of Zen.  It is a matter, of course, that
we have fully to understand the doctrine of Zen, and that we have to
go through the mental training peculiar to Zen in order to be
Enlightened.

The first step in the mental training is to become the master of
external things.  He who is addicted to worldly pleasures, however
learned or ignorant he may be, however high or low his social
position may be, is a servant to mere things.  He cannot adapt the
external world to his own end, but he adapts himself to it.  He is
constantly employed, ordered, driven by sensual objects.  Instead of
taking possession of wealth, he is possessed by wealth.  Instead of
drinking liquors, he is swallowed up by his liquors.  Balls and music
bid him to run mad.  Games and shows order him not to stay at home.
Houses, furniture, pictures, watches, chains, hats, bonnets, rings,
bracelets, shoes--in short, everything has a word to command him.
How can such a person be the master of things?  To Ju (Na-kae) says:
"There is a great jail, not a jail for criminals, that contains the
world in it.  Fame, gain, pride, and bigotry form its four walls.
Those who are confined in it fall a prey to sorrow and sigh for ever."

To be the ruler of things we have first to shut up all our senses,
and turn the currents of thoughts inward, and see ourselves as the
centre of the world, and meditate that we are the beings of highest
intelligence; that Buddha never puts us at the mercy of natural
forces; that the earth is in our possession; that everything on earth
is to be made use of for our noble ends; that fire, water, air,
grass, trees, rivers, hills, thunder, cloud, stars, the moon, the
sun, are at our command; that we are the law-givers of the natural
phenomena; that we are the makers of the phenomenal world; that it is
we that appoint a mission through life, and determine the fate of man.



3. The Next Step in the Mental Training.

In the next place we have to strive to be the master of our bodies.
With most of the unenlightened, body holds absolute control over
Self.  Every order of the former has to be faithfully obeyed by the
latter.  Even if Self revolts against the tyranny of body, it is
easily trampled down under the brutal hoofs of bodily passion.  For
example, Self wants to be temperate for the sake of health, and would
fain pass by the resort for drinking, but body would force Self into
it.  Self at times lays down a strict dietetic rule for himself, but
body would threaten Self to act against both the letter and spirit of
the rule.  Now Self aspires to get on a higher place among sages, but
body pulls Self down to the pavement of masses.  Now Self proposes to
give some money to the poor, but body closes the purse tightly.  Now
Self admires divine beauty, but body compels him to prefer
sensuality.  Again, Self likes spiritual liberty, but body confines
him in its dungeons.

Therefore, to get Enlightened, we must establish the authority of
Self over the whole body.  We must use our bodies as we use our
clothes in order to accomplish our noble purposes.  Let us command
body not to shudder under a cold shower-bath in inclement weather,
not to be nervous from sleepless nights, not to be sick with any sort
of food, not to groan under a surgeon's knife, not to succumb even if
we stand a whole day in the midsummer sun, not to break down under
any form of disease, not to be excited in the thick of
battlefield--in brief, we have to control our body as we will.

Sit in a quiet place and meditate in imagination that body is no more
bondage to you, that it is your machine for your work of life, that
you are not flesh, that you are the governor of it, that you can use
it at pleasure, and that it always obeys your order faithfully.
Imagine body as separated from you.  When it cries out, stop it
instantly, as a mother does her baby.  When it disobeys you, correct
it by discipline, as a master does his pupil.  When it is wanton,
tame it down, as a horse-breaker does his wild horse.  When it is
sick, prescribe to it, as a doctor does to his patient.  Imagine that
you are not a bit injured, even if it streams blood; that you are
entirely safe, even if it is drowned in water or burned by fire.

E-Shun, a pupil and sister of Ryo-an,[FN#231] a famous Japanese
master, burned herself calmly sitting cross-legged on a pile of
firewood which consumed her.  She attained to the complete mastery of
her body.  Socrates' self was never poisoned, even if his person was
destroyed by the venom he took.  Abraham Lincoln himself stood
unharmed, even if his body was laid low by the assassin.  Masa-shige
was quite safe, even if his body was hewed by the traitors' swords.
Those martyrs that sang at the stake to the praise of God could never
be burned, even if their bodies were reduced to ashes, nor those
seekers after truth who were killed by ignorance and superstition.
Is it not a great pity to see a man endowed with divine spirit and
power easily upset by a bit of headache, or crying as a child under a
surgeon's knife, or apt to give up the ghost at the coming of little
danger, or trembling through a little cold, or easily laid low by a
bit of indisposition, or yielding to trivial temptation?


[FN#231]  Ryo an (E-myo, died 1411), the founder of the monastery of
Sai-jo-ji, near the city of Odawara. See To-jo-ren-to-roku.


It is no easy matter to be the dictator of body.  It is not a matter
of theory, but of practice.  You must train your body that you may
enable it to bear any sort of suffering, and to stand unflinched in
the face of hardship.  It is for this that So-rai[FN#232] (Ogiu) laid
himself on a sheet of straw-mat spread on the ground in the coldest
nights of winter, or was used to go up and down the roof of his
house, having himself clad in heavy armour.  It is for this that
ancient Japanese soldiers led extremely simple lives, and that they
often held the meeting-of-perseverance,[FN#233] in which they exposed
themselves to the coldest weather in winter or to the hottest weather
in summer.  It is for this that Katsu Awa practised fencing in the
middle of night in a deep forest.[FN#234]


[FN#232]  One of the greatest scholars of the Tokugawa period, who
died in 1728. See Etsu-wa-bun-ko.

[FN#233]  The soldiers of the Tokugawa period were used to hold such
a meeting.

[FN#234]  Kai-shu-gen-ko-roku.


Ki-saburo, although he was a mere outlaw, having his left arm half
cut at the elbow in a quarrel, ordered his servant to cut it off with
a saw, and during the operation he could calmly sit talking and
laughing with his friends. Hiko-kuro (Takayama),[FN#235] a Japanese
loyalist of note, one evening happened to come to a bridge where two
robbers were lying in wait for him.  They lay fully stretching
themselves, each with his head in the middle of the bridge, that he
might not pass across it without touching them.  Hiko-kuro was not
excited nor disheartened, but calmly approached the vagabonds and
passed the bridge, treading upon their heads, which act so frightened
them that they took to their heels without doing any harm to
him.[FN#236]


[FN#235]  A well-known loyalist in the Tokugawa period, who died in
1793.

[FN#236]  Etsu-wa-bun-ko.


The history of Zen is full of the anecdotes that show Zen priests
were the lords of their bodies.  Here we quote a single example by
way of illustration: Ta Hwui (Dai-ye), once having had a boil on his
hip, sent for a doctor, who told him that it was fatal, that he must
not sit in Meditation as usual.  Then Ta Hwui said to the physician:
"I must sit in Meditation with all my might during my remaining days,
for if your diagnosis be not mistaken, I shall die before long."  He
sat day and night in constant Meditation, quite forgetful of his
boil, which was broken and gone by itself.[FN#237]

[FN#237]  Sho-bo-gen-zo-zui-mon-ki, by Do-gen.



4. The Third Step in the Mental Training.

To be the lord of mind is more essential to Enlightenment, which, in
a sense, is the clearing away of illusions, the putting out of mean
desires and passions, and the awakening of the innermost wisdom.  He
alone can attain to real happiness who has perfect control over his
passions tending to disturb the equilibrium of his mind.  Such
passions as anger, hatred, jealousy, sorrow, worry, grudge, and fear
always untune one's mood and break the harmony of one's mind.  They
poison one's body, not in a figurative, but in a literal sense of the
word.  Obnoxious passions once aroused never fail to bring about the
physiological change in the nerves, in the organs, and eventually in
the whole constitution, and leave those injurious impressions that
make one more liable to passions of similar nature.

We do not mean, however, that we ought to be cold and passionless, as
the most ancient Hinayanists were used to be.  Such an attitude has
been blamed by Zen masters.  "What is the best way of living for us
monks?" asked a monk to Yun Ku (Un-go), who replied: "You had better
live among mountains."  Then the monk bowed politely to the teacher,
who questioned: "How did you understand me?"  "Monks, as I
understood," answered the man, "ought to keep their hearts as
immovable as mountains, not being moved either by good or by evil,
either by birth or by death, either by prosperity or by adversity."
Hereupon Yun Ku struck the monk with his stick and said: "You forsake
the Way of the old sages, and will bring my followers to perdition!"
Then, turning to another monk, inquired: "How did you understand me?"
 "Monks, as I understand," replied the man, "ought to shut their eyes
to attractive sights and close their ears to musical notes."  "You,
too," exclaimed Yun Ka, "forsake the Way of the old sages, and will
bring my followers to perdition!"  An old woman, to quote another
example repeatedly told by Zen masters, used to give food and
clothing to a monk for a score of years.  One day she instructed a
young girl to embrace and ask him: "How do you feel now?"  "A
lifeless tree," replied the monk coolly, "stands on cold rock. There
is no warmth, as if in the coldest season of the year."  The matron,
being told of this, observed: "Oh that I have made offerings to such
a vulgar fellow for twenty years!"  She forced the monk to leave the
temple and reduced it to ashes.[FN#238]


[FN#238]  These instances are quoted from Zen-rin-rui-shu.


If you want to secure Dhyana, let go of your anxieties and failures
in the past; let bygones be bygones; cast aside enmity, shame, and
trouble, never admit them into your brain; let pass the imagination
and anticipation of future hardships and sufferings; let go of all
your annoyances, vexations, doubts, melancholies, that impede your
speed in the race of the struggle for existence.  As the miser sets
his heart on worthless dross and accumulates it, so an unenlightened
person clings to worthless mental dross and spiritual rubbish, and
makes his mind a dust-heap.  Some people constantly dwell on the
minute details of their unfortunate circumstances, to make themselves
more unfortunate than they really are; some go over and over again
the symptoms of their disease to think themselves into serious
illness; and some actually bring evils on them by having them
constantly in view and waiting for them.  A man asked Poh Chang
(Hyaku-jo): "How shall I learn the Law?"  "Eat when you are hungry,"
replied the teacher; " sleep when you are tired.  People do not
simply eat at table, but think of hundreds of things; they do not
simply sleep in bed, but think of thousands of things."[FN#239]


[FN#239]  E-gen and Den-to-roku.


A ridiculous thing it is, in fact, that man or woman, endowed with
the same nature as Buddha's, born the lord of all material objects,
is ever upset by petty cares, haunted by the fearful phantoms of his
or her own creation, and burning up his or her energy in a fit of
passion, wasting his or her vitality for the sake of foolish or
insignificant things.

It is a man who can keep the balance of his mind under any
circumstances, who can be calm and serene in the hottest strife of
life, that is worthy of success, reward, respect, and reputation, for
he is the master of men.  It was at the age of forty-seven that Wang
Yang Ming[FN#240] (O-yo-mei) won a splendid victory over the rebel
army which threatened the throne of the Ming dynasty.  During that
warfare Wang was giving a course of lectures to a number of students
at the headquarters of the army, of which he was the
Commander-in-chief.  At the very outset of the battle a messenger
