the latter interpretation.]

[Footnote 4: Eva/m/ jij/n/anasya brahma/nas/
/ko/tanabhogvabhutaga/d/arupsattvara, istamomayapradhanad vyav/ri/ttir
ukta, idani/m/ karmava/s/vat trigu/n/atmakaprik/ri/u
sa/m/sangammittanamavidhan intadukhasagaranimajjaoni/s/addha/h/. /k/i
pratya gaumano nyan nikhilaheyapratauika/m/ miatimyanandam brahmeti
pratipadyate, anandamayo bhyasat.]

[Footnote 5: There is no reason to consider the passage 'atra ke/k/it'
in /S/a@nkara's bhashya on Sutra 23 an interpolation as Deussen does (p.
30). It simply contains a criticism passed by /S/a@nkara on other
commentators.]

[Footnote 6: To the passages on pp. 150 and 153 of the Sanskrit text,
which Deussen thinks to be interpolations, there likewise applies the
remark made in the preceding note.]

[Footnote 7: Givaysa iva parasyapi brahma/n/a/h/ /s/arirantarvaititvam
abhyupagata/m/ /k/et tadvad eva
/s/arirasainbandhaprayuktasukhadukhopabhogapraptir hi /k/en na,
hetuvai/s/eshyat, na hi /s/arirantarvartitvam eva
sukhadukhopabhogahetu/h/ api tu pu/n/yapaparnpakarmaparavasatva/m/ ta/k/
/K/apahatapapmana/h/ parahatmano na sambhavati.]

[Footnote 8: The second interpretation given on pp. 184-5 of the
Sanskrit text (beginning with apara aha) Deussen considers to be an
interpolation, caused by the reference to the Paingi upanishad in
/S/a@nkara's comment on I, 3, 7 (p. 232). But there is no reason
whatsoever for such an assumption. The passage on p. 232 shows that
/S/a@nkara considered the explanation of the mantra given in the
Paingi-upanishad worth quoting, and is in fact fully intelligible only
in case of its having been quoted before by /S/a@nkara himself.--That
the 'apara' quotes the B/ri/hadara/n/yaka not according to the Ka/n/va
text--to quote from which is /S/a@nkara's habit--but from the
Madhyandina text, is due just to the circumstance of his being an
'apara,' i.e. not /S/a@nkara.]

[Footnote 9: Ita/s/ /k/aitad evam. Anuk/ri/tes tasya /k/a. Tasya
daharakasasya parabrahma/n/o snukarad ayam apahatapapmatvadigu/n/ako
vimuktabandha/h/ pratyagatma na daharaka/s/a/h/ tadanukaras tatsamya/m/
tatha hi pratyagalmanozpi vimuktasya parabrahmanukara/h/ sruyate yada
pa/s/ya/h/ pa/s/yate rukmavar/n/a/m/ kartaram i/s/a/m/ purusha/m/
brahmayoni/m/ tada vidvan pu/n/yapape vidhuya nira/ng/ana/h/ parama/m/
samyam upaitity atos'nukarta prajapativakyanirdish/t/a/h/ anukarya/m/
para/m/ brahma na daharaka/s/a/h/. Api /k/a smaryate. Sa/m/sari/n/oszpi
muktavasthaya/m/ paramasamyapattilaksha/n/a/h/ parabrahmanukara/h/
smaryate ida/m/ j/n/anam upasritya, &c.--Ke/k/id anuk/ri/tes tasya
/k/api smaryate iti /k/a sutradvayam adhikara/n/antara/m/ tam eva
bhantam anubhati sarva/m/ tasya bhasa sarvam ida/m/ vibhatity asya/h/
/s/rute/h/ parabrahmaparatvanir/n/ayaya prav/ri/tta/m/ vadanti. Tat tv
ad/ris/yatvadigu/n/ako dharmokte/h/ dyubhvadyayatana/m/ sva/s/abdad ity
adhi kara/n/advayena tasya prakara/n/asya brahmavishayatvapratipadanat
jyoti/sk/ara/n/abhidhanat ity adishu parasya brahma/n/o
bharupatvavagates /k/a purvapakshanutthanad ayukta/m/
sutraksharavairupya/k/ /k/a.]

[Footnote 10: Yadi paramatma na bhokta eva/m/ taihi bhokt /i/taya
pratiyamano jiva eva syad ity asankyaha atta.]

[Footnote 11: Sthanadivyapade/s/a/k/ /k/a ity atra ya/h/ /k/akshushi
tish/th/ann ity adina pratipadyamana/m/ /k/akshushi
sthitiniyamanadika/m/ paramatmana eveti siddha/m/ k/ri/tva
akshipurushasya paramatmatva/m/ sadhitam idani/m/ tad eva samarthayate
antaryau.]

[Footnote 12: Anandamaya/h/ I, 1, 12; anta/h/ I, i, 20; aka/s/a/h/ I, 1,
22; prana/h/ I, 1, 23; jyoti/h/ I, 1, 24; prana/h/ I, 1, 28; atta I, 2,
9; guha/m/ pravish/t/au I, 2, 11; antara I, 2,13; antaryami I, 2, 18;
ad/ris/yatvadigu/n/aka/h/ I, 2, 21; vai/s/vanara/h/ I, 2, 24;
dyubhvadyayatanam I, 3, 1; bhuma I, 3, 8; aksheram I, 3, 10; sa/h/ I, 3,
13; dahara/h/ I, 3, 14; pramita/h/ I, 3, 24; (jyoti/h/ 40;) aka/s/a/h/
I, 3,41.]


SECOND ADHYAYA.


The first adhyaya has proved that all the Vedanta-texts unanimously
teach that there is only one cause of the world, viz. Brahman, whose
nature is intelligence, and that there exists no scriptural passage
which can be used to establish systems opposed to the Vedanta, more
especially the Sa@nkhya system. The task of the two first padas of the
second adhyaya is to rebut any objections which may be raised against
the Vedanta doctrine on purely speculative grounds, apart from
scriptural authority, and to show, again on purely speculative grounds,
that none of the systems irreconcilable with the Vedanta can be
satisfactorily established.


PADA I.


Adhikara/n/a I refutes the Sa@nkhya objection that the acceptation of
the Vedanta system involves the rejection of the Sa@nkhya doctrine which
after all constitutes a part of Sm/ri/ti, and as such has claims on
consideration.--To accept the Sa@nkhya-sm/ri/ti, the Vedantin replies,
would compel us to reject other Sm/ri/tis, such as the Manu-sm/ri/ti,
which are opposed to the Sa@nkhya doctrine. The conflicting claims of
Sm/ri/tis can be settled only on the ground of the Veda, and there can
be no doubt that the Veda does not confirm the Sa@nkhya-sm/ri/ti, but
rather those Sm/ri/tis which teach the origination of the world from an
intelligent primary cause.

Adhik. II (3) extends the same line of argumentation to the
Yoga-sm/ri/ti.

Adhik. III (4-11) shows that Brahman, although of the nature of
intelligence, yet may be the cause of the non-intelligent material
world, and that it is not contaminated by the qualities of the world
when the latter is refunded into Brahman. For ordinary experience
teaches us that like does not always spring from like, and that the
qualities of effected things when the latter are refunded into their
causes--as when golden ornaments, for instance, are melted and thereby
become simple gold again--do not continue to exist in those
causes.--Here also the argumentation is specially directed against the
Sa@nkhyas, who, in order to account for the materiality and the various
imperfections of the world, think it necessary to assume a causal
substance participating in the same characteristics.

Adhik. IV (12) points out that the line of reasoning followed in the
preceding adhikara/n/a is valid also against other theories, such as the
atomistic doctrine.

The one Sutra (13) constituting Adhik. V teaches, according to
/S/a@nkara, that although the enjoying souls as well as the objects of
fruition are in reality nothing but Brahman, and on that account
identical, yet the two sets may practically be held apart, just as in
ordinary life we hold apart, and distinguish as separate individual
things, the waves, ripples, and foam of the sea, although at the bottom
waves, ripples, and foam are all of them identical as being neither more
nor less than sea-water.--The /S/ri-bhashya gives a totally different
interpretation of the Sutra, according to which the latter has nothing
whatever to do with the eventual non-distinction of enjoying souls and
objects to be enjoyed. Translated according to Ramanuja's view, the
Sutra runs as follows: 'If non-distinction (of the Lord and the
individual souls) is said to result from the circumstance of (the Lord
himself) becoming an enjoyer (a soul), we refute this objection by
instances from every-day experience.' That is to say: If it be
maintained that from our doctrine previously expounded, according to
which this world springs from the Lord and constitutes his body, it
follows that the Lord, as an embodied being, is not essentially
different from other souls, and subject to fruition as they are; we
reply that the Lord's having a body does not involve his being subject
to fruition, not any more than in ordinary life a king, although himself
an embodied being, is affected by the experiences of pleasure and pain
which his servants have to undergo.--The construction which Ramanuja
puts on the Sutra is not repugnant either to the words of the Sutra or
to the context in which the latter stands, and that it rests on earlier
authority appears from a quotation made by Ramanuja from the
Drami/d/abhashyakara[13].

Adhik. VI (14-20) treats of the non-difference of the effect from the
cause; a Vedanta doctrine which is defended by its adherents against the
Vai/s/eshikas according to whom the effect is something different from
the cause.--The divergent views of /S/a@nkara and Ramanuja on this
important point have been sufficiently illustrated in the general sketch
of the two systems.

Adhik. VII (21-23) refutes the objection that, from the Vedic passages
insisting on the identity of the Lord and the individual soul, it
follows that the Lord must be like the individual soul the cause of
evil, and that hence the entire doctrine of an all-powerful and all-wise
Lord being the cause of the world has to be rejected. For, the Sutrakira
remarks, the creative principle of the world is additional to, i.e.
other than, the individual soul, the difference of the two being
distinctly declared by Scripture.--The way in which the three Sutras
constituting this adhikara/n/a are treated by /S/a@nkara on the one hand
and Ramanuja on the other is characteristic. Ramanuja throughout simply
follows the words of the Sutras, of which Sutra 21 formulates the
objection based on such texts as 'Thou art that,' while Sutra 22 replies
that Brahman is different from the soul, since that is expressly
declared by Scripture. /S/a@nkara, on the other hand, sees himself
obliged to add that the difference of the two, plainly maintained in
Sutra 22, is not real, but due to the soul's fictitious limiting
adjuncts.

Adhik. VIII (24, 25) shows that Brahman, although destitute of material
and instruments of action, may yet produce the world, just as gods by
their mere power create palaces, animals, and the like, and as milk by
itself turns into curds.

Adhik. IX (26-29) explains that, according to the express doctrine of
Scripture, Brahman does not in its entirety pass over into the world,
and, although emitting the world from itself, yet remains one and
undivided. This is possible, according to /S/a@nkara, because the world
is unreal; according to Ramanuja, because the creation is merely the
visible and tangible manifestation of what previously existed in Brahman
in a subtle imperceptible condition.

Adhik. X (30, 31) teaches that Brahman, although destitute of
instruments of action, is enabled to create the world by means of the
manifold powers which it possesses.

Adhik. XI (32, 33) assigns the motive of the creation, or, more properly
expressed, teaches that Brahman, in creating the world, has no motive in
the strict sense of the word, but follows a mere sportive impulse.

Adhik. XII (34-36) justifies Brahman from the charges of partiality and
cruelty which might be brought against it owing to the inequality of
position and fate of the various animate beings, and the universal
suffering of the world. Brahman, as a creator and dispenser, acts with a
view to the merit and demerit of the individual souls, and has so acted
from all eternity.

Adhik. XIII (37) sums up the preceding argumentation by declaring that
all the qualities of Brahman--omniscience and so on--are such as to
capacitate it for the creation of the world.


PADA II.


The task of the second pada is to refute, by arguments independent of
Vedic passages, the more important philosophical theories concerning the
origin of the world which are opposed to the Vedanta view.--The first
adhikara/n/a (1-10) is directed against the Sa@nkhyas, whose doctrine
had already been touched upon incidentally in several previous places,
and aims at proving that a non-intelligent first cause, such as the
pradhana of the Sa@nkhyas, is unable to create and dispose.--The second
adhikara/n/a (11-17) refutes the Vai/s/eshika tenet that the world
originates from atoms set in motion by the ad/ri/sh/t/a.--The third and
fourth adhikara/n/as are directed against various schools of Bauddha
philosophers. Adhik. III (18-27) impugns the view of the so-called
sarvastitvavadins, or bahyarthavadins, who maintain the reality of an
external as well as an internal world; Adhik. IV (28-32) is directed
against the vij/n/anavadins, according to whom ideas are the only
reality.--The last Sutra of this adhikara/n/a is treated by Ramanuja as
a separate adhikara/n/a refuting the view of the Madhyamikas, who teach
that everything is void, i.e. that nothing whatever is real.--Adhik. V
(33-36) is directed against the doctrine of the Jainas; Adhik. VI
(37-41) against those philosophical schools which teach that a highest
Lord is not the material but only the operative cause of the world.

The last adhikara/n/a of the pada (42-45) refers, according to the
unanimous statement of the commentators, to the doctrine of the
Bhagavatas or Pa/nk/aratras. But /S/a@nkara and Ramanuja totally
disagree as to the drift of the Sutrakara's opinion regarding that
system. According to the former it is condemned like the systems
previously referred to; according to the latter it is approved
of.--Sutras 42 and 43, according to both commentators, raise objections
against the system; Sutra 42 being directed against the doctrine that
from the highest being, called Vasudeva, there is originated
Sa@nkarsha/n/a, i.e. the jiva, on the ground that thereby those
scriptural passages would be contradicted which teach the soul's
eternity; and Sutra 43 impugning the doctrine that from Sa@nkarsha/n/a
there springs Pradyumna, i.e. the manas.--The Sutra on which the
difference of interpretation turns is 44. Literally translated it runs,
'Or, on account of there being' (or, 'their being') 'knowledge and so
on, there is non-contradiction of that.'--This means, according to
/S/a@nkara, 'Or, if in consequence of the existence of knowledge and so
on (on the part of Sa@nkarsha/n/a, &c. they be taken not as soul, mind,
&c. but as Lords of pre-eminent knowledge, &c.), yet there is
non-contradiction of that (viz. of the objection raised in Sutra 42
against the Bhagavata doctrine).'--According to Ramanuja, on the other
hand, the Sutra has to be explained as follows: 'Or, rather there is
noncontradiction of that (i.e. the Pa/nk/aratra doctrine) on account of
their being knowledge and so on (i.e. on account of their being
Brahman).' Which means: Since Sa@nkarsha/n/a and so on are merely forms
of manifestation of Brahman, the Pa/nk/aratra doctrine, according to
which they spring from Brahman, is not contradicted.--The form of the
Sutra makes it difficult for us to decide which of the two
interpretations is the right one; it, however, appears to me that the
explanations of the 'va' and of the 'tat,' implied in Ramanuja's
comment, are more natural than those resulting from /S/a@nkara's
interpretation. Nor would it be an unnatural proceeding to close the
polemical pada with a defence of that doctrine which--in spite of
objections--has to be viewed as the true one.


PADA III.


The third pada discusses the question whether the different forms of
existence which, in their totality, constitute the world have an origin
or not, i.e. whether they are co-eternal with Brahman, or issue from it
and are refunded into it at stated intervals.

The first seven adhikara/n/as treat of the five elementary
substances.--Adhik. I (1-7) teaches that the ether is not co-eternal
with Brahman, but springs from it as its first effect.--Adhik. II (8)
shows that air springs from ether; Adhik. IV, V, VI (10; 11; 12) that
fire springs from air, water from fire, earth from water.--Adhik. III
(9) explains by way of digression that Brahman, which is not some
special entity, but quite generally 'that which is,' cannot have
originated from anything else.

Adhik. VII (13) demonstrates that the origination of one element from
another is due, not to the latter in itself, but to Brahman acting in
it.

Adhik. VIII (14) teaches that the reabsorption of the elements into
Brahman takes place in the inverse order of their emission.

Adhik. IX (15) remarks that the indicated order in which the emission
and the reabsorption of the elementary substances take place is not
interfered with by the creation and reabsorption of the organs of the
soul, i.e. the sense organs and the internal organ (manas); for they
also are of elemental nature, and as such created and retracted together
with the elements of which they consist.

The remainder of the pada is taken up by a discussion of the nature of
the individual soul, the jiva.--Adhik. X (16) teaches that expressions
such as 'Devadatta is born,' 'Devadatta has died,' strictly apply to the
body only, and are transferred to the soul in so far only as it is
connected with a body.

Adhik. XI (17) teaches that the individual soul is, according to
Scripture, permanent, eternal, and therefore not, like the ether and the
other elements, produced from Brahman at the time of creation.--This
Sutra is of course commented on in a very different manner by /S/a@nkara
on the one hand and Ramanuja on the other. According to the former, the
jiva is in reality identical--and as such co-eternal--with Brahman; what
originates is merely the soul's connexion with its limiting adjuncts,
and that connexion is moreover illusory.--According to Ramanuja, the
jiva is indeed an effect of Brahman, but has existed in Brahman from all
eternity as an individual being and as a mode (prakara) of Brahman. So
indeed have also the material elements; yet there is an important
distinction owing to which the elements may be said to originate at the
time of creation, while the same cannot be said of the soul. Previously
to creation the material elements exist in a subtle condition in which
they possess none of the qualities that later on render them the objects
of ordinary experience; hence, when passing over into the gross state at
the time of creation, they may be said to originate. The souls, on the
other hand, possess at all times the same essential qualities, i.e. they
are cognizing agents; only, whenever a new creation takes place, they
associate themselves with bodies, and their intelligence therewith
undergoes a certain expansion or development (vikasa); contrasting with
the unevolved or contracted state (sanko/k/a) which characterised it
during the preceding pralaya. But this change is not a change of
essential nature (svarupanyathabhava) and hence we have to distinguish
the souls as permanent entities from the material elements which at the
time of each creation and reabsorption change their essential
characteristics.

Adhik. XII (18) defines the nature of the individual soul. The Sutra
declares that the soul is 'j/n/a.' This means, according to /S/a@nkara,
that intelligence or knowledge does not, as the Vai/s/eshikas teach,
constitute a mere attribute of the soul which in itself is essentially
non-intelligent, but is the very essence of the soul. The soul is not a
knower, but knowledge; not intelligent, but intelligence.--Ramanuja, on
the other hand, explains 'j/n/a' by 'j/n/at/ri/,' i.e. knower, knowing
agent, and considers the Sutra to be directed not only against the
Vai/s/eshikas, but also against those philosophers who--like the
Sa@nkhyas and the Vedantins of /S/a@nkara's school--maintain that the
soul is not a knowing agent, but pure /k/aitanya.--The wording of the
Sutra certainly seems to favour Ramanuja's interpretation; we can hardly
imagine that an author definitely holding the views of /S/a@nkara
should, when propounding the important dogma of the soul's nature, use
the term j/n/a of which the most obvious interpretation j/n/at/ri/, not
j/n/anam.

Adhik. XIII (19-32) treats the question whether the individual soul is
a/n/u, i.e. of very minute size, or omnipresent, all-pervading
(sarvagata, vyapin). Here, again, we meet with diametrically opposite
views.--In /S/a@nkara's opinion the Sutras 19-38 represent the
purvapaksha view, according to which the jiva is a/n/u, while Sutra 29
formulates the siddhanta, viz. that the jiva, which in reality is
all-pervading, is spoken of as a/n/u in some scriptural passages,
because the qualities of the internal organ--which itself is
a/n/u--constitute the essence of the individual soul as long as the
latter is implicated in the sa/m/sara.--According to Ramanuja, on the
other hand, the first Sutra of the adhikara/n/a gives utterance to the
siddhanta view, according to which the soul is of minute size; the
Sutras 20-25 confirm this view and refute objections raised against it;
while the Sutras 26-29 resume the question already mooted under Sutra
18, viz. in what relation the soul as knowing agent (j/n/at/ri/) stands
to knowledge (j/n/ana).--In order to decide between the conflicting
claims of these two interpretations we must enter into some
details.--/S/a@nkara maintains that Sutras 19-28 state and enforce a
purvapaksha view, which is finally refuted in 29. What here strikes us
at the outset, is the unusual length to which the defence of a mere
prima facie view is carried; in no other place the Sutras take so much
trouble to render plausible what is meant to be rejected in the end, and
an unbiassed reader will certainly feel inclined to think that in 19-28
we have to do, not with the preliminary statement of a view finally to
be abandoned, but with an elaborate bona fide attempt to establish and
vindicate an essential dogma of the system. Still it is not altogether
impossible that the purvapaksha should here be treated at greater length
than usual, and the decisive point is therefore whether we can, with
/S/a@nkara, look upon Sutra 29 as embodying a refutation of the
purvapaksha and thus implicitly acknowledging the doctrine that the
individual soul is all-pervading. Now I think there can be no doubt that
/S/a@nkara's interpretation of the Sutra is exceedingly forced.
Literally translated (and leaving out the non-essential word
'praj/n/avat') the Sutra runs as follows: 'But on account of that
quality (or "those qualities;" or else "on account of the quality--or
qualities--of that") being the essence, (there is) that designation (or
"the designation of that").' This /S/a@nkara maintains to mean, 'Because
the qualities of the buddhi are the essence of the soul in the sa/m/sara
state, therefore the soul itself is sometimes spoken of as a/n/u.' Now,
in the first place, nothing in the context warrants the explanation of
the first 'tat' by buddhi. And--which is more important--in the second
place, it is more than doubtful whether on /S/a@nkara's own system the
qualities of the buddhi--such as pleasure, pain, desire, aversion,
&c.--can with any propriety be said to constitute the essence of the
soul even in the sa/m/sara state. The essence of the soul in whatever
state, according to /S/a@nkara's system, is knowledge or intelligence;
whatever is due to its association with the buddhi is non-essential or,
more strictly, unreal, false.

There are no similar difficulties in the way of Ramanuja's
interpretation of the adhikara/n/a. He agrees with /S/a@nkara in the
explanation of Sutras 19-35, with this difference that he views them as
setting forth, not the purvapaksha, but the siddhanta. Sutras 26-28 also
are interpreted in a manner not very different from /S/a@nkara's,
special stress being laid on the distinction made by Scripture between
knowledge as a mere quality and the soul as a knowing agent, the
substratum of knowledge. This discussion naturally gives rise to the
question how it is that Scripture in some places makes use of the term
vij/n/ana when meaning the individual soul. The answer is given in Sutra
29, 'The soul is designated as knowledge because it has that quality for
its essence,' i.e. because knowledge is the essential characteristic
quality of the soul, therefore the term 'knowledge' is employed here and
there to denote the soul itself. This latter interpretation gives rise
to no doubt whatever. It closely follows the wording of the text and
does not necessitate any forced supplementation. The 'tu' of the Sutra
which, according to /S/a@nkara, is meant to discard the purvapaksha,
serves on Ramanuja's view to set aside a previously-raised objection; an
altogether legitimate assumption.

Of the three remaining Sutras of the adhikara/n/a (30-32), 30 explains,
according to /S/a@nkara, that the soul may be called a/n/u, since, as
long as it exists in the sa/m/sara condition, it is connected with the
buddhi. According to Ramanuja the Sutra teaches that the soul may be
called vij/n/ana because the latter constitutes its essential quality as
long as it exists.--Sutra 31 intimates, according to /S/a@nkara, that in
the states of deep sleep, and so on, the soul is potentially connected
with the buddhi, while in the waking state that connexion becomes
actually manifest. The same Sutra, according to Ramanuja, teaches that
j/n/at/ri/tva is properly said to constitute the soul's essential
nature, although it is actually manifested in some states of the soul
only.--In Sutra 32, finally, /S/a@nkara sees a statement of the doctrine
that, unless the soul had the buddhi for its limiting adjunct, it would
either be permanently cognizing or permanently non-cognizing; while,
according to Ramanuja, the Sutra means that the soul would either be
permanently cognizing or permanently non-cognizing, if it were pure
knowledge and all-pervading (instead of being /jn/at/ri/ and a/n/u, as
it is in reality).--The three Sutras can be made to fit in with either
interpretation, although it must be noted that none of them explicitly
refers to the soul's connexion with the buddhi.

Adhik. XIV and XV (33-39; 40) refer to the kart/ri/tva of the jiva, i.e.
the question whether the soul is an agent. Sutras 33-39 clearly say that
it is such. But as, according to /S/a@nkara's system, this cannot be the
final view,--the soul being essentially non-active, and all action
belonging to the world of upadhis,--he looks upon the next following
Sutra (40) as constituting an adhikara/n/a by itself, and teaching that
the soul is an agent when connected with the instruments of action,
buddhi, &c., while it ceases to be so when dissociated from them, 'just
as the carpenter acts in both ways,' i.e. just as the carpenter works as
long as he wields his instruments, and rests after having laid them
aside.--Ramanuja, perhaps more naturally, does not separate Sutra 40
from the preceding Sutras, but interprets it as follows: Activity is
indeed an essential attribute of the soul; but therefrom it does not
follow that the soul is always actually active, just as the carpenter,
even when furnished with the requisite instruments, may either work or
not work, just as he pleases.

Adhik. XVI (41, 42) teaches that the soul in its activity is dependent
on the Lord who impels it with a view to its former actions.

Adhik. XVII (43-53) treats of the relation of the individual soul to
Brahman. Sutra 43 declares that the individual soul is a part (a/ms/a)
of Brahman, and the following Sutras show how that relation does not
involve either that Brahman is affected by the imperfections,
sufferings, &c. of the souls, or that one soul has to participate in the
experiences of other souls. The two commentators of course take entirely
different views of the doctrine that the soul is a part of Brahman.
According to Ramanuja the souls are in reality parts of Brahman[14];
according to Sa@nkara the 'a/ms/a' of the Sutra must be understood to
mean 'a/ms/a iva,' 'a part as it were;' the one universal indivisible
Brahman having no real parts, but appearing to be divided owing to its
limiting adjuncts.--One Sutra (50) in this adhikara/n/a calls for
special notice. According to Sa@nkara the words 'abhasa eva /k/a' mean
'(the soul is) a mere reflection,' which, as the commentators remark, is
a statement of the so-called pratibimbavada, i.e. the doctrine that the
so-called individual soul is nothing but the reflection of the Self in
the buddhi; while Sutra 43 had propounded the so-called ava/kkh/edavada,
i.e. the doctrine that the soul is the highest Self in so far as limited
by its adjuncts.--According to Ramanuja the abhasa of the Sutra has to
be taken in the sense of hetvabhasa, a fallacious argument, and the
Sutra is explained as being directed against the reasoning of those
Vedantins according to whom the soul is Brahman in so far as limited by
non-real adjuncts[15].


PADA IV.


Adhik. I, II, III (1-4; 5-6; 7) teach that the pra/n/as (by which
generic name are denoted the buddhindriyas, karmen-driyas, and the
manas) spring from Brahman; are eleven in number; and are of minute size
(a/n/u).

Adhik. IV, V, VI (8; 9-12; 13) inform us also that the mukhya pra/n/a,
i.e. the vital air, is produced from Brahman; that it is a principle
distinct from air in general and from the pra/n/as discussed above; and
that it is minute (a/n/u).

Adhik. VII and VIII (14-16; 17-19) teach that the pra/n/as are
superintended and guided in their activity by special divinities, and
that they are independent principles, not mere modifications of the
mukhya pra/n/a.

Adhik. IX (20-22) declares that the evolution of names and forms (the
namarupavyakara/n/a) is the work, not of the individual soul, but of the
Lord.

Notes:

[Footnote 13: Lokavat, Yatha loke raja/s/asananuvartina/m/ /k/a
rajanugrahanigrahak/ri/takhadukhayoges'pi na sa/s/ariraivamatre/n/a
sasake rajany api /s/asananuv/ri/ttyauv/ri/ttinimittasukhadukhayor
bhokt/ri/vaprasa@nga/h/. Yathaha Drami/d/abhashyakara/h/ yatha loke raja
pra/k/uradanda/s/uke ghores'narthasa/m/ka/t/es'pi prade/s/e
vartamanoszpi vyajanadyavadhutadeho doshair na sprisyate abhipreta/ms/
/k/a lokan paripipalayishati bhoga/ms/ /k/a gandhadin
avi/s/vajanopabhogyan dharayati tathasau loke/s/varo
bhramatsvasamait/h/ya/k/amato doshair na sp/ris/yate rakshati /k/a lokan
brahmalokadi/ms/ /k/avi/s/vajanopabhogyan dharayatiti.]

[Footnote 14: Givasya kart/ri/tva/m/ paramapurushayattam ity uktam.
Idanim kim aya/m/ giva/h/ parasmad atyantabhinna/h/ uta param eva brahma
bhrantam uta brahmaivopadhyava/kkh/innam atha brahma/ms/a iti
sa/m/sayyate /s/rutivipraticpatte/h/ sa/m/saya/h/. Nanu tadananyam
arambha/n/a/s/abdadibhya/h/ adhika/m/ tu bhedanirdesad ity atraivayam
aitho nir/n/ita/h/ Satya/m/ sa eva nanatvaikatva/s/rutivipratipattya
skshipya jivasya brahma/ms/atvopapadanena vi/s/eshato nir/n/iyate. Yavad
dhi jivasya brahma/m/satva/m/ na nir/n/itam tavaj jivasya
brahmanosnanyatva/m/ brahma/n/as tasmad adhikatva/m/ /k/a na
pratitish/th/ati. Ki/m/ tavat praptam. Atyanta/m/ bhinna iti. Kuta/h/.
J/n/aj/n/nau dvav ityadibhedanirde/s/at. J/n/aj/n/ayor abheda/s/rutayas
tv agnina si/nk/ed itivad viruddharthapratipadanad aupa/k/arikya/h/,
Brahma/n/os/ms/o jiva ity api na sadhiya/h/, ekavastvekade/s/ava/k/i hy
a/ms/a/s/sabda/h/, jivasya brahmaikade/s/atve tadgata dosha brahma/n/i
bhaveyu/h/. Na /k/a brahmakha/nd/o jiva ity a/ms/atvopapatti/h/
kha/nd/ananarhatvad brahma/n/a/h/ praguktadoshaprasa@nga/k/ /k/a, tasmad
atyantabhinnasya tada/ms/atva/m/ durupapadam. Yadva bhranta/m/ brahmaiva
jiva/h/. Kuta/h/. Tat tvam asi ayam atma
brahmetyadibrahmatmabhavopade/s/at, nanatmatvavadinyas tu
pratyakshadisiddharthanuvaditvad ananyathasiddhadvaitopade/s/aparabhi/h/
/s/rutibhi/h/ pratyakshadaya/s/ /k/a avidyantargata/h/
khyapyante.--Athava brahmaivanadyupadhyava/kkh/inna/m/ jiva/h/. Kuta/h/.
Tata eva brahmatmabhavopade/s/at. Na /k/ayam upadhir bhrantiparikalpita
ita vaktu/m/ sakya/m/ bandhamokshadivyavasthanupapatter. Ity eva/m/
pratptesbhidhiyate. Brahma/ms/a iti. Kuta/h/. Nanavyapade/s/ad anyatha
/k/aikatvena vyapade/s/ad ubhayatha hi vyapade/s/o d/ris/yate.
Navavyapade/s/as tavat
srash/tri/tva/rig/yatva--niyant/ri/tvaniyamyatva--sarvaj/n/atvaj/n/atva--
svadhinatvaparadhinatva--/s/uddhatva/s/uddhatva--
kalya/n/agu/n/akaratvaviparitatva--patitva/s/eshatvadibhir d/ris/yate.
Anyatha /k/abhedena vyapade/s/os pi tat tvam asi ayam atma
brahmetyadibhir d/ris/yate. Api da/s/akitavaditvam apy adhiyate eke,
brahma dasa brahma dasa brahmeme kitava ity atharva/n/ika brahma/n/o
da/s/akitavaditvam apy adhiyate, tata/s/ /k/a sarvajivavyapitvena abhedo
vyapadi/s/yata it artha/h/. Evam ubhayavyapade/s/amukhyatvasiddhaye
jivosya/m/ brahma/n/os/ms/a ity abhyupagantavya/h/.]

[Footnote 15: Nanu bhrantabrahmajivavadeszpy avidyak/ri/topadhibhedad
bhogavyavasthadaya upapadyanta ata aha, abhasa eva /k/a.
Akha/nd/aikarasapraka/s/amatratvarupasya
svarupatirodhanapurvakopadhibhedopapadanahetur abhasa eva.
Praka/s/aikasvarupasya praka/s/atirodhana/m/ praka/s/ana/s/a eveti prag
evopapaditam. Abhasa eveti va pa/th/a/h/, tatha sati hetava abhasa/h/.]


THIRD ADHYAYA.
PADA I.


Adhik. I (1-7) teaches that the soul, when passing out of the body at
the time of death, remains invested with the subtle material elements
(bhutasukshma) which serve as an abode to the pra/n/as attached to the
soul.

Adhik. II (8-11) shows that, when the souls of those who had enjoyed the
reward of their good works in the moon descend to the earth in order to
undergo a new embodiment, there cleaves to them a remainder (anu/s/aya)
of their former deeds which determines the nature of the new embodiment.

Adhik. III (12-21) discusses the fate after death of those whom their
good works do not entitle to pass up to the moon.

Adhik. IV, V, VI (22; 23; 24-27) teach that the subtle bodies of the
souls descending from the moon through the ether, air, &c., do not
become identical with ether, air, &c., but only like them; that the
entire descent occupies a short time only; and that, when the souls
finally enter into plants and so on, they do not participate in the life
of the latter, but are merely in external contact with them.


PADA II.


Adhik. I (1-6) treats of the soul in the dreaming state. According to
/S/a@nkara the three first Sutras discuss the question whether the
creative activity ascribed to the soul in some scriptural passages
produces things as real as those by which the waking soul is surrounded,
or not; Sutra 3 settles the point by declaring that the creations of the
dreaming soul are mere 'Maya,' since they do not fully manifest the
character of real objects. Sutra 4 adds that dreams, although mere Maya,
yet have a prophetic quality. Sutras 5 and 6 finally reply to the
question why the soul, which after all is a part of the Lord and as such
participates in his excellencies, should not be able to produce in its
dreams a real creation, by the remark that the soul's knowledge and
power are obscured by its connexion with the gross body.

The considerably diverging interpretation given of this adhikara/n/a by
Ramanuja has the advantage of more closely connecting the Sutras with
each other. According to him the question is not whether the creations
of a dream are real or not, but whether they are the work of the
individual soul or of the Lord acting within the soul. Sutras 1 and 2
set forth the purvapaksha. The creations of dreams (are the work of the
individual soul); for thus Scripture declares: 'And the followers of
some /s/akas declare (the soul to be) a creator,' &c. The third Sutra
states the siddhanta view: 'But the creations of dreams are Maya, i.e.
are of a wonderful nature (and as such cannot be effected by the
individual soul), since (in this life) the nature (of the soul) is not
fully manifested.' Concerning the word 'maya,' Ramanuja remarks,
'maya/s/abdo hy a/sk/aryava/k/i janaka/s/ya kule jata devamayeva nirmita
ityadishu tatha dar/s/anat.' The three remaining Sutras are exhibited in
the /S/ri-bhashya in a different order, the fourth Sutra, according to
/S/a@nkara, being the sixth according to Ramanuja. Sutras 4 and 5
(according to Ramanuja's numeration) are explained by Ramanuja very much
in the same way as by /S/a@nkara; but owing to the former's statement of
the subject-matter of the whole adhikara/n/a they connect themselves
more intimately with the preceding Sutras than is possible on
/S/a@nkara's interpretation. In Sutra 6 (su/k/aka/s/ /k/a hi) Ramanuja
sees a deduction from the siddhanta of the adhikara/n/a, 'Because the
images of a dream are produced by the highest Lord himself, therefore
they have prophetic significance.'

Adhik. II teaches that in the state of deep dreamless sleep the soul
abides within Brahman in the heart.

Adhik. III (9) expounds the reasons entitling us to assume that the soul
awakening from sleep is the same that went to sleep.--Adhik. IV (9)
explains the nature of a swoon.

Adhik. V (11-21) is, according to /S/a@nkara, taken up with the question
as to the nature of the highest Brahman in which the individual soul is
merged in the state of deep sleep. Sutra 11 declares that twofold
characteristics (viz. absence and presence of distinctive attributes,
nirvi/s/eshatva and savi/s/eshatva) cannot belong to the highest Brahman
even through its stations, i.e. its limiting adjuncts; since all
passages which aim at setting forth Brahman's nature declare it to be
destitute of all distinctive attributes.--The fact, Sutra 12 continues,
that in many passages Brahman is spoken of as possessing distinctive
attributes is of no relevancy, since wherever there are mentioned
limiting adjuncts, on which all distinction depends, it is specially
stated that Brahman in itself is free from all diversity; and--Sutra 13
adds--in some places the assumption of diversity is specially objected
to.--That Brahman is devoid of all form (Sutra 14), is the pre-eminent
meaning of all Vedanta-texts setting forth Brahman's nature.--That
Brahman is represented as having different forms, as it were, is due to
its connexion with its (unreal) limiting adjuncts; just as the light of
the sun appears straight or crooked, as it were, according to the nature
of the things he illuminates (15).--The B/ri/hadara/n/yaka expressly
declares that Brahman is one uniform mass of intelligence (16); and the
same is taught in other scriptural passages and in Sm/ri/ti (l7).--At
the unreality of the apparent manifoldness of the Self, caused by the
limiting adjuncts, aim those scriptural passages in which the Self is
compared to the sun, which remains one although his reflections on the
surface of the water are many (18).--Nor must the objection be raised
