of the saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body,
and an everlasting life. Amen.

What does this mean?

I believe that I cannot come to my Lord Jesus Christ by my own
intelligence or power. But the Holy Spirit called me by the Gospel,
enlightened me with His gifts, made me holy and kept me in the true
faith, just as He calls, gathers together, enlightens and makes holy
the whole Church on earth and keeps it with Jesus in the one, true
faith. In this Church, He generously forgives each day every sin
committed by me and by every believer. On the last day, He will raise
me and all the dead from the grave. He will give eternal life to me and
to all who believe in Christ. Yes, this is true!

III. The Our Father
The Simple Way a Father Should Present it to His Household

Introduction

Our Father, Who is in Heaven. (Matthew 6:9)

What does this mean?

In this introduction, God invites us to believe that He is our real
Father and we are His real children, so that we will pray with trust
and complete confidence, in the same way beloved children approach
their beloved Father with their requests.

The First Request

May Your name be holy. (Matthew 6:9)

What does this mean?

Of course, God's name is holy in and of itself, but by this request, we
pray that He will make it holy among us, too.

How does this take place?

It happens when God's Word is taught clearly and purely, and when we
live holy lives as God's children based upon it. Help us, Heavenly
Father, to do this! But anyone who teaches and lives by something other
than God's Word defiles God's name among us. Protect us from this,
Heavenly Father!

The Second Request

Your Kingdom come. (Matthew 6:10)

What does this mean?

Truly God's Kingdom comes by itself, without our prayer. But we pray in
this request that it come to us as well.

How does this happen?

It happens when the Heavenly Father gives us His Holy Spirit, so that
we believe His holy Word by His grace and live godly lives here in this
age and there in eternal life.

The Third Request

May Your will be accomplished. As it is Heaven, so may it be on Earth.
(Matthew 6:10)

What does this mean?

Truly, God's good and gracious will is accomplished without our prayer.
But we pray in this request that is accomplished among us as well.

How does this happen?

It happens when God destroys and interferes with every evil will and
all evil advice, which will not allow God's Kingdom to come, such as
the Devil's will, the world's will and will of our bodily desires. It
also happens when God strengthens us by faith and by His Word and keeps
us living by them faithfully until the end of our lives. This is His
will, good and full of grace.

The Fourth Request

Give us today our daily bread. (Matthew 6:11)

What does this mean?

Truly, God gives daily bread to evil people, even without our prayer.
But we pray in this request that He will help us realize this and
receive our daily bread with thanksgiving.

What does "Daily bread" mean?

Everything that nourishes our body and meets its needs, such as: Food,
drink, clothing, shoes, house, yard, fields, cattle, money,
possessions, a devout spouse, devout children, devout employees, devout
and faithful rulers, good government, good weather, peace, health,
discipline, honor, good friends, faithful neighbors and other things
like these.

The Fifth Request

And forgive our guilt, as we forgive those guilty of sinning against
us. (Matthew 6:12)
