that, in a specified place and on an appointed day, He would deliver a
public address, or perform a new and unprecedented miracle. We may here
see the wisdom of Him who "doeth all things well." Whilst the secresy
with which He conducted His movements baffled any premature attempts on
the part of His enemies, to effect His capture or condemnation, it also
checked that intense popular excitement which a ministry so
extraordinary might have been expected to awaken.

Four inspired writers have given separate accounts of the life of
Christ--all repeat many of His wonderful sayings--all dwell with marked
minuteness on the circumstances of His death--and all attest the fact of
His resurrection. Each mentions some things which the others have
omitted; and each apparently observes the order of time in the details
of his narrative. But when we combine and arrange their various
statements, so as to form the whole into one regular and comprehensive
testimony, we discover that there are not a few periods of His life
still left utterly blank in point of incidents; and that there is no
reference whatever to topics which we might have expected to find
particularly noticed in the biography of so eminent a personage. After
His appearance as a public teacher, He seems, not only to have made
sudden transitions from place to place, but otherwise to have often
courted the shade; and, instead of unfolding the circumstances of His
private history, the evangelists dwell chiefly on His Discourses and His
Miracles. During His ministry, Capernaum was His headquarters; [20:1]
but we cannot positively tell with whom He lodged in that place; nor
whether the twelve sojourned there under the same roof with Him; nor how
much time He spent in it at any particular period. We cannot point out
the precise route which He pursued on any occasion when itinerating
throughout Galilee or Judea; neither are we sure that He always
journeyed on foot, or that He adhered to a uniform mode of travelling.
It is most singular that the inspired writers throw out no hint on which
an artist might seize as the groundwork of a painting of Jesus. As if to
teach us more emphatically that we should beware of a sensuous
superstition, and that we should direct our thoughts to the spiritual
features of His character, the New Testament never mentions either the
colour of His hair, or the height of His stature, or the cast of His
countenance. How wonderful that even "the beloved disciple," who was
permitted to lean on the bosom of the Son of man, and who had seen him
in the most trying circumstances of His earthly history, never speaks of
the tones of His voice, or of the expression of His eye, or of any
striking peculiarity pertaining to His personal appearance! The silence
of all the evangelists respecting matters of which at least some of them
must have retained a very vivid remembrance, and of which ordinary
biographers would not have failed to preserve a record, supplies an
indirect and yet a most powerful proof of the Divine origin of the
Gospels.

But whilst the sacred writers enter so sparingly into personal details,
they leave no doubt as to the perfect integrity which marked every part
of our Lord's proceedings. He was born in a degenerate age, and brought
up in a city of Galilee which had a character so infamous that no good
thing was expected to proceed from it; [21:1] and yet, like a ray of
purest light shining into some den of uncleanness, He contracted no
defilement from the scenes of pollution which He was obliged to witness.
Even in boyhood, He must have uniformly acted with supreme discretion;
for though His enemies from time to time gave vent to their malignity in
various accusations, we do not read that they ever sought to cast so
much as a solitary stain upon His youthful reputation. The most
malicious of the Jews failed to fasten upon Him in after life any charge
of immorality. Among those constantly admitted to His familiar
intercourse, a traitor was to be found; and had Judas been able to
detect anything in His private deportment inconsistent with His public
profession, he would doubtless have proclaimed it as an apology for his
perfidy; but the keen eye of that close observer could not discover a
single blemish in the character of his Master; and, when prompted by
covetousness, he betrayed Him to the chief priests, the thought of
having been accessory to the death of one so kind and so holy, continued
to torment him, until it drove him to despair and to self-destruction.

The doctrine inculcated by our Lord commended itself by the light of its
own evidence. It was nothing more than a lucid and comprehensive
exposition of the theology of the Old Testament; and yet it, presented
such a new view of the faith of patriarchs and of prophets, that it had
all the freshness and interest of an original revelation. It discovered
a most intimate acquaintance with the mental constitution of man--it
appealed with mighty power to the conscience--and it was felt to be
exactly adapted to the moral state and to the spiritual wants of the
human family. The disciples of Jesus did not require to be told that He
had "the key of knowledge," for they were delighted and edified as "He
opened" to them the Scriptures. [22:1] He taught the multitude "as one
having authority;" [22:2] and they were "astonished at His doctrine."
The discourses of the Scribes, their most learned instructors, were
meagre and vapid--they were not calculated to enlarge the mind or to
move the affections--they consisted frequently of doubtful disputations
relating to the ceremonials of their worship--and the very air with
which they were delivered betrayed the insignificance of the topics of
discussion. But Jesus spake with a dignity which commanded respect, and
with the deep seriousness of a great Teacher delivering to perishing
sinners tidings of unutterable consequence.

There was something singularly beautiful and attractive, as well as
majestic and impressive, in the teaching of our Lord. The Sermon on the
Mount is a most pleasing specimen of His method of conveying
instruction. Whilst He gives utterance to sentiments of exalted wisdom,
He employs language so simple, and imagery so chaste and natural, that
even a child takes a pleasure in perusing His address. There is reason
to think that He did not begin to speak in parables until a considerable
time after He had entered upon His ministry. [23:1] By these symbolical
discourses He at once blinded the eyes of His enemies, and furnished
materials for profitable meditation to His genuine disciples. The
parables, like the light of prophecy, are, to this very day, a beacon to
the Church, and a stumbling-block to unbelievers.

The claims of Jesus as the Christ were decisively established by the
Divine power which He manifested. It had been foretold that certain
extraordinary recoveries from disease and infirmity would be witnessed
in the days of the Messiah; and these predictions were now literally
fulfilled. The eyes of the blind were opened, and the ears of the deaf
were unstopped; the lame man leaped as an hart, and the tongue of the
dumb sang. [23:2] Not a few of the cures of our Saviour were wrought on
individuals to whom He was personally unknown; [23:3] and many of His
works of wonder were performed in the presence of friends and foes.
[23:4] Whilst His miracles exceeded in number all those recorded in the
Old Testament, they were still more remarkable for their variety and
their excellence. By His touch, or His word, he healed the most
inveterate maladies; He fed the multitude by thousands out of a store of
provisions which a little boy could carry; [24:1] He walked upon the
waves of the sea, when it was agitated by a tempest; [24:2] He made the
storm a calm, so that the wind at once ceased to blow, and the surface
of the deep reposed, at the same moment, in glassy smoothness; [24:3] He
cast out devils; and He restored life to the dead. Well might the
Pharisees be perplexed by the inquiry--"How can a man that is a sinner
do such miracles?" [23:4] It is quite possible that false prophets, by
the help of Satan, may accomplish feats fitted to excite astonishment;
and yet, in such cases, the agents of the Wicked One may be expected to
exhibit some symptoms of his spirit and character. But nothing
diabolical, or of an evil tendency, appeared in the miracles of our
Lord. With the one exception of the cursing of the barren fig-tree
[24:5]--a malediction which created no pain, and involved no substantial
loss--all his displays of power were indicative of His goodness and His
mercy. No other than a true prophet would have been enabled so often to
control the course of nature, in the production of results of such
utility, such benignity, and such grandeur.

The miracles of Christ illustrated, as well as confirmed, His doctrines.
When, for instance, He converted the water into wine at the marriage in
Cana of Galilee. [24:6] He taught, not only that he approved of wedlock,
but also that, within proper limits, He was disposed to patronise the
exercise of a generous hospitality, in some cases He required faith in
the individuals whom He vouchsafed to cure, [24:7] thus distinctly
suggesting the way of a sinner's salvation. Many of His miracles were
obviously of a typical character. When He acted as the physician of the
body, He indirectly gave evidence of His efficiency as the physician of
the soul; when He restored sight to the blind, He indicated that He
could turn men from darkness to light; when He raised the dead, He
virtually demonstrated His ability to quicken such as are dead in
trespasses and sins. Those who witnessed the visible exhibitions of His
power were prepared to listen with the deepest interest to His words
when He declared--"I am the light of the world; he that followeth me
shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the _light of life_." [25:1]

Though our Lord's conduct, as a public teacher, fully sustained His
claims as the Messiah, it must have been a complete enigma to all
classes of politicians. He did not seek to obtain power by courting the
favour of the great, neither did He attempt to gain popularity by
flattering the prejudices of the multitude. He wounded the national
pride by hinting at the destruction of the temple; He gave much offence
by holding intercourse with the odious publicans; and with many, He
forfeited all credit, as a patriot, by refusing to affirm the
unlawfulness of paying tribute to the Roman emperor. The greatest human
characters have been occasionally swayed by personal predilections or
antipathies, but, in the life of Christ, we can discover no memorial of
any such infirmity. Like a sage among children, He did not permit
Himself to be influenced by the petty partialities, whims, or
superstitions of His countrymen. He inculcated a theological system for
which He could not expect the support of any of the existing classes of
religionists. He differed from the Essenes, as He did not adopt their
ascetic habits; He displeased the Sadducees, by asserting the doctrine
of the resurrection; He provoked the Pharisees, by declaring that they
worshipped God in vain, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men;
and He incurred the hostility of the whole tribe of Jewish zealots, by
maintaining His right to supersede the arrangements of the Mosaic
economy. By pursuing this independent course He vindicated His title to
the character of a Divine lawgiver, but at the same time He forfeited a
vast amount of sympathy and aid upon which He might otherwise have
calculated.

There has been considerable diversity of opinion regarding the length of
our Saviour's ministry. [26:1] We could approximate very closely to a
correct estimate could we tell the number of passovers from its
commencement to its close, but this point cannot be determined with
absolute certainty. Four are apparently mentioned [26:2] by the
evangelist John; and if, as is probable, they amounted to no more, it
would seem that our Lord's career, as a public teacher, was of about
three years' duration. [26:3] The greater part of this period was spent
in Galilee; and the sacred writers intimate that He made several
circuits, as a missionary, among the cities and villages of that
populous district. [26:4] Matthew, Mark, and Luke dwell chiefly upon
this portion of His history. Towards the termination of His course,
Judea was the principal scene of His ministrations. Jerusalem was the
centre of Jewish power and prejudice, and He had hitherto chiefly
laboured in remote districts of the land, that He might escape the
malignity of the scribes and Pharisees; but, as His end approached, He
acted with greater publicity, and often taught openly in the very courts
of the temple. John supplements the narratives of the other evangelists
by recording our Lord's proceedings in Judea.

A few members of the Sanhedrim, such as Nicodemus, [27:1] believed Jesus
to be "a teacher come from God," but by far the majority regarded Him
with extreme aversion. They could not imagine that the son of a
carpenter was to be the Saviour of their country, for they expected the
Messiah to appear surrounded with all the splendour of secular
magnificence. They were hypocritical and selfish; they had been
repeatedly rebuked by Christ for their impiety; and, as they marked His
increasing favour with the multitude, their envy and indignation became
ungovernable. They accordingly seized Him at the time of the Passover,
and, on the charge that He said He was the Son of God, He was condemned
as a blasphemer. [27:2] He suffered crucifixion--an ignominious form of
capital punishment from which the laws of the empire exempted every
Roman citizen--and, to add to His disgrace, He was put to death between
two thieves. [27:3] But even Pontius Pilate, who was then Procurator of
Judea, and who, in that capacity, endorsed the sentence, was constrained
to acknowledge that He was a "just person" in whom He could find "no
fault." [27:4] Pilate was a truckling time-server, and he acquiesced in
the decision, simply because he was afraid to exasperate the Jews by
rescuing from their grasp an innocent man whom they persecuted with
unrelenting hatred. [27:5]

The death of Christ, of which all the evangelists treat so particularly,
is the most awful and the most momentous event in the history of the
world. He, no doubt, fell a victim to the malice of the rulers of the
Jews; but He was delivered into their hands "by the determinate counsel
and foreknowledge of God;" [28:1] and if we discard the idea that He was
offered up as a vicarious sacrifice, we must find it impossible to give
anything like a satisfactory account of what occurred in Gethsemane and
at Calvary. The amount of physical suffering He sustained from man did
not exceed that endured by either of the malefactors with whom He was
associated; and such was His magnanimity and fortitude, that, had He
been an ordinary martyr, the prospect of crucifixion would not have been
sufficient to make Him "exceeding sorrowful" and "sore amazed." [28:2]
His holy soul must have been wrung with no common agony, when "His sweat
was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground," [28:3]
and when He was forced to cry out--"My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken me?" [28:4] In that hour of "the power of darkness" He was
"smitten of God and afflicted," and there was never sorrow like unto His
sorrow, for upon Him were laid "the iniquities of us all."

The incidents which accompanied the death of Jesus were even more
impressive than those which signalised His birth. When He was in the
garden of Gethsemane there appeared unto Him an angel from Heaven
strengthening Him. [28:5] During the three concluding hours of His
intense anguish on the cross, there was darkness overall the land,
[28:6] as if nature mourned along with the illustrious sufferer. When He
bowed His head on Calvary and gave up the ghost, the event was marked by
notifications such as never announced the demise of any of this world's
great potentates, for "the veil of the temple was rent in twain," and
the rocks were cleft asunder, and the graves were opened, and the earth
trembled. [29:1] "The centurion and they that were with him," in
attendance at the execution, seem to have been Gentiles; and though,
doubtless, they had heard that Jesus claimed to be the Messiah of the
Jews, they perhaps very imperfectly comprehended the import of the
designation; but they were forthwith overwhelmed with the conviction,
that He, whose death they had just witnessed, must have given a true
account of His mission and His dignity, for "when they saw the
earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly,
saying--Truly this was _the Son of God_" [29:2]

The body of our Lord was committed to the grave on the evening of
Friday, and, early on the morning of the following Sunday, He issued
from the tomb. An ordinary individual has no control over the duration
of his existence, but Jesus demonstrated that He had power to lay down
His life, and that He had power to take it again. [29:3] Had He been a
deceiver His delusions must have terminated with His death, so that His
resurrection must be regarded as His crowning miracle, or rather, as the
affixing of the broad seal of heaven to the truth of His mission as the
Messiah. It was, besides, the fulfilment of an ancient prophecy; [29:4]
a proof of His fore-knowledge; [29:5] and a pledge of the resurrection
of His disciples. [29:6] Hence, in the New Testament, [29:7] it is so
often mentioned with marked emphasis.

There is no fact connected with the life of Christ better attested than
that of His resurrection. He was put to death by His enemies; and His
body was not removed from the cross until they were fully satisfied that
the vital spark had fled. [29:8] His tomb was scooped out of a solid
rock; [29:9] the stone which blocked up the entrance was sealed with all
care; and a military guard kept constant watch to prevent its violation.
[30:1] But in due time an earthquake shook the cemetery--"The angel of
the Lord descended from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from
the door and sat upon it ... and for fear of him the keepers did shake,
and became as dead men." [30:2] Our Lord meanwhile came forth from the
grave, and the sentinels, in consternation, hastened to the chief
priests and communicated the astounding intelligence. [30:3] But these
infatuated men, instead of yielding to the force of this overwhelming
evidence, endeavoured to conceal their infamy by the base arts of
bribery and falsehood. "They gave large money unto the soldiers,
saying--Say ye--His disciples came by night and stole him away while we
slept...so they took the money, and did as they were taught." [30:4]

Jesus, as the first-born of Mary, was presented in the temple forty days
after His birth; and, as "the first-begotten of the dead," [30:5] He
presented Himself before His Father, in the temple above, forty days
after He had opened the womb of the grave. During the interval he
appeared only to His own followers. [30:6] Those who had so long and so
wilfully rejected the testimony of His teaching and His miracles, had
certainly no reason to expect any additional proofs of His Divine
mission. But the Lord manifests Himself to His Church, "and not unto the
world," [30:7] and to such as fear His name He is continually supplying
new and interesting illustrations of His presence, His power, His
wisdom, and His mercy. Whilst He is a pillar of darkness to His foes, He
is a pillar of light to His people. Though Jesus was now invisible to
the Scribes and Pharisees, He admitted His disciples to high and holy
fellowship. Now their hearts burned within them as He spake to them "of
the things pertaining to the kingdom of God," [31:1] and as "He
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning
Himself." [31:2] Now He doubtless pointed out to them how He was
symbolised in the types, how He was exhibited in the promises, and how
He was described in the prophecies. Now He explained to them more fully
the arrangements of His Church, and now He commanded His apostles to go
and "teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost." [31:3] Having assured the twelve of His
presence with His true servants even unto the end of the world, and
having led them out as far as Bethany, a village a few furlongs from
Jerusalem, "he lifted up his hands and blessed them. And it came to
pass, while he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up
into heaven." [31:4]

Thus closed the earthly career of Him who is both the Son of man and the
Son of God. Though He was sorely tried by the privations of poverty,
though He was exposed to the most brutal and degrading insults, and
though at last He was forsaken by His friends and consigned to a death
of lingering agony, He never performed a single act or uttered a single
word unworthy of His exalted and blessed mission. The narratives of the
evangelists supply clear internal evidence that, when they described the
history of Jesus, they must have copied from a living original; for
otherwise, no four individuals, certainly no four Jews, could have each
furnished such a portrait of so great and so singular a personage.
Combining the highest respect for the institutions of Moses with a
spirit eminently catholic, He was at once a devout Israelite and a
large-hearted citizen of the world. Rising far superior to the
prejudices of His countrymen, He visited Samaria, and conversed freely
with its population; and, whilst declaring that He was sent specially to
the seed of Abraham, He was ready to extend His sympathy to their
bitterest enemies. Though He took upon Him the form of a servant, there
was nothing mean or servile in His behaviour; for, when He humbled
Himself, there was ever about Him an air of condescending majesty.
Whether He administers comfort to the mourner, or walks upon the waves
of the sea, or replies to the cavils of the Pharisees, He is still the
same calm, holy, and gracious Saviour. When His passion was immediately
in view, He was as kind and as considerate as ever, for, on the very
night in which He was betrayed, He was employed in the institution of an
ordinance which was to serve as a sign and a seal of His grace
throughout all generations. His character is as sublime as it is
original. It has no parallel in the history of the human family. The
impostor is cunning, the demagogue is turbulent, and the fanatic is
absurd; but the conduct of Jesus Christ is uniformly gentle and serene,
candid, courteous, and consistent. Well, indeed, may His name be called
Wonderful. "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the
world know him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
But an many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name." [32:1]




SUPPLEMENTARY NOTE TO CHAPTER II.

THE YEAR OF CHRIST'S BIRTH.

The Christian era commences on the 1st of January of the year 754 of the
city of Rome. That our Lord was born about the time stated in the text
may appear from the following considerations--

_The visit of the wise men to Bethlehem must have taken place a very few
days after the birth of Jesus, and before His presentation in the
temple._ Bethlehem was not the stated residence of Joseph and Mary,
either before or after the birth of the child (Luke i. 26, ii. 4, 39;
Matt. ii. 2). They were obliged to repair to the place on account of the
taxing, and immediately after the presentation in the temple, they
returned to Nazareth and dwelt there (Luke ii. 39). Had the visit of the
wise men occurred, as some think, six, or twelve, or eighteen months
after the birth, the question of Herod to "the chief priests and scribes
of the people" where "Christ _should be born_"--would have been quite
vain, as the infant might have been removed long before to another part
of the country. The wise men manifestly expected to see a _newly born_
infant, and hence they asked--"where is he that _is born_ King of the
Jews?" (Matt. ii. 2.) The evangelist also states expressly that they came
to Jerusalem "_when Jesus was born_" (Matt. ii. 1). At a subsequent
period they would have found the Holy Child, not at Bethlehem, but at
Nazareth.

The only plausible objection to this view of the matter is derived from
the statement that Herod "sent forth and slew all the children that were
in Bethlehem and in all the coasts thereof, _from two years old and
under, according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the
wise men"_ (Matt. ii. 16). The king had ascertained from these sages
"what time the star appeared" (Matt. ii. 7), and they seem to have
informed him that it had been visible a year before. A Jewish child was
said to be two years old _when it had entered on its second year_ (see
Greswell's "Dissertations," vol. ii. 136); and, to make sure of his
prey, Herod murdered all the infants in Bethlehem and the neighbourhood
under the age of thirteen months. The wise men had not told him that the
child was a year old--it was obvious that they thought very
differently--but the tyrant butchered all who came, within the range of
suspicion. It is highly probable that the star announced the appearance
of the Messiah twelve months before he was born. Such an intimation was
given of the birth of Isaac, who was a remarkable type of Christ (Gen.
xvii. 21). See also 2 Kings iv. 16, and Dan. iv. 29, 33.

The presentation of the infant in the temple occurred _after the death
of Herod_. This follows as a corollary from what has been already
advanced, for if the wise men visited Bethlehem immediately after the
birth, and if the child was then hurried away to Egypt, the presentation
could not have taken place earlier. The ceremony was performed _forty
days after the birth_ (Luke ii. 22, and Lev. xii. 2, 3, 4), and as the
flight and the return might both have been accomplished in eight or ten
days, there was ample time for a sojourn of at least two or three weeks
in that part of Egypt which was nearest to Palestine. Herod died during
this brief exile, and yet his demise happened so soon before the
departure of the holy family on their way home, that the intelligence
had not meanwhile reached Joseph by the voice of ordinary fame; and
until his arrival in the land of Israel, he did not even know that
Archelaus reigned in Judea (Matt. ii. 22). He seems to have inferred
from the dream that the dynasty of the Herodian family had been
completely subverted, so that when he heard of the succession of
Archelaus "he was afraid" to enter his territory; but, at this juncture,
being "counselled of God" in another dream, he took courage, proceeded
on his journey, and, after the presentation in the temple, "returned
into the parts of Galilee."

That the presentation in the temple took place after the death of Herod
is further manifest from the fact that the babe remained uninjured,
though his appearance in the sacred courts awakened uncommon interest,
and though Anna "spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in
Jerusalem" (Luke ii. 38). Herod had his spies in all quarters, and had
he been yet living, the intelligence of the presentation and of its
extraordinary accompaniments, would have soon reached his ears, and he
would have made some fresh attempt upon the life of the infant. But when
the babe was actually brought to the temple, the tyrant was no more.
Jerusalem was in a state of great political excitement, and Archelaus
had, perhaps, already set sail for Rome to secure from the emperor the
confirmation of his title to the kingdom (see Josephus' Antiq. xvii. c.
9), so that it is not strange if the declarations of Simeon and Anna did
not attract any notice on the part of the existing rulers.

Assuming, then, that Christ was born a very short time before the death
of Herod, we have now to ascertain the date of the demise of that
monarch. Josephus states (Antiq. xiv. 14, Sec. 5) that Herod was made king
by the Roman Senate in the 184th Olympiad, when Calvinus and Pollio were
consuls, that is, in the year of Rome 714; and that he reigned
thirty-seven years (Antiq. xvii. 8, Sec. 1). We may infer, therefore, that
his reign terminated in the year 751 of the city of Rome. He died
shortly before the passover; his disease seems to have been of a very
lingering character; and he appears to have languished under it upwards
of a year (Josephus' Antiq. xvii. 6, Sec. 4, 5, and xvii. 9, Sec. 2, 3). The
passover of 751 fell on the 31st of March (see Greswell's
"Dissertations," vol. i. p. 331), and as our Lord was in all likelihood
born early in the month, the Jewish king probably ended his days a week
or two afterwards, or about the time of the vernal equinox. According to
this computation the _conception_ took place exactly at the feast of
Pentecost, which fell, in 750, on the 31st of May.

This view is corroborated by Luke iii. 1, where it is said that the word
of God came to John the Baptist "in the _fifteenth year_ of the reign of
Tiberius Caesar." John's ministry had continued only a short time when
he was imprisoned, and then Jesus "began to be _about thirty_ years of
age" (Luke iii. 23). Augustus died in August 767, and this year 767,
according to a mode of reckoning then in use (see Hales' "Chronology,"
i. 49, 171, and Luke xxiv. 21), was the _first year_ of his successor
Tiberius. The _fifteenth year_ of Tiberius, according to the same mode
of calculation, commenced on the 1st of January 781 of the city of Rome,
and terminated on the 1st of January 782. If then our Lord was born
about the 1st of March 751 of Rome, and if the Baptist was imprisoned
early in 781, it could be said with perfect propriety that Jesus then
"began to be about thirty years of age." This view is further confirmed
by the fact that Quirinius, or Cyrenius, mentioned Luke ii. 2, was
_first_ governor of Syria from the _close_ of the year 750 of Rome to
753. (See Merivale, iv. p. 457, note.) Our Lord was born under his
administration, and according to the date we have assigned to the
nativity, the "taxing" at Bethlehem must have taken place a few months
after Cyrenius entered into office.

This view of the date of the birth of Christ, which differs somewhat
from that of any writer with whom I am acquainted, appears to meet all
the difficulties connected with this much-disputed question. It is based
partly upon the principle, so ingeniously advocated by Whiston in his
"Chronology," that the flight into Egypt took place before the
presentation in the temple. I have never yet met with any antagonist of
that hypothesis who was able to give a satisfactory explanation of the
text on which it rests. Some other dates assigned for the birth of
Christ are quite inadmissible. In Judea shepherds could not have been
found "abiding in the field, keeping watch over their flock by night"
(Luke ii. 8) in November, December, January, or, perhaps, February; but
in March, and especially in a mild season, such a thing appears to have
been quite common. (See Greswell's "Dissertations," vol. i. p. 391, and
Robinson's "Biblical Researches," vol ii. p. 97, 98.) Hippolytus, one of
the earliest Christian writers who touches on the subject, indicates
that our Lord was born about the time of the passover. (See Greswell, i.
461, 462.)





CHAPTER III.

THE TWELVE AND THE SEVENTY.


It has often been remarked that the personal preaching of our Lord was
comparatively barren. There can be no doubt that the effects produced
did not at all correspond to what might have been expected from so
wonderful a ministry; but it had been predicted that the Messiah would
be "despised and _rejected_ of men," [36:1] and the unbelief of the Jews
was one of the humiliating trials He was ordained to suffer during His
abode on earth. "The Holy Ghost was not yet given, because that Jesus
was not yet glorified." [36:2] We have, certainly, no evidence that any
of His discourses made such an impression as that which accompanied the
address of Peter on the day of Pentecost. Immediately after the
outpouring of the Spirit at that period an abundant blessing followed
the proclamation of the gospel. But though Jesus often mourned over the
obduracy of His countrymen, and though the truth, preached by His
disciples, was often more effective than when uttered by Himself, it
cannot with propriety be said that His own evangelical labours were
unfruitful. The one hundred and twenty, who met in an upper room during
the interval between His Ascension and the day of Pentecost [36:3] were
but a portion of His followers. The fierce and watchful opposition of
the Sanhedrim had kept Him generally at a distance from Jerusalem; it
was there specially dangerous to profess an attachment to His cause; and
we may thus, perhaps, partially account for the paucity of His adherents
in the Jewish metropolis. His converts were more numerous in Galilee;
and it was, probably, in that district He appeared to the company of
upwards of five hundred brethren who saw Him after His resurrection.
[37:1] He had itinerated extensively as a missionary; and, from some
statements incidentally occurring in the gospels, we may infer, that
there were individuals who had imbibed His doctrines in the cities and
villages of almost all parts of Palestine. [37:2] But the most signal
and decisive proof of the power of His ministry is presented in the fact
that, during the three years of its duration, He enlisted and sent forth
no less than eighty-two preachers. Part of these have since been known
as "The Twelve," and the rest as "The Seventy."

The Twelve are frequently mentioned in the New Testament, and yet the
information we possess respecting them is exceedingly scanty. Of some we
know little more than their names. It has been supposed that a town
called Kerioth, [37:3] or Karioth, belonging to the tribe of Judah, was
the birthplace of Judas, the traitor; [37:4] but it is probable that all
his colleagues were natives of Galilee. [37:5] Some of them had various
names; and the consequent diversity which the sacred catalogues present
has frequently perplexed the reader of the evangelical narratives.
Matthew was also called Levi; [37:6] Nathanael was designated
Bartholomew; [36:7] and Jude had the two other names of Lebbaeus and
Thaddaeus. [38:1] Thomas was called Didymus, [38:2] or the twin, in
reference, we may presume, to the circumstances of his birth; James the
son of Alphaeus was styled, perhaps by way of distinction, James "the
Less" [38:3]--in allusion, it would seem, to the inferiority of his
stature; the other James and John were surnamed Boanerges, [38:4] or the
sons of thunder--a title probably indicative of the peculiar solemnity
and power of their ministrations; and Simon stands at the head of all
the lists, and is expressly said to be "first" of the Twelve, [38:5]
because, as we have reason to believe, whilst his advanced age might
have warranted him to claim precedence, his superior energy and
promptitude enabled him to occupy the most prominent position. The same
individual was called Cephas, or Peter, or _Stone_, [38:6] apparently on
account of the firmness of his character. His namesake, the other Simon,
was termed the Canaanite, and also Zelotes, [38:7] or the zealot--a
title expressive, in all likelihood, of the zeal and earnestness with
which he was wont to carry out his principles. We are informed that our
Lord sent forth the Twelve "by two and two," [38:8] but we cannot tell
whether He observed any general rule in the arrangement of those who
were to travel in company. The relationship of the parties to each other
might, at least in three instances, have suggested a classification; as
Peter and Andrew, James and John, James the Less and Jude, were,
respectively, brothers. James the Less is described as "the Lord's
brother," [39:1] and Jude is called "the brother of James," [39:2] so
that these two disciples must have been in some way related to our
Saviour; but the exact degree of affinity or consanguinity cannot now,
perhaps, be positively ascertained. [39:3] Some of the disciples, such
as Andrew, [39:4] and probably John, [39:5] had previously been
disciples of the Baptist, but their separation from their former master
and adherence to Jesus did not lead to any estrangement between our Lord
and His pious forerunner. As the Baptist contemplated the more permanent
and important character of the Messiah's mission, he could cheerfully
say--"He must increase, but I must decrease." [39:6]

All the Twelve, when enlisted as disciples of Christ, appear to have
moved in the humbler walks of life; and yet we are scarcely warranted in
asserting that they were extremely indigent. Peter, the fisherman,
pretty plainly indicates that, in regard to worldly circumstances, he
had been, to some extent, a loser by obeying the call of Jesus. [39:7]
Though James and John were likewise fishermen, the family had at least
one little vessel of their own, and they could afford to pay "hired
servants" to assist them in their business. [40:1] Matthew acted, in a
subordinate capacity, as a collector of imperial tribute; but though the
Jews cordially hated a functionary who brought so painfully to their
recollection their condition as a conquered people, it is pretty clear
that the publican was engaged in a lucrative employment. Zacchaeus, said
to have been a "chief among the publicans," [40:2] is represented as a
rich man; [40:3] and Matthew, though probably in an inferior station,
was able to give an entertainment in his own house to a numerous
company. [40:4] Still, however, the Twelve, as a body, were qualified,
neither by their education nor their habits, for acting as popular
instructors; and had the gospel been a device of human wisdom, it could
not have been promoted by their advocacy. Individuals who had hitherto
been occupied in tilling the land, in fishing, and in mending nets, or
in sitting at the receipt of custom, could not have been expected to
make any great impression as ecclesiastical reformers. Their position in
society gave them no influence; their natural talents were not
particularly brilliant; and even their dialect betokened their connexion
with a district from which nothing good or great was anticipated. [40:5]
But God exalted these men of low degree, and made them the spiritual
illuminators of the world.

Though the New Testament enters very sparingly into the details of their
personal history, it is plain that the Twelve presented a considerable
variety of character. Thomas, though obstinate, was warm-hearted and
manly. Once when, as he imagined, his Master was going forward to
certain death, he chivalrously proposed to his brethren that they should
all perish along with Him; [40:6] and though at first he doggedly
refused to credit the account of the resurrection, [41:6] yet, when his
doubts were removed, he gave vent to his feelings in one of the most
impressive testimonies [41:2] to the power and godhead of the Messiah to
be found in the whole book of revelation. James, the son of Alphaeus,
was noted for his prudence and practical wisdom; [41:3] and Nathanael
was frank and candid--"an Israelite indeed, in whom was no guile."
[41:4] Our Lord bestowed on Peter and the two sons of Zebedee peculiar
proofs of confidence and favour, for they alone were permitted to
witness some of the most remarkable scenes in the history of the Man of
Sorrows. [41:5] Though these three brethren displayed such a
congeniality of disposition, it does not appear that they possessed
minds of the same mould, but each had excellencies of his own which
threw a charm around his character. Peter yielded to the impulse of the
moment and acted with promptitude and vigour; James became the first of
the apostolic martyrs, probably because by his ability and boldness, as
a preacher, he had provoked the special enmity of Herod and the Jews;
[41:6] whilst the benevolent John delighted to meditate on the "deep
things of God," and listened with profound emotion to his Master as He
discoursed of the mystery of His Person, and of the peace of believers
abiding in His love. It has been conjectured that there was some family
relationship between the sons of Zebedee and Jesus; but of this there is
no satisfactory evidence. [41:7] It was simply, perhaps, the marked
attention of our Saviour to James and John which awakened the ambition
of their mother, and induced her to bespeak their promotion in the
kingdom of the Son of Man. [42:1]

Though none of the Twelve had received a liberal education, [42:2] it
cannot be said that they were literally "novices" when invested with the
ministerial commission. It is probable that, before they were invited to
follow Jesus, they had all seriously turned their attention to the
subject of religion; some of them had been previously instructed by the
Baptist; and all, prior to their selection, appear to have been about a
year under the tuition of our Lord himself. From that time until the end
of His ministry they lived with Him on terms of the most intimate
familiarity. From earlier acquaintance, as well as from closer and more
confidential companionship, they had a better opportunity of knowing His
character and doctrines than any of the rest of His disciples. When,
perhaps about six or eight months [42:3] after their appointment, they
were sent forth as missionaries, they were commanded neither to walk in
"the way of the Gentiles," nor to enter "into any city of the
Samaritans," but rather to go "to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel." [42:4] Their number _Twelve_ corresponded to the number of the
tribes, and they were called _apostles_ probably in allusion to a class
of Jewish functionaries who were so designated. It is said that the High
Priest was wont to send forth from Jerusalem into foreign countries
certain accredited agents, or messengers, styled apostles, on
ecclesiastical errands. [42:5]

During the personal ministry of our Lord the Twelve seem to have been
employed by Him on only one missionary excursion. About twelve months
after that event [43:1] He "appointed other seventy also" to preach His
Gospel. Luke is the only evangelist who mentions the designation of
these additional missionaries; and though we have no reason to believe
that their duties terminated with the first tour in which they were
engaged, [43:2] they are never subsequently noticed in the New
Testament. Many of the actions of our Lord had a typical meaning, and it
is highly probable that He designed to inculcate an important truth by
the appointment of these Seventy new apostles. According to the ideas of
the Jews of that age there were _seventy_ heathen nations; [43:3] and it
is rather singular that, omitting Peleg the progenitor of the
Israelites, the names of the posterity of Shem, Ham, and Japheth,
recorded in the 10th chapter of Genesis, amount exactly to seventy.
"These," says the historian, "are the families of the sons of Noah,
_after their generations, in their nations; and by these were the
nations divided_ in the earth after the flood." [43:4] Every one who
looks into the narrative will perceive that the sacred writer does not
propose to furnish a complete catalogue of the descendants of Noah, for
he passes over in entire silence the posterity of the greater number of
the patriarch's grandchildren; he apparently intends to name only those
who were _the founders of nations_; and thus it happens that whilst, in
a variety of instances, he does not trace the line of succession, he
takes care, in others, to mention the father and many of his sons.
[44:1] The Jewish notion current in the time of our Lord as to the
existence of seventy heathen nations, seems, therefore, to have rested
on a sound historical basis, inasmuch as, according to the Mosaic
statement, there were, beside Peleg, precisely seventy individuals by
whom "the nations were divided in the earth after the flood." We may
thus infer that our Lord meant to convey a great moral lesson by the
appointment alike of the Twelve and of the Seventy. In the ordination of
the Twelve He evinced His regard for all the tribes of Israel; in the
ordination of the Seventy He intimated that His Gospel was designed for
all the nations of the earth. When the Twelve were about to enter on
their first mission He required them to go only to the Jews, but He sent
forth the Seventy "two and two before His face _into every city and
place whither He himself would come_." [45:1] Towards the commencement
of His public career, He had induced many of the Samaritans to believe
on Him, [45:2] whilst at a subsequent period His ministry had been
blessed to Gentiles in the coasts of Tyre and Sidon; [45:3] and there is
no evidence that in the missionary journey which He contemplated when He
appointed the Seventy as His pioneers, He intended to confine His
labours to His kinsmen of the seed of Abraham. It is highly probable
that the Seventy were actually sent forth _from Samaria_, [45:4] and the
instructions given them apparently suggest that, in the circuit now
assigned to them, they were to visit certain districts lying north of
Galilee of the Gentiles. [45:5] The personal ministry of our Lord had
respect primarily and specially to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, [45:6] but His conduct in this case symbolically indicated the
catholic character of His religion. He evinced His regard for the Jews
by sending no less than twelve apostles to that one nation, but He did
not Himself refuse to minister either to Samaritans or Gentiles; and to
shew that He was disposed to make provision for the general diffusion of
His word, He "appointed other seventy also, and sent them two and two
before His face into every city and place whither He himself would
come."

It is very clear that our Lord committed, in the first instance, to the
Twelve the organisation of the ecclesiastical commonwealth. The most
ancient Christian Church, that of the metropolis of Palestine, was
modelled under their superintendence; and the earliest converts gathered
into it, after His ascension, were the fruits of their ministry. Hence,
in the Apocalypse, the wall of the "holy Jerusalem" is said to have
"twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the
Lamb." [46:1] But it does not follow that others had no share in
founding the spiritual structure. The Seventy also received a commission
from Christ, and we have every reason to believe that, after the death
of their Master, they pursued their missionary labours with renovated
ardour. That they were called apostles as well as the Twelve, cannot,
perhaps, be established by distinct testimony; [46:2] but it is certain,
that they were furnished with supernatural endowments; [46:3] and it is
scarcely probable that they are overlooked in the description of the
sacred writer when He represents the New Testament Church as "built upon
the foundation of the _apostles and prophets_, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone." [46:4]

The appointment of the Seventy, like that of the Twelve, was a typical
act; and it is not, therefore, extraordinary that they are only once
noticed in the sacred volume. Our Lord never intended to constitute two
permanent corporations, limited, respectively, to twelve and seventy
members, and empowered to transmit their authority to successors from
generation to generation. In a short time after His death the symbolical
meaning of the mission of the Seventy was explained, as it very soon
appeared that the gospel was to be transmitted to all the ends of the
earth; and thus it was no longer necessary to refer to these
representatives of the ministry of the universal Church. When the Twelve
turned to the Gentiles, their number lost its significance, and from
that date they accordingly ceased to fill up vacancies occurring in
their society; and, as the Church assumed a settled form, the apostles
were disposed to insist less and less on any special powers with which
they had been originally furnished, and rather to place themselves on a
level with the ordinary rulers of the ecclesiastical community. Hence we
find them sitting in church courts with these brethren, [47:1] and
desirous to be known not as apostles, but as elders. [47:2] We possess
little information respecting either their official or their personal
history. A very equivocal, and sometimes contradictory, tradition [47:3]
is the only guide which even professes to point out to us where the
greater number of them laboured; and the same witness is the only
voucher for the statements which describe how most of them finished
their career. It is an instructive fact that no proof can be given, from
the sacred record, of the ordination either by the Twelve or by the
Seventy, of even one presbyter or pastor. With the exception of the
laying on of hands upon the seven deacons, [47:4] no inspired writer
mentions any act of the kind in which the Twelve ever engaged. The
deacons were not _rulers_ in the Church, and therefore could not by
ordination confer ecclesiastical power on others.

There is much meaning in the silence of the sacred writers respecting
the official proceedings and the personal career of the Twelve and the
Seventy. It thus becomes impossible for any one to make out a title to
the ministry by tracing his ecclesiastical descent; for no contemporary
records enable us to prove a connexion between the inspired founders of
our religion, and those who were subsequently entrusted with the
government of the Church. At the critical point where, had it been
deemed necessary, we might have had the light of inspiration, we are
left to wander in total darkness. We are thus shut up to the conclusion
that the claims of those who profess to be heralds of the gospel are to
be tested by some other criterion than their ecclesiastical lineage. It
is written--"_By their fruits_ ye shall know them." [48:1] God alone can
make a true minister; [48:2] and he who attempts to establish his right
to feed the flock of Christ by appealing to his official genealogy
miserably mistakes the source of the pastoral commission. It would,
indeed, avail nothing though a minister could prove his relationship to
the Twelve or the Seventy by an unbroken line of ordinations, for some
who at the time may have been able to deduce their descent from the
apostles were amongst the most dangerous of the early heretics. [48:3]
True religion is sustained, not by any human agency, but by that Eternal
Spirit who quickens all the children of God, and who has preserved for
them a pure gospel in the writings of the apostles and evangelists. The
perpetuity of the Church no more depends on the uninterrupted succession
of its ministers than does the perpetuity of a nation depend on the
continuance of the dynasty which may happen at a particular date to
occupy the throne. As plants possess powers of reproduction enabling
them, when a part decays, to throw it off, and to supply its place by a
new and vigorous vegetation, so it is with the Church--the spiritual
vine which the Lord has planted. Its government may degenerate into a
corrupt tyranny by which its most precious liberties may be invaded or
destroyed, but the freemen of the Lord are not bound to submit to any
such domination. Were even all the ecclesiastical rulers to become
traitors to the King of Zion, the Church would not therefore perish. The
living members of the body of Christ would be then required to repudiate
the authority of overseers by whom they were betrayed, and to choose
amongst themselves such faithful men as were found most competent to
teach and to guide the spiritual community. The Divine Statute-book
clearly warrants the adoption of such an alternative. "Beloved," says
the Apostle John, "believe not every spirit, but _try the spirits_
whether they are of God. .... We are of God, _he that knoweth God
heareth us_, he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the
spirit of truth and the spirit of error." [49:1] "If there come _any_
unto you, and _bring not this doctrine_, receive him not into your
house, neither bid him God-speed; for he that biddeth him God-speed is
partaker of his evil deeds." [49:2] Paul declares, still more
emphatically--"Though WE, or AN ANGEL FROM HEAVEN, preach any other
gospel unto you than that which we have preached unto you, _let him be
accursed_. As we said before, so say I now again, If _any man_ preach
any other gospel unto you than that ye have received, _let him be
accursed_." [49:3]

In one sense neither the Twelve nor the Seventy had successors. All of
them were called to preach the gospel by the living voice of Christ
himself; all had "companied" with Him during the period of His ministry;
all had listened to His sermons; all had been spectators of His works of
wonder; all were empowered to perform miracles; all seem to have
conversed with Him after His resurrection; and all appear to have
possessed the gift of inspired utterance. [50:1] But in another sense
every "good minister of Jesus Christ" is a successor of these primitive
preachers; for every true pastor is taught of God, and is moved by the
Spirit to undertake the service in which he is engaged, and is warranted
to expect a blessing on the truth which he disseminates. As of old the
descent from heaven of fire upon the altar testified the Divine
acceptance of the sacrifices, so now the descent of the Spirit, as
manifested in the conversion of souls to God, is a sure token that the
labours of the minister have the seal of the Divine approbation. The
great Apostle of the Gentiles did not hesitate to rely on such a proof
of his commission from heaven. "Need we," says he to the Corinthians,
"epistles of commendation to you, or letters of commendation from you?
Ye are our epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all men;
forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ
ministered by us, written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God, not in tables of stone, but in the fleshy tables of the
heart." [50:2] No true pastor will be left entirely destitute of such
encouragement, and neither the Twelve nor the Seventy could produce
