inextricably entangled in a labyrinth of obligations which they cannot
discharge. We are all paupers. And so I come to the second point, and
that is--

II. The poor rich man.

'There is that maketh himself rich, and yet hath nothing.' That
describes accurately the type of man of whom there are thousands; of
whom there are dozens listening to me at this moment; who ignores
dependence and is not conscious of sin, and so struts about in
self-complacent satisfaction with himself, and knows nothing of his
true condition. There is nothing more tragic--and so it would be seen
to be if it were not so common--than that a man, laden, as we each of
us are, with a burden of evil that we cannot get rid of, should yet
conceit himself to possess merits, virtues, graces, that ought to
secure for him the admiration of his fellows, or, at least, to exempt
him from their censure, and which he thinks, when he thinks about it
at all, may perhaps secure for him the approbation of God. 'The
deceitfulness of sin' is one of its mightiest powers. There is nothing
that so blinds a man to the real moral character of actions as that
obstinate self-complacency which approves of a thing because it is
mine. You condemn in other people the very things you do yourself. You
see all their ugliness in them; you do not recognise it when it is
your deed. Many of you have never ventured upon a careful examination
and appraisement of your own moral and religious character. You durst
not, for you are afraid that it would turn out badly. So, like some
insolvent who has not the courage to face the facts, you take refuge
in defective bookkeeping, and think that that is as good as being
solvent. Then you have far too low a standard, and one of the main
reasons why you have so low a standard is just because the sins that
you do have dulled your consciences, and like the Styrian peasants
that eat arsenic, the poison does not poison you, and you do not feel
yourself any the worse for it. Dear brethren! these are very rude
things for me to say to you. I am saying them to myself as much as to
you, and I would to God that you would listen to them, not because I
say them, but because they are true. The great bulk of us know our own
moral characters just as little as we know the sound of our own
voices. I suppose if you could hear yourself speak you would say, 'I
never knew that my voice sounded like that.' And I am quite sure that
many of you, if the curtain could be drawn aside which is largely
woven out of the black yarn of your own evil thoughts, and you could
see yourselves as in a mirror, you would say, 'I had no notion that I
looked like that.' 'There is that maketh himself rich, and yet hath
nothing.'

Ay! and more than that. The making of yourself rich is the sure way to
prevent yourself from ever being so. We see that in all other regions
of life. If a student says to himself, 'Oh! I know all that subject,'
the chances are that he will not get it up any more; and the further
chance is that he will be 'ploughed' when the examination-day comes.
If the artist stands before the picture, and says to himself, 'Well
done, that is the realisation of my ideal!' he will paint no more
anything worth looking at. And in any department, when a man says 'Lo!
I have attained,' then he ceases to advance.

Now, bring all that to bear upon religion, upon Christ and His
salvation, upon our own spiritual and religious and moral condition.
The sense of imperfection is the salt of approximation to perfection.
And the man that says 'I am rich' is condemning himself to poverty and
pauperism. If you do not know your need, you will not go to look for
the supply of it. If you fancy yourselves to be quite well, though a
mortal disease has gripped you, you will take no medicine, nor have
recourse to any physician. If you think that you have enough good to
show for man's judgment and for God's, and have not been convinced of
your dependence and your sinfulness, then Jesus Christ will be very
little to you, and His great work as the Redeemer and Saviour of His
people from their sins will be nothing to you. And so you will condemn
yourselves to have nothing unto the very end.

I believe that this generation needs few things more than it needs a
deepened consciousness of the reality of sin and of the depth and
damnable nature of it. It is because people feel so little of the
burden of their transgression that they care so little for that gentle
Hand that lifts away their burden. It is because from much of popular
religion--and, alas! that I should have to say it, from much of
popular preaching--there has vanished the deep wholesome sense of
poverty, that, from so much of popular religion, and preaching too,
there has faded away the central light of the Gospel, the proclamation
of the Cross by which is taken away the sin of the whole world.

So, lastly, my text brings before us--

III. The rich poor man.

'There is that maketh himself poor and yet'--or, as varied, the
expression is, 'therefore hath great riches.' Jesus Christ has lifted
the thoughts in my text into the very region into which I am trying to
bring them, when in the first of all the Beatitudes, as they are
called, 'He opened His mouth and said, Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.' Poor, and therefore an owner of
a kingdom! Now I need not, at this stage of my sermon, insist upon the
fact that that consciousness of poverty is the only fitting attitude
for any of us to take up in view of the two facts with which I
started, the fact of our dependence and the fact of our sinfulness.
What absurdity it seems for a man about whom these two things are
true, that, as I said, he began with a borrowed capital, and has only
incurred greater debts in his transactions, there should be any
foothold left in his own estimation on which he can stand and claim to
be anything but the pauper that he is. Oh! brethren, of all the
hallucinations that we put upon ourselves in trying to believe that
things are as we wish, there is none more subtle, more obstinate, more
deeply dangerous than this, that a man full of evil should be so
ignorant of his evil as to say, like that Pharisee in our Lord's
parable, 'I thank Thee that I am not as other men are. I give tithes
... I pray ... I am this, that, and the other thing; not like that
wretched publican over there.' Yes, this is the fit attitude for
us,--'He would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven.'

Then let me remind you that this wholesome recognition of facts about
ourselves as they are is the sure way to possess the wealth. Of
course, it is possible for a man by some mighty influence or other
brought to bear upon him, to see himself as God sees him, and then, if
there is nothing more than that, he is tortured with 'the sorrow that
worketh death.' Judas 'went out and hanged himself'; Peter 'went out
and wept bitterly.' The one was sent 'to his own place,' wherever that
was; the other was sent foremost of the Twelve. If you see your
poverty, let self-distrust be the nadir, the lowest point, and let
faith be the complementary high point, the zenith. The rebound from
self-distrust to trust in Christ is that which makes the consciousness
of poverty the condition of receiving wealth.

And what wealth it is!--the wealth of a peaceful conscience, of a
quiet heart, of lofty aims, of a pure mind, of strength according to
our need, of an immortal hope, of a treasure in the heavens that
faileth not, 'where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt; where thieves
do not break through nor steal.' Blessed be God! the more we have the
riches of glory in Christ Jesus, the more shall we feel that we have
nothing, and that all is His, and none of it ours. And so, as the
rivers run in the valleys, and the high mountain-tops are dry and
barren, the grace which makes us rich will run in the low ground of
our conscious humiliation and nothingness.

Dear brother! do you estimate yourself as you are? Have you taken
stock of yourself? Have you got away from the hallucination of
possessing wealth? Has your sense of need led you to cease from trust
in yourself, and to put all your trust in Jesus Christ? Have you taken
the wealth which He freely gives to all who sue _in forma
pauperis_? He does not ask you to bring anything but debts and
sins, emptiness and weakness, and penitent faith. He will strengthen
the weakness, fill the emptiness, forgive the sins, cancel the debts,
and make you 'rich toward God.' I beseech you to listen to Him,
speaking from heaven, and taking up the strain of this text: 'Because
thou sayest I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked, I counsel thee to buy of Me gold tried in
the fire, that thou mayest be rich.' And then you will be of those
blessed poor ones who are 'rich through faith, and heirs of the
Kingdom.'



THE TILLAGE OF THE POOR

'Much food is in the tillage of the poor.'--PROVERBS xiii. 23.


Palestine was a land of small peasant proprietors, and the institution
of the Jubilee was intended to prevent the acquisition of large
estates by any Israelite. The consequence, as intended, was a level of
modest prosperity. It was 'the tillage of the poor,' the careful,
diligent husbandry of the man who had only a little patch of land to
look after, that filled the storehouses of the Holy Land. Hence the
proverb of our text arose. It preserves the picture of the economical
conditions in which it originated, and it is capable of, and is
intended to have, an application to all forms and fields of work. In
all it is true that the bulk of the harvested results are due, not to
the large labours of the few, but to the minute, unnoticed toils of
the many. Small service is true service, and the aggregate of such
produces large crops. Spade husbandry gets most out of the ground. The
labourer's allotment of half an acre is generally more prolific than
the average of the squire's estate. Much may be made of slender gifts,
small resources, and limited opportunities if carefully cultivated, as
they should be, and as their very slenderness should stimulate their
being.

One of the psalms accuses 'the children of Ephraim' because, 'being
armed and carrying bows, they turned back in the day of battle.' That
saying deduces obligation from equipment, and preaches a stringent
code of duty to those who are in any direction largely gifted. Power
to its last particle is duty, and not small is the crime of those who,
with great capacities, have small desire to use them, and leave the
brunt of the battle to half-trained soldiers, badly armed.

But the imagery of the fight is not sufficient to include all aspects
of Christian effort. The peaceful toil of the 'husbandman that
labours' stands, in one of Paul's letters, side by side with the
heroism of the 'man that warreth.' Our text gives us the former image,
and so supplements that other.

It completes the lesson of the psalm in another respect, as insisting
on the importance, not of the well endowed, but of the slenderly
furnished, who are immensely in the majority. This text is a message
to ordinary, mediocre people, without much ability or influence.

I. It teaches, first, the responsibility of small gifts.

It is no mere accident that in our Lord's great parable He represents
the man with the _one_ talent as the hider of his gift. There is
a certain pleasure in doing what we can do, or fancy we can do, well.
There is a certain pleasure in the exercise of any kind of gift, be it
of body or mind; but when we know that we are but very slightly gifted
by Him, there is a temptation to say, 'Oh! it does not matter much
whether I contribute my share to this, that, or the other work or no.
I am but a poor man. My half-crown will make but a small difference in
the total. I am possessed of very little leisure. The few minutes that
I can spare for individual cultivation, or for benevolent work, will
not matter at all. I am only an insignificant unit; nobody pays any
attention to my opinion. It does not in the least signify whether I
make my influence felt in regard of social, religious, or political
questions, and the like. I can leave all that to the more influential
men. My littleness at least has the prerogative of immunity. My little
finger would produce such a slight impact on the scale that it is
indifferent whether I apply it or not. It is a good deal easier for me
to wrap up my talent--which, after all, is only a threepenny bit, and
not a talent--and put it away and do nothing.'

Yes, but then you forget, dear friend! that responsibility does not
diminish with the size of the gifts, but that there is as great
responsibility for the use of the smallest as for the use of the
largest, and that although it does not matter very much to anybody but
yourself what you do, it matters all the world to you.

But then, besides that, my text tells us that it does matter whether
the poor man sets himself to make the most of his little patch of
ground or not. 'There is much food in the tillage of the poor.' The
slenderly endowed are the immense majority. There is a genius or two
here and there, dotted along the line of the world's and the Church's
history. The great men and wise men and mighty men and wealthy men may
be counted by units, but the men that are not very much of anything
are to be counted by millions. And unless we can find some stringent
law of responsibility that applies to them, the bulk of the human race
will be under no obligation to do anything either for God or for their
fellows, or for themselves. If I am absolved from the task of bringing
my weight to bear on the side of right because my weight is
infinitesimal, and I am only one in a million, suppose all the million
were to plead the same excuse; what then? Then there would not be any
weight on the side of the right at all. The barns in Palestine were
not filled by farming on a great scale like that pursued away out on
the western prairies, where one man will own, and his servants will
plough a furrow for miles long, but they were filled by the small
industries of the owners of tiny patches.

The 'tillage of the poor,' meaning thereby not the mendicant, but the
peasant owner of a little plot, yielded the bulk of the 'food.' The
wholesome old proverb, 'many littles make a mickle,' is as true about
the influence brought to bear in the world to arrest evil and to
sweeten corruption as it is about anything besides. Christ has a great
deal more need of the cultivation of the small patches that He gives
to the most of us than He has even of the cultivation of the large
estates that He bestows on a few. Responsibility is not to be measured
by amount of gift, but is equally stringent, entire, and absolute
whatsoever be the magnitude of the endowments from which it arises.

Let me remind you, too, how the same virtues and excellences can be
practised in the administering of the smallest as in that of the
greatest gifts. Men say--I dare say some of you have said--'Oh! if I
were eloquent like So-and-so; rich like somebody else; a man of weight
and importance like some other, how I would consecrate my powers to
the Master! But I am slow of speech, or nobody minds me, or I have but
very little that I can give.' Yes! 'He that is faithful in that which
is least is faithful also in much.' If you do not utilise the capacity
possessed, to increase the estate would only be to increase the crop
of weeds from its uncultivated clods. We never palm off a greater
deception on ourselves than when we try to hoodwink conscience by
pleading bounded gifts as an excuse for boundless indolence, and to
persuade ourselves that if we could do more we should be less inclined
to do nothing. The most largely endowed has no more obligation and no
fairer field than the most slenderly gifted lies under and possesses.

All service coming from the same motive and tending to the same end is
the same with God. Not the magnitude of the act, but the motive
thereof, determines the whole character of the life of which it is a
part. The same graces of obedience, consecration, quick sympathy,
self-denying effort may be cultivated and manifested in the spending
of a halfpenny as in the administration of millions. The smallest
rainbow in the tiniest drop that hangs from some sooty eave and
catches the sunlight has precisely the same lines, in the same order,
as the great arch that strides across half the sky. If you go to the
Giant's Causeway, or to the other end of it amongst the Scotch
Hebrides, you will find the hexagonal basaltic pillars all of
identically the same pattern and shape, whether their height be
measured by feet or by tenths of an inch. Big or little, they obey
exactly the same law. There is 'much food in the tillage of the poor.'

II. But now, note, again, how there must be a diligent cultivation of
the small gifts.

The inventor of this proverb had looked carefully and sympathetically
at the way in which the little peasant proprietors worked; and he saw
in that a pattern for all life. It is not always the case, of course,
that a little holding means good husbandry, but it is generally so;
and you will find few waste corners and few unweeded patches on the
ground of a man whose whole ground is measured by rods instead of by
miles. There will usually be little waste time, and few neglected
opportunities of working in the case of the peasant whose subsistence,
with that of his family, depends on the diligent and wise cropping of
the little patch that does belong to him.

And so, dear brethren! if you and I have to take our place in the
ranks of the one-talented men, the commonplace run of ordinary people,
the more reason for us to enlarge our gifts by a sedulous diligence,
by an unwearied perseverance, by a keen look-out for all opportunities
of service, and above all by a prayerful dependence upon Him from whom
alone comes the power to toil, and who alone gives the increase. The
less we are conscious of large gifts the more we should be bowed in
dependence on Him from whom cometh 'every good and perfect gift'; and
who gives according to His wisdom; and the more earnestly should we
use that slender possession which God may have given us. Industry
applied to small natural capacity will do far more than larger power
rusted away by sloth. You all know that it is so in regard of daily
life, and common business, and the acquisition of mundane sciences and
arts. It is just as true in regard to the Christian race, and to the
Christian Church's work of witness.

Who are they who have done the most in this world for God and for men?
The largely endowed men? 'Not many wise, not many mighty, not many
noble are called.' The coral insect is microscopic, but it will build
up from the profoundest depth of the ocean a reef against which the
whole Pacific may dash in vain. It is the small gifts that, after all,
are the important ones. So let us cultivate them the more earnestly
the more humbly we think of our own capacity. 'Play well thy part;
there all the honour lies.' God, who has builded up some of the
towering Alps out of mica-flakes, builds up His Church out of
infinitesimally small particles--slenderly endowed men touched by the
consecration of His love.

III. Lastly, let me remind you of the harvest reaped from these
slender gifts when sedulously tilled.

Two great results of such conscientious cultivation and use of small
resources and opportunities may be suggested as included in that
abundant 'food' of which the text speaks.

The faithfully used faculty increases. 'To him that hath shall be
given.' 'Oh! if I had a wider sphere how I would flame in it, and fill
it!' Then twinkle your best in your little sphere, and that will bring
a wider one some time or other. For, as a rule, and in the general,
though with exceptions, opportunities come to the man that can use
them; and roughly, but yet substantially, men are set in this world
where they can shine to the most advantage to God. Fill your place;
and if you, like Paul, have borne witness for the Master in little
Jerusalem, He will not keep you there, but carry you to bear witness
for Him in imperial Rome itself.

The old fable of the man who told his children to dig all over the
field and they would find treasure, has its true application in regard
to Christian effort and faithful stewardship of the gifts bestowed
upon us. The sons found no gold, but they improved the field, and
secured its bearing golden harvests, and they strengthened their own
muscles, which was better than gold. So if we want larger endowments
let us honestly use what we possess, and use will make growth.

The other issue, about which I need not say more than a word, is that
the final reward of all faithful service--'Enter thou into the joy of
thy Lord' is said, not to the brilliant, but to the 'faithful'
servant. In that great parable, which is the very text-book of this
whole subject of gifts and responsibilities and recompense, the men
who were entrusted with unequal sums used these unequal sums with
equal diligence, as is manifest by the fact that they realised an
equal rate of increase. He that got two talents made two more out of
them, and he that had five did no more; for he, too, but doubled his
capital. So, because the poorer servant with his two, and the richer
with his ten, had equally cultivated their diversely-measured estates,
they were identical in reward; and to each of them the same thing is
said: 'Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.' It matters little whether
we copy some great picture upon a canvas as big as the side of a
house, or upon a thumbnail; the main thing is that we copy it. If we
truly employ whatsoever gifts God has given to us, then we shall be
accepted according to that we have, and not according to that we have
not.



SIN THE MOCKER

'Fools make a mock at sin; but among the righteous there is
favour.'--Proverbs xiv, 9.


The wisdom of this Book of Proverbs is not simply intellectual, but it
has its roots in reverence and obedience to God, and for its
accompaniment, righteousness. The wise man is the good man, and the
good man is the godly man. And as is wisdom, so its opposite, folly,
is not only intellectual feebleness--the bad man is a fool, and the
godless is a bad man. The greatest amount of brain-power cultivated to
the highest degree does not make a man wise, and about many a student
and thinker God pronounces the sentence 'Thou fool!'

That does not mean that all sin is ignorance, as we sometimes hear it
said with a great show of tolerant profundity. There is some ignorance
in all sin, but the essence of sin is the aversion of the will from a
law and from a Person, not the defect of the understanding. So far
from all sin being but ignorance, and therefore blameless, there is no
sin without knowledge, and the measure of ignorance is the measure of
blamelessness; unless the ignorance be itself, as it often is,
criminal. Ignorance is one thing, folly is another.

One more remark by way of introduction must be made on the language of
our text. The margin of the Revised Version correctly turns it
completely round, and for 'the foolish make a mock at guilt,' would
read, 'guilt mocketh at the foolish.' In the original the verb in our
text is in the singular, and the only singular noun to go with it is
'guilt.' The thought then here is, that sin tempts men into its
clutches, and then gibes and taunts them. It is a solemn and painful
subject, but perhaps this text rightly pondered may help to save some
of us from hearing the mocking laugh which echoes through the empty
chambers of many an empty soul.

I. Sin mocks us by its broken promises.

The object immediately sought by any wrong act may be attained. In
sins of sense, the appetite is gratified; in other sins, the desire
that urged to them attains its end. But what then? The temptation lay
in the imagination that, the wrong thing being done, an inward good
would result, and it does not; for even if the immediate object be
secured, other results, all unforeseen, force themselves on us which
spoil the hoped for good. The sickle cuts down tares as well as wheat,
and the reaper's hands are filled with poisonous growths as well as
with corn. There is a revulsion of feeling from the thing that before
the sin was done attracted. The hideous story of the sin of David's
son, Amnon, puts in ugliest shape the universal experience of men who
are tempted to sin and are victims of the revulsion that follows--He
'hated her exceedingly, so that the hatred wherewith he hated her was
greater than the love wherewith he had loved her.' Conscience, which
was overpowered and unheard amid the loud cries of desire, speaks. We
find out the narrow limits of satisfaction. The satisfied appetite has
no further driving power, but lies down to sleep off its debauch, and
ceases to be a factor for the time. Inward discord, the schism between
duty and inclination, sets up strife in the very sanctuary of the
soul. We are dimly conscious of the evil done as robbing us of power
to do right. We cannot pray, and would be glad to forget God. And a
self thus racked, impoverished, and weakened, is what a man gains by
the sin that promised him so much and hid so much from him.

Or if these consequences are in any measure silenced and stifled, a
still more melancholy mockery betrays him, in the continuance of the
illusion that he is happy and all is well, when all the while he is
driving headlong to destruction. Many a man orders his life so that it
is like a ship that sails with huzzas and bedizened with flags while a
favouring breeze fills its sails, but comes back to port battered and
all but waterlogged, with its canvas 'lean, rent, and beggared by the
strumpet wind.' It is always a mistake to try to buy happiness by
doing wrong. The price is rigorously demanded, but the _quid pro
quo_ is not given, or if it seems to be so, there is something else
given too, which takes all the savour out of the composite whole. The
'Folly' of the earlier half of this book woos men by her sweet
invitations, and promises the sweetness of stolen waters and the
pleasantness of bread eaten in secret, but she hides the fact, which
the listener to her seducing voice has to find out for himself after
he has drunk of the stolen waters and tasted the maddening
pleasantness of her bread eaten in secret, that 'her guests are in the
depths of Sheol.' The temptations that seek to win us to do wrong and
dazzle us by fair visions are but 'juggling fiends that keep the word
of promise to the ear, and break it to the hope.'

II. Sin mocks fools by making them its slaves.

There is not only a revulsion of feeling from the evil thing done that
was so tempting before, but there is a dreadful change in the voice of
the temptress. Before her victim had done the sin, she whispered hints
of how little a thing it was. 'Don't make such a mountain of a
molehill. It is a very small matter. You can easily give it up when
you like.' But when the deed is done, then her mocking laugh rings
out, 'I have got you now and you cannot get away.' The prey is seduced
into the trap by a carefully prepared bait, and as soon as its
hesitating foot steps on to the slippery floor, down falls the door
and escape is impossible, We are tempted to sin by the delusion that
we are shaking off restraints that fetter our manhood, and that it is
spirited to do as we like, and as soon as we have sinned we discover
that we were pleasing not ourselves but a taskmaster, and that while
the voice said, 'Show yourself a man, beyond these petty,
old-fashioned maxims'; the meaning of it was, 'Become my slave.'

Sin grows in accordance with an awful necessity, so that it is never
in a sinner's power to promise himself 'It is only this one time that
I will do the wrong thing. Let me have one lapse and I will abjure the
evil for ever after.' We have to reckon with the tremendous power of
habit, and to bethink ourselves that a man may never commit a given
sin, but that if he has committed it once, it is all but impossible
that he will stop there. The incline is too slippery and the ice too
smooth to risk a foot on it. Habit dominates, outward circumstances
press, there springs up a need for repeating the draught, and for its
being more highly spiced. Sin begets sin as fast as the green flies
which infest rose-bushes. One has heard of slavers on the African
coast speaking negroes fair, and tempting them on board by wonderful
promises, but once the poor creatures are in the ship, then on with
the hatches and, if need be, the chains.

III. Sin mocks fools by unforeseen consequences.

These are carefully concealed or madly disregarded, while we are in
the stage of merely being tempted, but when we have done the evil,
they are unmasked, like a battery against a detachment that has been
trapped. The previous denial that anything will come of the sin, and
the subsequent proclamation that this ugly issue has come of it, are
both parts of sin's mockery, and one knows not which is the more
fiendish, the laugh with which she promises impunity or that with
which she tells of the certainty of retribution. We may be mocked, but
'God is not mocked. Whatever a man soweth, that'--and not some other
growth--'shall he also reap.' We dwell in an all-related order of
things, in which no act but has its appropriate consequences, and in
which it is only fools who say to themselves, 'I did not think it
would matter much.' Each act of ours is at once sowing and reaping; a
sowing, inasmuch as it sets in motion a train the issues of which may
not be realised by us till the act has long been forgotten; a reaping,
inasmuch as what we are and do to-day is the product of what we were
and did in a forgotten past. We are what we are, because we were long
ago what we were. As in these composite photographs, which are
produced by laying one individual likeness on another, our present
selves have our past selves preserved in them. We do not need to bring
in a divine Judge into human life in order to be sure that, by the
play of the natural laws of cause and effect, 'every transgression and
disobedience receives its just recompense of reward.' Given the world
as it is, and the continuous identity of a man, and you have all that
is needed for an Iliad of woes flowing from every life that makes
terms with sin. If we gather into one dismal pile the weakening of
power for good, the strengthening of impulses to evil, the inward
poverty, the unrest, the gnawings of conscience or its silence, the
slavery under evil often loathed even while it is being obeyed, the
dreary sense of inability to mend oneself, and often the wreck of
outward life which dog our sins like sleuth-hounds, surely we shall
not need to imagine a future tribunal in order to be sure that sin is
a murderess, or to hear her laugh as she mocks her helpless victims.

But as surely as there are in this present world experiences which
must be regarded as consequences of sin, so surely do they all assume
a more dreadful character and take on the office of prophets of a
future. If man lives beyond the grave, there is nothing to suggest
that he will there put off character as he puts off the bodily life.
He will be there what he has made himself here. Only he will be so
more intensely, more completely. The judgments of earth foretell and
foreshadow a judgment beyond earth.

There is but one more word that I would say, and it is this. Jesus has
come to set the captives of sin free from its mockery, its tyranny,
its worst consequences. He breaks the power of past evil to domineer
over us. He gives us a new life within, which has no heritage of evil
to pervert it, no memories of evil to discourage it, no bias towards
evil to lead it astray. As for the sins that we have done, He is ready
to forgive, to seal to us God's forgiveness, and to take from our own
self-condemnation all its bitterness and much of its hopelessness. For
the past, His blood has taken away its guilt and power. For the future
it sets us free from the mockery of our sin, and assures us of a
future which will not be weakened or pained by remembrances of a
sinful past. Sin mocks at fools, but they who have Christ for their
Redeemer, their Righteousness, and their Life can smile at her
impotent rage, and mock at her and her impotent attempts to terrify
them and assert her lost power with vain threats.



HOLLOW LAUGHTER, SOLID JOY

'Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful; and the end of that mirth is
heaviness.'--PROVERBS xiv. 13.

'These things have I spoken unto you, that My joy may be in you, and
that your joy may be fulfilled.'--JOHN xv. 11 (R.V.).


A poet, who used to be more fashionable than he is now, pronounces
'happiness' to be our being's end and aim. That is not true, except
under great limitations and with many explanations. It may be regarded
as God's end, but it is ruinous to make it man's aim. It is by no
means the highest conception of the Gospel to say that it makes men
happy, however true it may be. The highest is that it makes them good.
I put these two texts together, not only because they bring out the
contrast between the laughter which is hollow and fleeting and the joy
which is perfect and perpetual, but also because they suggest to us
the difference in kind and object between earthly and heavenly joys;
which difference underlies the other between the boisterous laughter
in which is no mirth and no continuance and the joy which is deep and
abiding.

In the comparison which I desire to make between these two texts we
must begin with that which is deepest, and consider--

I. The respective objects of earthly and heavenly joy.

Our Lord's wonderful words suggest that they who accept His sayings,
that they who have His word abiding in them, have in a very deep sense
His joy implanted in their hearts, to brighten and elevate their joys
as the sunshine flashes into silver the ripples of the lake. What then
were the sources of the calm joys of 'the Man of Sorrows'? Surely His
was the perfect instance of 'rejoicing in the Lord always'--an
unbroken communion with the Father. The consciousness that the divine
pleasure ever rested on Him, and that all His thoughts, emotions,
purposes, and acts were in perfect harmony with the perfect will of
the perfect God, filled His humanity up to the very brim with gladness
which the world could not take away, and which remains for us for ever
as a type to which all our gladness must be conformed if it is to be
worthy of Him and of us. As one of the Psalmists says, God is to be
'the gladness of our joy.' It is in Him, gazed upon by the faith and
love of an obedient spirit, sought after by aspiration and possessed
inwardly in peaceful communion, confirmed by union with Him in the
acts of daily obedience, that the true joy of every human life is to
be realised. They who have drunk of this deep fountain of gladness
will not express their joy in boisterous laughter, which is the
hollower the louder it is, and the less lasting the more noisy, but
will manifest itself 'in the depth and not the tumult of the soul.'

Nor must we forget that 'My joy' co-existed with a profound experience
of sorrow to which no human sorrow was ever like. Let us not forget
that, while His joy filled His soul to the brim, He was 'acquainted
with grief'; and let us not wonder if the strange surface
contradiction is repeated in ourselves. It is more Christlike to have
inexpressibly deep joy with surface sorrow, than to have a shallow
laughter masking a hurtful sorrow.

We have to set the sources of earthly gladness side by side with those
of Christ's joy to be aware of a contrast. His sprang from within, the
world's is drawn from without. His came from union with the Father,
the world's largely depends on ignoring God. His needed no supplies
from the gratifications ministered by sense, and so independent of the
presence or absence of such; the world's need the constant
contributions of outward good, and when these are cut off they droop
and die. He who depends on outward circumstances for his joy is the
slave of externals and the sport of time and chance.

II. The Christian's joy is full, the world's partial.

All human joys touch but part of our nature, the divine fills and
satisfies all. In the former there is always some portion of us
unsatisfied, like the deep pits on the moon's surface into which no
light shines, and which show black on the silver face. No human joys
wait to still conscience, which sits at the banquet like the skeleton
that Egyptian feasters set at their tables. The old story told of a
magician's palace blazing with lighted windows, but there was always
one dark;--what shrouded figure sat behind it? Is there not always a
surly 'elder brother' who will not come in however the musicians may
pipe and the servants dance? Appetite may be satisfied, but what of
conscience, and reason, and the higher aspirations of the soul? The
laughter that echoes through the soul is the hollower the louder it
is, and reverberates most through empty spaces.

But when Christ's joy remains in us our joy will be full. Its flowing
tide will rush into and placidly occupy all the else oozy shallows of
our hearts, even into the narrowest crannies its penetrating waters
will pass, and everywhere will bring a flashing surface that will
reflect in our hearts the calm blue above. We need nothing else if we
have Christ and His joy within us. If we have everything else, we need
His joy within us, else ours will never be full.

III. The heavenly joys are perpetual, the earthly joys transient.

Many of our earthly joys die in the very act of being enjoyed. Those
which depend on the gratification of some appetite expire in fruition,
and at each recurrence are less and less complete. The influence of
habit works in two ways to rob all such joys of their power to
minister to us--it increases the appetite and decreases the power of
the object to satisfy. Some are followed by swift revulsion and
remorse; all soon become stale; some are followed by quick remorse;
some are necessarily left behind as we go on in life. To the old man
the pleasures of youth are but like children's toys long since
outgrown and left behind. All are at the mercy of externals. Those
which we have not left we have to leave. The saddest lives are those
of pleasure-seekers, and the saddest deaths are those of the men who
sought for joy where it was not to be found, and sought for their
gratification in a world which leaves them, and which they have to
leave.

There is a realm where abide 'fullness of joy and pleasures for ever
more.' Surely they order their lives most wisely who look for their
joys to nothing that earth holds, and have taken for their own the
ancient vow: 'Though the fig-tree shall not blossom, neither shall
fruit be in the vine.... Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in
the God of my salvation.' If 'My joy' abides in us in its calm and
changeless depth, our joy will be 'full' whatever our circumstances
may be; and we shall hear at last the welcome: 'Enter thou into the
joy of thy Lord.'



SATISFIED FROM SELF

'... A good man shall be satisfied from himself.'--PROVERBS xiv. 14.


At first sight this saying strikes one as somewhat unlike the ordinary
Scripture tone, and savouring rather of a Stoical self-complacency;
but we recall parallel sayings, such as Christ's words, 'The water
that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water'; and the
Apostle's, 'Then shall he have rejoicing in himself alone.' We further
note that the text has an antithetic parallel in the preceding clause,
where the picture is drawn of 'a backslider in heart,' as 'filled with
his own ways'; so that both clauses set forth the familiar but solemn
thought that a man's deeds react upon the doer, and apart from all
thoughts of divine judgment, themselves bring certain retribution. To
grasp the inwardness of this saying we must note that--

I. Goodness comes from godliness.

There is no more striking proof that most men are bad than the notion
which they have of what is good. The word has been degraded to mean in
common speech little more than amiability, and is applied with little
discrimination to characters of which little more can be said than
that they are facile and indulgent of evil. 'A good fellow' may be a
very bad man. At the highest the epithet connotes merely more or less
admirable motives and more or less admirable deeds as their results,
whilst often its use is no more than a piece of unmeaning politeness.
That was what the young ruler meant by addressing Christ as 'Good
Master'; and Christ's answer to him set him, and should set us, on
asking ourselves why we call very ordinary men and very ordinary
actions 'good.' The scriptural notion is immensely deeper, and the
scriptural employment of the word is immensely more restricted. It is
more inward: it means that motives should be right before it calls any
action good; it means that our central and all-influencing motive
should be love to God and regard to His will. That is the Old
Testament point of view as well as the New. Or to put it in other
words, the 'good man' of the Bible is a man in whom outward
righteousness flows from inward devotion and love to God. These two
elements make up the character: godliness is an inseparable part of
goodness, is the inseparable foundation of goodness, and the sole
condition on which it is possible. But from this conception follows,
that a man may be truly called good, although not perfect. He may be
so and yet have many failures. The direction of his aspirations, not
the degree to which these are fulfilled, determines his character, and
his right to be reckoned a good man. Why was David called 'a man after
God's own heart,' notwithstanding his frightful fall? Was it not
because that sin was contrary to the main direction of his life, and
because he had struggled to his feet again, and with tears and
self-abasement, yet with unconquerable desire and hope, 'pressed
toward the mark for the prize of his high calling'? David in the Old
Testament and Peter in the New bid us be of good cheer, and warn us
against the too common error of thinking that goodness means
perfection. 'The new moon with a ragged edge' is even in its
imperfections beautiful, and in its thinnest circlet prophesies the
perfect round.

Remembering this inseparable connection between godliness and goodness
we further note that--

II. Godliness brings satisfaction.

There is a grim contrast between the two halves of this verse. The
former shows us the backslider in heart as filled 'with his own ways.'
He gets weary with satiety; with his doings he 'will be sick of them';
and the things which at first delighted will finally disgust and be
done without zest. There is nothing sadder than the gloomy faces often
seen in the world's festivals. But, on the other hand, the godly man
will be satisfied from within. This is no Stoical proclamation of
self-sufficingness. Self by itself satisfies no man, but self, become
the abiding-place of God, does satisfy. A man alone is like 'the chaff
which the wind driveth away'; but, rooted in God, he is 'like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, whose leaf does not wither.' He has
found all that he needs. God is no longer without him but within; and
he who can say, 'I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me,' has
within him the secret of peace and the source of satisfaction which
can never say 'I thirst.' Such an inward self, in which God dwells and
through which His sweet presence manifests itself in the renewed
nature, sets man free from all dependence for blessedness on
externals. We hang on them and are in despair if we lose them, because
we have not the life of God within us. He who has such an indwelling,
and he only, can truly say, 'All my possessions I carry with me.' Take
him and strip from him, film after film, possessions, reputation,
friends; hack him limb from limb, and as long as there is body enough
left to keep life in him, he can say, 'I have all and abound.' 'Ye
took joyfully the spoiling of your possessions, knowing that ye have
your own selves for a better possession.'

III. Godly goodness brings inward satisfaction.

No man is satisfied with himself until he has subjugated himself. What
makes men restless and discontented is their tossing, anarchical
desires. To live by impulse, or passion, or by anything but love to
God, is to make ourselves our own tormentors. It is always true that
he 'who loveth his life shall lose it,' and loses it by the very act
of loving it. Most men's lives are like the troubled sea, 'which
cannot rest,' and whose tossing surges, alas! 'cast up mire and dirt,'
for their restless lives bring to the surface much that was meant to
lie undisturbed in the depths.

But he who has subdued himself is like some still lake which 'heareth
not the loud winds when they call,' and mirrors the silent heavens on
its calm surface. But further, goodness brings satisfaction, because,
as the Psalmist says, 'in keeping Thy commandments there is great
reward.' There is a glow accompanying even partial obedience which
diffuses itself with grateful warmth through the whole being of a man.
And such goodness tends to the preservation of health of soul as
natural, simple living to the health of the body. And that general
sense of well-being brings with it a satisfaction compared with which
all the feverish bliss of the voluptuary is poor indeed.

But we must not forget that satisfaction from one's self is not
satisfaction _with_ one's self. There will always be the
imperfection which will always prevent self-righteousness. The good
man after the Bible pattern most deeply knows his faults, and in that
very consciousness is there a deep joy. To be ever aspiring onwards,
and to know that our aspiration is no vain dream, this is joy. Still
to press 'toward the mark,' still to have 'the yet untroubled world
which gleams before us as we move,' and to know that we shall attain
if we follow on, this is the highest bliss. Not the accomplishment of
our ideal, but the cherishing of it, is the true delight of life.

Such self-satisfying goodness comes only through Christ. He makes it
possible for us to love God and to trust Him. Only when we know 'the
love wherewith He has loved us,' shall we love with a love which will
be the motive power of our lives. He makes it possible to live outward
lives of obedience, which, imperfect as it is, has 'great reward.' He
makes it possible for us to attain the yet unattained, and to be sure
that we 'shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.' He has
said, 'The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water
springing up unto everlasting life.' Only when we can say, 'I live,
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me,' will it be true of us in its
fullest sense, 'A good man shall be satisfied from himself.'



WHAT I THINK OF MYSELF AND WHAT GOD THINKS OF ME

'All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the Lord
weigheth the spirits.'--PROVERBS xvi. 2.


'All the ways of a man'--then there is no such thing as being
conscious of having gone wrong, and having got into miry and foul
ways? Of course there is; and equally of course a broad statement such
as this of my text is not to be pressed into literal accuracy, but is
a simple, general assertion of what we all know to be true, that we
have a strange power of blinding ourselves as to what is wrong in
ourselves and in our actions. Part of the cure for that lies in the
thought in the second clause of the text--'But the Lord weigheth the
spirits.' He weighs them in a balance, or as a man might take up
something and poise it on his palm, moving his hand up and down till
his muscles by their resistance gave him some inkling of its weight.
But what is it that God weighs? 'The spirits.' We too often content
ourselves with looking at our ways; God looks at ourselves. He takes
the inner man into account, estimates actions by motives, and so very
often differs from our judgment of ourselves and of one another.

Now so far the verse of my text carries me, and as a rule we have to
keep ourselves within the limits of each verse in reading this Book of
Proverbs, for two adjoining verses have very seldom anything to do
with each other. But in the present case they have, for here is what
follows: 'Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts' (about
thyself and everything else) 'shall be established.' That is to say,
