context. There is, first of all, in the first verse of the chapter, a
general exposition of what was uppermost in His mind and heart during
the whole of the period in the upper room. The act in our text, and
the wonderful words which follow in the subsequent chapters, crowned
by that great intercessory prayer, seem to me to be all explained for
us by this first unveiling of His motives. 'When Jesus knew that His
hour was come that He should depart out of this world unto the Father,
having loved His own which were in the world, He loved them unto the
end.'

And then the words of my text, which apply more specifically to the
single incident with which they are brought into connection, tell us
in addition why this one manifestation of Christ's love was given.
'Knowing that the Father had given all things into His hands, and that
He was come from God, and went to God.' There, then, are two
explanations of motive, the one covering a wider area than the other,
but both converging on the incident before us.

The first of these is just this--the consciousness of impending
separation moved Christ to a more than ordinarily tender manifestation
of His love. For the rendering which you will find in the margin of
the Revised Version, 'He loved them _to the uttermost_,' seems to me
to be truer to the Evangelist's meaning than the other, 'He loved them
unto the end.' For it was more to John's purpose to tell us that the
shadow of the Cross only brought to the surface in more blessed and
wonderful representation the deep love of His heart, than simply to
tell us that that shadow did not stop its flow. It is much to know
that all through His sorrow He continued to love; it is far more to
know that the sorrow sharpened its poignancy, and deepened its depth,
and made more tender its tenderness.

How near to the man Christ that thought brings us! Do we not all know
the impulse to make parting moments tender moments? The masks of use
and wont drop off; the reticence which we, perhaps wisely, ordinarily
cultivate in regard to our deepest feelings melts away. We yearn to
condense all our unspoken love into some one word, act, look, or
embrace, which it may afterwards be life to two hearts to remember.
And Jesus Christ felt this. Because He was going away He could not but
pour out Himself yet more completely than in the ordinary tenor of His
life. The earthquake lays bare hidden veins of gold, and the heart
opens itself out when separation impends. We shall never understand
the works of Jesus Christ if we do as we are all apt to do, think of
them as having only a didactic and doctrinal purpose. We must remember
that there is in Him the true play of a human heart, and that it was
to relieve His own love, as well as to teach these men their duty,
that he rose from the supper, and prepared Himself to wash the
disciples' feet.

Then, on the other hand, the other motive which is brought by the
Evangelists more immediately into connection with this incident is,
'knowing that the Father had given all things into His hands, and that
He was come from God, and went to God.'

The consciousness of the highest dignity impels to the lowliest
submission. 'All things given into His hands,' means universal and
absolute dominion. 'That He was come from God,' means pre-existence,
voluntary incarnation, an eternal divine nature, and unbroken
communion with the Father. 'That He went to God,' means a voluntary
departure from this low world, and a return to 'His own calm home, His
habitation from eternity.'

And, gathered all together, the phrases imply His absolute
consciousness of His divine nature. It was that that sent Him with the
towel round His loins to wash the foul feet of the pedestrians who had
come by the dusty and hot way from Bethany, and through all the
abominations of an Eastern city, into the upper chamber.

This was He who from the beginning 'was with God, and was God.' This
was He who was the Lord of Death, Victor over the grave. This was He
who by His own power ascended up on high, and reigns on the throne of
the universe to-day. This was He whose breast the same Evangelist had
seen before he wrote his Gospel, 'girded with the golden girdle' of
priesthood and of sovereignty; and holding, in the hands that had laid
the towel on the disciples' feet, the seven stars.

Oh, brethren! if we believed our creeds, how our hearts would melt
with wonder and awe that He who was so high stooped so low! 'Knowing
that He came from God, and went to God,' and that even when He was
kneeling there before these men, 'the Father had given all things into
His hands,' what did He do? Triumph? Show His majesty? Flash His
power? Demand service? 'Girded Himself with a towel and washed His
disciples' feet'!

The consciousness of loftiness does not alone avail to explain the
transcendent lowliness. You need the former motive to be joined with
it, because it is only love which bends loftiness to service, and
turns the consciousness of superiority into yearning to divest oneself
of the superiorities that separate, and to emphasise the emotions
which unite.

II. The detailed completeness of the act.

The remarkable particularity of the account of the stages of the
humiliation suggests the eye-witness. John carried them all in his
mind ineffaceably, and long, long years after that memorable hour we
hear him recalling each detail of the scene. We can see the little
group startled by the disturbance of the order of the meal as He rose
from the table, and the hushed wonder and the open-lipped expectation
with which they watched to see what the next step would be. He rises
from the table and divests Himself of the upper garments which impeded
movement. 'What will He do next?' He takes the basin, standing there
to be ready for washing the apostles' feet, but unused, and not even
filled with water. He fills it Himself, asking none to help Him. He
girds the towel round Him; and then, perhaps, begins with the
betrayer; at any rate, not with Peter.

Cannot you see them, as they look? Do not you feel the solemnity of
the detailed particular account of each step?

And may we not also say that all is a parable, or illustration, on a
lower level, of the very same principles which were at work in the
mightier fact of the greater condescension of His 'becoming flesh and
dwelling among us'? He 'rose from the table,' as He rose from His
place in 'the bosom of the Father.' He disturbed the meal as He broke
the festivities of the heavens. He divested Himself of His garments,
as 'He thought not equality with God a thing to be worn eagerly'; and
'He girded Himself with the towel,' as He put on the weakness of
flesh. Himself He filled the basin, by His own work providing the
means of cleansing; and Himself applied the cleansing to the feet of
those who were with Him. It is all a working out of the same double
motive which drew Him downwards to our earth. The reason why He
stooped, with His hands to wash the disciples' feet, is the same as
the reason why He had hands to wash with--viz., that knowing Himself
to be high over all, and loving all, He chose to become one with us,
that we might become like unto Him. So the details of the act are a
parable of His incarnation and death.

III. And then, still further, note the purpose of the deed.

Now although I have said that we never rightly understand our Lord's
actions if we are always looking for dogmatic or doctrinal purposes,
and thinking of them rather as being lectures, and sometimes rebukes
in act, than as being the outgush of His emotions and His human-divine
nature, yet we have also to take into account their moral and
spiritual lessons. His acts are words and His words are acts. And
although the main and primary purpose of this incident, in so far as
it had any other purpose than to relieve Christ's own love by
manifesting itself, and to comfort the disciples' hearts by the tender
manifestation, was to teach them their duty, as we shall presently
see, yet the special aspect of cleansing, which comes out so
emphatically and prominently in the episode of Peter's refusal, is to
be carried all along through the interpretation of the incident. This
was the reason why Jesus Christ came from heaven and assumed flesh,
and this was the reason why Jesus Christ, assuming flesh, bowed
Himself to this menial office--to make men clean.

I venture to say that we never understand Jesus Christ and His work
until we recognise this as its prominent purpose, to cleanse us from
sin. An inadequate conception of what we need, shallow, superficial
views of the gravity and universality and obstinacy of the fact of
sin, are an impenetrable veil between us and all real understanding of
Jesus Christ. There is no adequate motive for such an astounding fact
as the incarnation and sacrifice of the Son of God, except the purpose
of redeeming the world. If you do not believe that you--you
individually, and all of us your brethren--need to be cleansed, you
will find it hard to believe in the divinity and atonement of Jesus
Christ. If you have been down into the depths of your own heart, and
found out what tremendous, diabolic power your own evil nature and sin
have upon you, then you will not be content with anything less than
the incarnate God who stoops from heaven to bear the burden of your
sin, and to take it all away. If you want to understand why He laid
aside His garments and took the servile form of our manhood, the
appeal of man's sin to His love and the answer of His Divine
condescension are the only explanation.

Again, let me remind you that there is no cleansing without Christ.
Can you do it for yourselves, do you think? There is an old proverb,
'One hand washes the other.' That is true about stains on the flesh.
It is not true about stains on our spirits. Nobody can do it for us
but Jesus Christ alone. He kneels before us, having the right and the
power to wash us because He has died for us. Kings of England used to
touch for 'the king's evil,' and lay their pure fingers upon feculent
masses of corruption. Our King's touch is sovereign for the corruption
and incipient putrefaction of our sin; and there is no power in heaven
or earth that will make a man clean except the power of Jesus Christ.
It is either Jesus Christ or filthiness.

If I might pass from my text for one moment, I would remind you of the
episode which immediately follows, and suggest that if Jesus Christ is
not cleansing us He is nothing to us. 'If I wash thee not, thou hast
no part in Me.' I know, of course, that it is possible to have
partial, rudimentary, and sometimes reverent conceptions of that Lord
without recognising in Him the great 'Fountain opened for sin and for
uncleanness.' But I am sure of this, that there is no real, living
possession of Jesus Christ such as men's souls need, and such as will
outlast the disintegrating influences of death, unless it be such a
possession of Him as appropriates for its own, primarily, His
cleansing power. First of all He must cleanse, and then all other
aspects of His glory, and gifts of His grace, will pour into our
hearts.

No understanding of Christ, then, without the recognition that
cleansing is the purpose and the vindication of His incarnation and
sacrifice; no cleansing without Christ; no Christ worth calling by the
name without cleansing.

IV. And so, lastly, note the pattern in this act.

You will remember that it is followed by solemn words spoken after He
had taken His garments and resumed His place at the table, in which
there blended, in the most wonderful fashion, the consciousness of
authority, both as Teacher of truth and as Guide of life, and the
sweetest and most loving lowliness. In them Jesus prescribed the
wonderful act of His condescending love and cleansing power as the law
of the Christian life. There are too many of us who profess to be
quite willing to trust to Jesus Christ as the Cleanser of our souls
who are not nearly so willing to accept His Example as the pattern for
our lives; and I would have you note, as an extremely remarkable
point, that all the New Testament references to our Lord as being our
Example are given in immediate connection with His passion. The very
part of His life which we generally regard as being most absolutely
unique and inimitable is the fact in His life which Apostles and
Evangelists select as the one to set before us for our example.

Do you ask if any man can copy the sufferings of Jesus Christ? In
regard to their virtue and efficacy, No. In regard to their motive--in
one aspect, No; in another aspect, Yes. In regard to the spirit that
impelled Him we may copy Him. The smallest trickle of water down a
city gutter will carve out of the mud at its side little banks and
cliffs, and exhibit all the phenomena of erosion on the largest scale,
as the Mississippi does over half a continent, and the tiniest little
wave in a basin will fall into the same curves as the billows of
mid-ocean. You and I, in our little lives, may even aspire to 'do as I
have done to you.'

The true use of superiority is service. _Noblesse oblige_! Bank,
wealth, capacity, talents, all things are given to us that we may use
them to the last particle for our fellows. Only when the world and
society have awakened to that great truth which the towel-girded,
kneeling Christ has taught us, will society be organised on the
principles that God meant.

But, further, the highest form of service is to cleanse. Cleansing is
always dirty work for the cleaners, as every housemaid knows. You
cannot make people clean by scolding them, by lecturing them, by
patronising them. You have to go down into the filth if you mean to
lift them out of it; and leave your smelling-bottles behind; and think
nothing repulsive if your stooping to it may save a brother.

The only way by which we can imitate that example is by, first of all,
participating in it for ourselves. We must, first of all, have the
Cross as our trust, before it can become our pattern and our law. We
must first say, 'Lord! not my feet only, but also my hands and my
head,' and then, in the measure in which we ourselves have received
the cleansing benediction, we shall be impelled and able to lay our
gentle hands on foulness and leprosy; and to say to all the impure,
'Jesus Christ, who hath cleansed _me_, makes _thee_ clean.'




THE DISMISSAL OF JUDAS

'... Then said Jesus unto Judas, That thou doest, do quickly.'--JOHN
xiii. 27.

When our Lord gave the morsel, dipped in the dish, to Judas, only John
knew the significance of the act. But if we supplement the narrative
here with that given by Matthew, we shall find that, accompanying the
gift of the sop, was a brief dialogue in which the betrayer, with
unabashed front, hypocritically said, 'Lord! Is it I?' and heard the
solemn, sad answer, 'Thou sayest!' Two things, then, appealed to him
at the moment: one, the conviction that he was discovered; the other,
the wonderful assurance that he was still loved, for the gift of the
morsel was a token of friendliness. He shut his heart against them
both; and as he shut his heart against Christ he opened it to the
devil. So 'after the sop Satan entered into him.' At that moment a
soul committed suicide; and none of those that sat by, with the
exception of Christ and the 'disciple whom He loved,' so much as
dreamed of the tragedy going on before their eyes.

I know not that there are anywhere words more weighty and wonderful
than those of our text. And I desire to try if I can at all make you
feel as I feel, their solemn signification and force. 'That thou
doest, do quickly.'

I. I hear in them, first, the voice of despairing love abandoning the
conflict.

If I have rightly construed the meaning of the incident, this is the
plain meaning of it. And you will observe that the Revised Version,
more accurately and closely rendering the words of our text, begins
with a '_Therefore_.' 'Therefore said Jesus unto him,' because the die
was cast; because the will of Judas had conclusively welcomed Satan,
and conclusively rejected Christ; therefore, knowing that remonstrance
was vain, knowing that the deed was, in effect, done, Jesus Christ,
that Incarnate Charity which 'believeth all things, and hopeth all
things,' abandoned the man to himself, and said, 'There, then, if thou
wilt thou must. I have done all I can; my last arrow is shot, and it
has missed the target. That then doest, do quickly.'

There is a world of solemn meaning in that one little word 'doest.' It
teaches us the old lesson, which sense is so apt to forget, that the
true actor in man's deeds is 'the hidden man of the heart,' and that
when it has acted, it matters comparatively little whether the mere
tool and instrument of the hands or of the other organs have carried
out the behest. The thing is done before it is done when the man has
resolved, with a fixed will, to do it. The betrayal was as good as in
process, though no step beyond the introductory ones, which could
easily have been cancelled, had yet been accomplished. Because there
was a fixed purpose which could not be altered by anything now,
therefore Jesus Christ regards the act as completed. It is what we
think in our hearts that we are; and our fixed determinations, our
inclinations of will, are far more truly our doings than the mere
consequences of these, embodied in actuality. It is but a poor
estimate of a man that judges him by the test of what he has done.
What he has wanted to do is the true man; what he has attempted to do.
'It was well that it was in thine heart!' saith God to the king who
thought of building the Temple which he was never allowed to rear. 'It
is ill that is in thine heart,' says He by whom actions are weighed,
to the sinner in purpose, though his clean hands lie idly in his lap.
These hidden movements of desire and will that never come to the
surface are our true selves. Look after them, and the deeds will take
care of themselves. Serpent's eggs have serpents in them. And he that
has determined upon a sin has done the sin, whether his hands have
been put to it or no.

But, then, turn for a moment to the other thought that is suggested
here--that solemn picture of a soul left to do as it will, because
divine love has no other restraints which it can impose, and is
bankrupt of motives that it can adduce to prevent it from its madness.
Now I do not believe, for my part, that any man in this world is so
all-round 'sold unto sin' as that the seeking love of God gives him up
as irreclaimable. I do not believe that there are any people
concerning whom it is true that it is impossible for the grace of God
to find some chink and cranny in their souls through which it can
enter and change them. There are no hopeless cases as long as men are
here. But, then, though there may not be so, in regard to the whole
sweep of the man's nature, yet every one of us, over and over again,
has known what it is to come exactly into that position in regard to
some single evil or other, concerning which we have so set our teeth
and planted our feet at such an angle of resistance as that God gives
up dealing with us and leaves us, as He did with Balaam when He
opposed his covetous inclinations to all the remonstrances of Heaven.
God said at last to him 'Go!' because it was the best way to teach him
what a fool he had been in wanting to go. Thus, when we determine to
set ourselves against the pleadings and the beseechings of divine
love, the truest kindness is to fling the reins upon our necks, and
let us gallop ourselves into a sweat and weariness, and then we shall
be more amenable to the touch of the rein thereafter.

Are there any people whom God is teaching obedience to His light
touch, by letting them run their course after some one specific sin?
Perhaps there are. At all events, let us remember that that position
of being allowed to do as we like is one to which we all tend, in the
measure in which we indulge our inclinations, and shut our hearts
against God's pleadings. There is such a thing as a conscience seared
as with a hot iron. They used to say that there were witches' marks on
the body, places where, if you stuck a pin in, there was no feeling.
Men cover themselves all over with marks of that sort, which are not
sensitive even to the prick of a divine remonstrance, rebuke, or
retribution. They 'wipe their mouths and say I have done no harm.' You
can tie up the clapper of the bell that swings on the black rock, on
which, if you drift, you go to pieces. You can silence the Voice by
the simple process of neglecting it. Judas set his teeth against two
things, the solemn conviction that Jesus Christ knew his sin, and the
saving assurance that Jesus Christ loved him still. And whosoever
resists either of these two is getting perilously near to the point
where, not in petulance but in pity, God will say, 'Very well, I have
called and ye have refused. Now go, and do what you want to do, and
see how you like it when it is done. What thou doest, do quickly.' Do
you remember the other word, 'If '_twere_ done when 'tis done, then
'twere well it were done quickly'? But since consequences last when
deeds are past, perhaps you had better halt before you determine to do
them.

II. Now, secondly, I hear in these words the voice of strangely
blended majesty and humiliation.

'What thou doest, do!' Judas thought he had got possession of Christ's
person, and was His master in a very real sense. When lo! all at once
the victim assumes the position of the Lord and commands, showing the
traitor that instead of thwarting and counterworking, he was but
carrying out the designs of his fancied victim; and that he was an
instrument in Christ's hands for the execution of His will. And these
two thoughts, how, in effect, all antagonism, all malicious hatred,
all violent opposition of every sort but work in with Christ's
purpose, and carry out His intention; and how, at the moments of
deepest apparent degradation, He towers, in manifest Majesty and
Masterhood, seem to me to be plainly taught in the word before us.

He uses his foes for the furtherance of His purpose. That has been the
history of the world ever since. 'The floods, O Lord, have lifted up
their voice.' And what have they done? Smashing against the
breakwater, they but consolidate its mighty blocks, and prove that
'the Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters.' It has
been so in the past, it is so to-day; it will be so till the end.
Every Judas is unconsciously the servant of Him whom he seeks to
betray; and finds out to his bewilderment that what he meant for a
death-blow is fulfilling the very purpose and will of the Lord against
whom he has turned.

Again, the combination here, in such remarkable juxtaposition, of the
two things, a willing submission to the utmost extremity of shame,
which the treasonous heart can froth out in its malice and, at the
same time, a rising up in conscious majesty and lordship, are
suggested to us by the words before us. That combination of utter
lowliness and transcendent loftiness runs through the whole life and
history of our Lord. Did you ever think how strong an argument that
strange combination, brought out so inartificially throughout the
whole of the Gospels, is for their historical veracity? Suppose the
problem had been given to poets to create and to set in a series of
appropriate scenes a character with these two opposites stamped
equally upon it, neither of them impinging upon the domain of the
other--viz., utter humility and humiliation in circumstance, and
majestic sovereignty and elevation above all circumstances--do you
think that any of them could have solved the problem, though--Aeschylus
and Shakespeare had been amongst them, as these four men
that wrote these four little tracts that we call Gospels have done?
How comes it that this most difficult of literary problems has been so
triumphantly solved by these men? I think there is only one answer,
'Because they were reporters, and imagined nothing, but observed
everything, and repeated what had happened.' He reconciled these
opposites who was the Man of Sorrows and acquainted with grief, and
yet the Eternal Son of the Father; and the Gospels have solved the
problem only because they are simple records of its solution by Him.

Wherever in His history there is some trait of lowliness there is by
the side of it a flash of majesty. Wherever in His history there is
some gleaming out from the veil of flesh of the hidden glory of
divinity, there is immediately some drawing of the veil across the
glory. And the two things do not contradict nor confuse, but we stand
before that double picture of a Christ betrayed and of a Christ
commanding His betrayer, and using his treason, and we say, 'The Word
was made flesh, and dwelt among us.'

III. Again, I hear the voice of instinctive human weakness.

'That thou doest, do quickly.' It may be doubtful, and some of you
perhaps may not be disposed to follow me in my remark, but to my ear
that sounds just like the utterance of that instinctive dislike of
suspense and of the long hanging over us of the sword by a hair, which
we all know so well. Better to suffer than to wait for suffering. The
loudest thunder-crash is not so awe-inspiring as the dread silence of
nature when the sky is black before the peal rolls through the clouds.
Many a martyr has prayed for a swift ending of his troubles. Many a
sorrowing heart, that has been sitting cowering under the anticipation
of coming evils, has wished that the string could be pulled, as it
were, and they could all come down in one cold flood, and be done
with, rather than trickle drop by drop. They tell us that the bravest
soldiers dislike the five minutes when they stand in rank before the
first shot is fired. And with all reverence I venture to think that He
who knew all our weaknesses in so far as weakness was not sin, is here
letting us see how He, too, desired that the evil which was coming
might come quickly, and that the painful tension of expectation might
be as brief as possible. That may be doubtful; I do not dwell upon it,
but I suggest it for your consideration.

IV. And then I pass on to the last of the tones that I hear in these
utterances--the voice of the willing Sacrifice for the sins of the
world.

'That thou doest, do quickly.' There is nothing more obvious
throughout the whole of the latter portion of the Gospel narrative
than the way in which, increasingly towards its close, Jesus seemed to
hasten to the Cross. You remember His own sayings: 'I have a baptism
to be baptized with, and how am I straitened till it be accomplished.
I am come to cast fire on the earth; would it were already kindled!'
You remember with what a strange air--I was going to use an
inappropriate word, and say, of alacrity; but, at all events, of fixed
resolve--He journeyed from Galilee, in that last solemn march to
Jerusalem, and how the disciples followed, astonished at the unwonted
look of decision and absorption that was printed upon His countenance.
If we consider His doings in that last week in Jerusalem, how he
courted publicity, how He avoided no encounter with His official
enemies, how He sharpened His tones, not exactly so as to provoke, but
certainly so as by no means to conciliate, we shall see, I think, in
it all, His consciousness that the hour had come, and His absolute
readiness and willingness to be offered for the world's sin. He
stretches out His hands, as it were, to draw the Cross nearer to
Himself, not with any share in the weakness of a fanatical aspiration
after martyrdom, but under a far deeper and more wonderful impulse.

Why was Christ so willing, so eager, if I may use the word, that His
death should be accomplished? Two reasons, which at the bottom are
one, answer the question. He thus hastened to His Cross because He
would obey the Father's will, and because He loved the whole
world--you and me and all our fellows. We were each in His heart. It
was because He wanted to save thee that He said to Judas, 'Do it
quickly, that the world's salvation and that man's salvation may be
accomplished.' These were the cords that bound Him to the altar. Let
us never forget that Judas with his treachery, and rulers with their
hostility, and Pilate with his authority, and the soldiers with their
nails, and centurions with their lances, and the grim figure of Death
itself with its shaft, would have been all equally powerless against
Christ if it had not been his loving will to die on the Cross for each
of us.

Therefore, brethren, as we hear this voice, let us discern in it the
tones which warn us of the danger of yielding to inclination and
stifling His rebukes, till He abandons us for the moment in despair;
let us hear in it the pathetic voice of a Brother, who knows all our
weaknesses and has felt our emotions; let us hear the voice of
Sovereign Authority which uses its enemies for its purposes, and is
never loftier than when it is most lowly, whose Cross is His throne of
glory, whose exaltation is His deepest humiliation, and let us hear a
love which, discerning each of us through all the ages and the crowds,
went willingly to the Cross because He willed that He should be our
Saviour.

And seeing that time is short, and the future precarious, and delay
may darken into loss and rejection, let us take these words as spoken
to us in another sense, and hear in them the warning that 'to-day, if
we will hear His voice, we harden not our hearts,' and when He says to
us, in regard to repentance and faith, and Christian consecration and
service, 'That thou doest, do quickly,' let us answer, 'I made haste
and delayed not, but made haste to keep Thy commandments.'




THE GLORY OF THE CROSS

'Therefore, when he was gone out, Jesus said, Now is the Son of Man
glorified, and God is glorified in Him. If God be glorified in Him,
God shall also glorify Him in Himself, and shall straightway glorify
Him.'--JOHN xiii. 31, 32.

There is something very weird and awful in the brief note of time with
which the Evangelist sends Judas on his dark errand. 'He ... went
immediately out, and it was night.' Into the darkness that dark soul
went. That hour was 'the power of darkness,' the very keystone of the
black arch of man's sin, and some shadow of it fell upon the soul of
Christ Himself.

In immediate connection with the departure of the traitor comes this
singular burst of triumph in our text. The Evangelist emphasises the
connection by that: '_Therefore_, when he was gone out, Jesus said.'
There is a wonderful touch of truth and naturalness in that
connection. The traitor was gone. His presence had been a restraint;
and now that that 'spot in their feast of charity' had disappeared,
the Master felt at ease; and like some stream, out of the bed of which
a black rock has been taken, His words flow more freely. How intensely
real and human the narrative becomes when we see that Christ, too,
felt the oppression of an uncongenial presence, and was relieved and
glad at its removal! The departure of the traitor evoked these words
of triumph in another way, too. At his going away, we may say, the
match was lit that was to be applied to the train. He had gone out on
his dark errand, and that brought the Cross within measurable distance
of our Lord. Out of a new sense of its nearness He speaks here. So the
note of time not only explains to us why our Lord spoke, but puts us
on the right track for understanding His words, and makes any other
interpretation of them than one impossible. What Judas went to do was
the beginning of Christ's glorifying. We have here, then, a triple
glorification--the Son of Man glorified in His Cross; God glorified in
the Son of Man; and the Son of Man glorified in God. Let us look at
these three thoughts for a few moments now.

I. First, we have here the Son of Man glorified in His Cross.

The words are a paradox. Strange, that at such a moment, when there
rose up before Christ all the vision of the shame and the suffering,
the pain and the death, and the mysterious sense of abandonment, which
was worse than them all, He should seem to stretch out His hands to
bring the Cross nearer to Himself, and that His soul should fill with
triumph!

There is a double aspect under which our Lord regarded His sufferings.
On the one hand we mark in Him an unmistakable shrinking from the
Cross, the innocent shrinking of His manhood expressed in such words
as 'I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how am I straitened till
it be accomplished'; and in such incidents as the agony in Gethsemane.
And yet, side by side with that, not overcome by it, but not
overcoming it, there is the opposite feeling, the reaching out almost
with eagerness to bring the Cross nearer to Himself. These two lie
close by each other in His heart. Like the pellucid waters of the
Rhine and the turbid stream of the Moselle, that flow side by side
over a long space, neither of them blending discernibly with the
other, so the shrinking and the desire were contemporaneous in
Christ's mind. Here we have the triumphant anticipation rising to the
surface, and conquering for a time the shrinking.

Why did Christ think of His Cross as a glorifying? The New Testament
generally represents it as the very lowest point of His degradation;
John's Gospel always represents it as the very highest point of His
glory. And the two things are both true; just as the zenith of our sky
is the nadir of the sky for those on the other side of the world. The
same fact which in one aspect sounds the very lowest depth of Christ's
humiliation, in another aspect is the very highest culminating point
of His glory.

How did the Cross glorify Christ? In two ways. It was the revelation
of His heart; it was the throne of His sovereign power.

It was the revelation of His heart. All his life long He had been
trying to tell the world how much He loved it. His love had been, as
it were, filtered by drops through His words, through His deeds,
through His whole demeanour and bearing; but in His death it comes in
a flood, and pours itself upon the world. All His life long he had
been revealing His heart, through the narrow rifts of His deeds, like
some slender lancet windows; but in His death all the barriers are
thrown down, and the brightness blazes out upon men. All through His
life He had been trying to communicate His love to the world, and the
fragrance came from the box of ointment exceeding precious, but when
the box was broken the house was filled with the odour.

For Him to be known was to be glorified. So pure and perfect was He,
that revelation of His character and glorification of Himself were one
and the same thing. Because His Cross reveals to the world for all
time, and for eternity, too, a love which shrinks from no sacrifice, a
love which is capable of the most entire abandonment, a love which is
diffused over the whole surface of humanity and through all the ages,
a love which comes laden with the richest and the highest gifts, even
the turning of selfish and sinful hearts into its own pure and perfect
likeness, therefore does He say, in contemplation of that Cross which
was to reveal Him for what He was to the world, and to bring His love
to every one of us, 'Now is the Son of Man glorified.'

We can fancy a mother, for instance, in the anticipation of shame, and
ignominy, and suffering, and sorrow, and death which she encounters
for the sake of some prodigal child, forgetting all the ignominy, and
the shame, and the suffering, and the sorrow, and the death, because
all these are absorbed in the one thought: 'If I bear them, my poor,
wandering, rebellious child will know at last how much I loved him.'
So Christ yearns to impart the knowledge of Himself to us, because by
that knowledge we may be won to His love and service; and hence when
He looks forward to the agony, and contumely, and sorrow of the close,
every other thought is swallowed up in this one: 'They will be the
means by which the whole world will find out how deep my heart of love
to it was.' Therefore does He triumph and say, 'Now is the Son of Man
glorified.'

Still further, He regards His Cross as the means of His glorifying,
because it is His throne of saving power. The paradoxical words of our
text rest upon His profound conviction that in His death He was about
to put forth a mightier and diviner power than ever He had manifested
in His life. They are the same in effect and in tone as the great
words: 'I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me.' Now I want
you to ask yourselves one question: In what sense is Christ's Cross
Christ's glorifying, unless His Cross bears an altogether different
relation to His life from what the death of a great teacher or
benefactor ordinarily bears to his? It is impossible that Christ could
have spoken such words as these of my text if He had simply thought of
His death as a Plato or a John Howard might have thought of his, as
being the close of his activity for the welfare of his fellows. Unless
Christ's death has in it some substantive value, unless it is
something more than the mere termination of His work for the world, I
see not how the words before us can be interpreted. If His death is
His glorifying, it must be because in that death something is done
which was not completed by the life, however fair; by the words,
however wise and tender; by the works of power, however restorative
and healing. Here is something more than these present. What more?
This more, that His Cross is the 'propitiation for the sins of the
whole world.' He is glorified therein, not as a Socrates might be
glorified by his calm and noble death; not because nothing in His life
became Him better than the leaving of it; not because the page that
tells the story of His passion is turned to by us as the tenderest and
most sacred in the world's records; but because in that death He
wrestled with and overcame our foes, and because, like the Jewish hero
of old, dying, He pulled down the house which our tyrants had built,
and overwhelmed them in its ruins. 'Now is the Son of Man glorified.'

And so, brethren, there blend, in that last act of our Lord's--for His
death was His act--in strange fashion, the two contradictory ideas of
glory and shame; like some sky, all full of dark thunderclouds, and
yet between them the brightest blue and the blazing sunshine. In the
Cross, Death crowns Him the Prince of Life, and His Cross is His
throne. All His life long He was the Light of the World, but the very
noontide hour of His glory was that hour when the shadow of eclipse
lay over all the land, and He hung on the Cross dying in the dark. At
His 'eventide it was light.' 'He endured the Cross, despising the
shame'; and lo! the shame flashed up into the very brightness of
glory, and the ignominy and the suffering became the jewels of His
crown. 'Now is the Son of Man glorified.'

II. Now let us turn for a moment to the second of the threefold
glorifications that are set forth here: God glorified in the Son of
Man.

The mystery deepens as we advance. That God should be glorified in a
man is not strange, but that He should be so glorified in the eminent
and special fashion which Jesus contemplates here, is strange; and
stranger still when we think that the act in which He was to be
glorified was the death of an innocent Man. If God, in any special and
eminent manner, is glorified in the Cross of Jesus Christ, that
implies, as it seems to me, two things at all events--many more which
I have not time to touch upon, but two things very plainly. One is
that 'God was in Christ,' in some singular and eminent manner. If all
His life was a continual manifestation of the divine character, if
Christ's words were the divine wisdom, if Christ's compassion was the
divine pity, if Christ's lowliness was the divine gentleness, if His
whole human life and nature were the brightest and clearest
manifestation to the world of what God is, we can understand that the
Cross was the highest point of the revelation of the divine nature to
the world, and so was the glorifying of God in Him. But if we take any
lower view of the relation between God and Christ, I know not how we
can acquit these words of our Master of the charge of being a world
too wide for the facts of the case.

The words involve, as it seems to me, not only that idea of a close,
unique union and indwelling of God in Christ, but they involve also
this other: that these sufferings bore no relation to the deserts of
the person who endured them. If Christ, with His pure and perfect
character--the innocency and nobleness of which all that read the
Gospels admit--if Christ suffered so; if the highest virtue that was
ever seen in this world brought no better wages than shame and
spitting and the Cross; if Christ's life and Christ's death are simply
a typical example of the world's treatment of its greatest
benefactors; then, if they have any bearing at all on the character of
God, they cast a shadow rather than a light upon the divine
government, and become not the least formidable of the difficulties
and knots that will have to be untied hereafter before it shall be
clear that God did everything well. But if we can say, 'He hath borne
our griefs and carried our sorrows'; if we can say, 'God was in Christ
reconciling the world to Himself'; if we can say, that His death was
the death of Him whom God had appointed to live and die for us, and
'to bear our sins in His own body on the tree,' then, though deep
mysteries come with the thought, still we can see that, in a very
unique manner, God is glorified and exalted in His death.

For if the dying Christ be the Son of God dying for us, then the Cross
glorifies God, because it teaches us that the glory of the divine
character is the divine love. Of wisdom, or of power, or of any of the
more 'majestic' attributes of the divine nature, that weak Man,
hanging dying on the Cross, was a strange embodiment; but if the very
heart of the divine brightness be the pure white fire of love; if
there be nothing diviner in God than His giving of Himself to His
creatures; if the highest glory of the divine nature be to pity and to
bestow, then the Cross upon which Christ died towers above all other
revelations as the most awful, the most sacred, the most tender, the
most complete, the most heart-touching, the most soul-subduing
manifestation of the divine nature; and stars and worlds, and angels
and mighty creatures, and things in the heights and things in the
depths, to each of which have been entrusted some broken syllables of
the divine character to make known to the world, dwindle and fade
before the brightness, the lambent, gentle brightness that beams out
from the Cross of Christ, which proclaims--God is love, is pity, is
pardon.

And is it not so--is it not so? Is not the thought that has flowed
from Christ's Cross through Christendom of what our Father in Heaven
is, the highest and the most blessed that the world has ever had? Has
it not scattered doubts that lay like mountains of ice upon man's
heart? Has it not swept the heavens clear of clouds that wrapped it in
darkness? Has it not delivered men from the dreams of gods angry, gods
capricious, gods vengeful, gods indifferent, gods simply mighty and
vast and awful and unspeakable? Has it not taught us that love is God,
and God is love; and so brought to the whole world the true Gospel,
the Gospel of the grace of God? In that Cross the Father is glorified.

III. Now, lastly, we have here the Son of Man glorified in the Father.

The mysteries and the paradoxes seem to deepen as we advance. 'If God
be glorified in Him, God shall also glorify Him in Himself, and shall
straightway glorify Him.' Do these words sound to you as if they
expressed no more than the confidence of a good man, who, when he was
dying, believed that he would be accepted of a loving Father, and
would be at rest from his sufferings? To me they seem to say
infinitely more than that. 'He shall also glorify Him in Himself.'
Mark that 'in Himself.' That is the obvious antithesis to what has
been spoken about in the previous clause, a glorifying which consisted
in a manifestation to the external universe, whereas this is a
glorifying within the depths of the divine nature. And the best
