Christian people, if you came out of your shells and traded with
your pound.

II. Observe the varying profits of the trading.

The one man says, 'Thy pound hath gained ten pounds.' The other
says, 'Thy pound hath gained five pounds.' And the others who are
not mentioned, no doubt, had also varying results to present. Now
that inequality of profits from an equal capital to start with, is
but a picturesque way of saying what is, alas! too obviously true,
that Christian people do not all stand on the same level in regard
to the use they have made of, and the benefits they have derived
from, the one equal gift which was bestowed upon them. It is
the same to every one at the beginning, but differences develop as
they go on. One man makes twice as much out of it as another does.

Now, let us distinctly understand what sort of differences these are
which our Lord signalises here. Let me clear away a mistake which
may interfere with the true lessons of this parable, that the
differences in question are the superficial ones in apparent results
which follow from difference of endowments, or from difference of
influential position. That is the kind of meaning that is often
attached to the 'ten pounds' or the 'five pounds' in the text. We
think that the ten pounder is the man who has been able to do some
large spiritual work for Jesus Christ, that fills the world with its
greatness, the man who has been set in some most conspicuous place,
and by reason of intellectual ability or other talent has been able
to gather in many souls into the kingdom; but that is not Christ's
way of estimating. We should be going dead in the teeth of
everything that He teaches if we thought that such as these were the
differences intended. No, no! Every man that co-operates in a great
work with equal diligence and devotion has an equal place in his
eyes. The soldier that clapped Luther on the back as he was going
into the Diet of Worms, and said, 'You have a bigger fight to fight
than we ever had; cheer up, little monk!' stands on the same level
as the great reformer, if what he did was done from the game motive
and with as full consecration of himself. The old law of Israel
states the true principle of Christian recompense: they that 'abide
by the stuff' have the same share in the spoil as they 'that go down
into the battle.' All servants who have exercised equal faithfulness
and equal diligence stand on the same level and have the same
success; no matter how different may be their estimation in the eyes
of men; no matter how different may be the conspicuousness of the
places that they fill in the eyes of the world whilst they live, or
in the records of the Church when they are dead. Equal diligence
will issue in equal results in the development of character, and the
only reason for the diversity of results is the diversity of
faithfulness and of zeal in trading with the pound.

Notice, too, before I go further, how all who trade make profits.
There are no bad debts in that business. There are no investments
that result in a loss. Everybody that goes into it makes something
by it; which is just to say that any man who is honest and earnest
in the attempt to utilise the powers of Christ's Gospel for his own
culture, or for the world's good, will succeed in reality, however
he may seem to fail in appearance. There are no commercial failures
in this trading. The man with his ten pounds of profit made them
because he worked hardest. The man that made the five made all that
his work entitled him to. There was no one who came and said, 'Lord!
I put thy pound into my little shop, and I did my best with it, and
it is all gone!' Every Christian effort is crowned with success.

III. Lastly, we have here the final declaration of profits.

The master has come back. He is a king now, but he is the master
still, and he wants to know what has become of the money that was
left in the servants' hands. Now, that is but a metaphorical way of
bringing to our minds that which we cannot conceive of without
metaphor--viz., the retribution that lies beyond the grave for us
all. Although we cannot conceive it without metaphor, we may reach,
through the metaphor to some apprehension, at any rate, of the facts
that lie behind it. There are two points in reference to this final
declaration of profits suggested here.

The first is this, that all the profit is ascribed to the capital.
Neither of the two men say: 'I, with thy pound, have gained,' but
'Thy pound hath gained.' That is accurately true. For if I accept,
and live by, any great moral truth or principle, it is the principle
or the truth that is the real productive cause of the change in my
life and character. I, by my acceptance of it, simply put the belt
on the drum that connects my loom with the engine, but it is the
engine that drives the looms and the shuttle, and brings out the web
at last. And so, Christian people who, with God's grace in their
hearts, have utilised the 'pound,' and thereby made themselves
Christlike, have to say, 'It was not I, but Christ in me. It was the
Gospel, and not my faith in the Gospel, that wrought this change.'
Is it your teeth or your dinner that nourishes you? Is it the Gospel
or your trust in the Gospel that is the true cause of your
sanctifying?

With regard to the other aspect of this trading, the same thing is
true. Is it my word or Christ's Word ministered by me that helps any
of my hearers who are helped? Surely! surely! there is no question
about that. It is the 'pound' that gains the 'pounds.' 'Paul
planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the increase. So, then,
neither is he that planteth anything nor he that watereth, but God
that giveth the increase.'

The other consideration suggested by these words is the exact
knowledge of the precise results of a life, which is possessed at
last. Each servant knew precisely what was the net outcome of his
whole activity. That is exactly what we do not know here, and never
shall, and never can know. But yonder all illusions will have
vanished; and there will be two sorts of disillusionising then. Men,
for instance, of my profession, whose names are familiar, and who
hold high places in the esteem of the Church, and may be tempted to
suppose that they have done a great deal--I am afraid that many of
us will find, when we get yonder, that we have not done nearly so
much as our admirers in this world, and we ourselves, were sometimes
tempted to think that we had done. The searching light that comes in
will show a great many seamy places in the cloth that looks very
sound when it is inspected in the twilight. And there will be
another kind of disillusionising. Many a man has said, 'Lord! I have
laboured in vain, and spent my strength for nought,' who will find
out that he was mistaken, and that where he saw failure there were
solid results; that where he thought the grain had perished in the
furrows, it had sprung up and borne fruit unto life everlasting.
'Lord! when saw we Thee in prison, and visited Thee?' We never knew
that we had done anything of the sort. 'Behold! I was left alone,'
said the widowed Jerusalem when she was restored to her husband,
'these'--children that have gathered round me--'where had they
been?' We shall know, for good or bad, exactly the results of our
lives.

We shall have to tell them. The slothful servant, too, was under
this compulsion of absolute honesty. If he had not been so, do you
think he would have ventured to stand up before his master, a king
now, and insult him to his face? But he had to turn himself inside
out, and tell then what he had thought in his inmost heart. So
'every one of us shall give an account of himself to God'; and like
a man in the bankruptcy court, we shall have to explain our books,
and go into all our transactions. We are working in the dark today.
Our work will be seen as it is, in the light. The coral reef rises
in the ocean, and the creatures that made it do not see it. The
ocean will be drained away, and the reef will stand up sheer and
distinct.

My brother! 'I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire'--and
when you have bought your pound, see that you use it; for 'it is
required in stewards that a man be found faithful.'




THE REWARDS OF THE TRADING SERVANTS


    'Because thou hast been faithful in a very little,
    have thou authority over ten cities... Be thou also
    over five cities.'--LUKE xix. 17, 19.

The relation between this parable of the pounds and the other of the
talents has often been misunderstood, and is very noteworthy. They
are not two editions of one parable variously manipulated by the
Evangelists, but they are two parables presenting two kindred and
yet diverse aspects of one truth. They are neither identical, as
some have supposed, nor contradictory, as others have imagined; but
they are complementary. The parable of the talents represents the
servants as receiving different endowments; one gets five; another
two; another one. They make the same rate of profit with their
different endowments. The man that turned his two talents into four
did just as well as he that turned his five into ten. In either case
the capital is doubled. Since the diligence is the same, the rewards
are the same, and to each is given the identical same eulogium and
the same entrance into the joy of his Lord. So the lesson of that
parable is that, however unequal are our endowments, there may be as
much diligence shown in the use of the smallest as in the greatest,
and where that is the case, the man with the small endowments will
stand on the same level of recompense as the man with the large.

But that is not all. This parable comes in to complete the thoughts.
Here all the servants get the same gift, the one pound, but they
make different profits out of it, one securing twice as much as the
other. And, inasmuch as the diligence has been different, the
rewards are different. So the lesson of this parable is that unequal
faithfulness in the use of the same opportunities results in unequal
retribution and reward. Unequal faithfulness, I say, because, of
course, in both parables it is presupposed that the factor in
producing the profit is not any accidental circumstance, but the
earnestness and faithfulness of the servant. Christ does not pay for
results; He pays for motives. And it is not because the man has made
a certain number of pounds, but because in making them he has shown
a certain amount of faithfulness, that he is rewarded. Christ does
not say, 'Well done! good and _successful_ servant,' but 'Well
done! good and _faithful_ servant.'

So, keeping these two sides of the one truth in view, I desire now
to draw out two or three of the lessons which seem to me to lie in
the principle laid down in my texts, of the unequal results of the
unequal diligence of these servants.

I. I would note the solemn view of this present life that underlies
the whole.

'Thou hast been faithful in a very little; have thou authority over
five cities.' Well, that rests upon the thought that all our present
life here is a stewardship, which in its nature is preparatory to
larger work yonder. And that is the point of view from which alone
it is right to look at, and possible to understand, this else
unintelligible and bewildering life on earth. Clearly enough, to
anybody that has eyes in his head, moral ends are supreme in man's
relation to nature, and in man's life. We are here for the sake of
making character, and of acquiring aptitudes and capacities which
shall be exercised hereafter. The whole of our earthly career is the
exercise of stewardship in regard to all the gifts with which we
have been entrusted, in order that by the right exercise of that
stewardship we may develop ourselves and acquire powers.

Now if it is clear that the whole meaning and end of the present
life are to make character, and that we have to do with the material
and the transient only, in order that, like the creatures that build
up the coral reefs, we may draw from the ever-varying waves of the
ocean that welters around us solid substance which we can pile up
into an enduring monument--is this process of making character, and
developing ourselves, to be cut short by such a contemptible thing
as the death of the body? One very distinguished evolutionist, who
has been forced onwards from his position to a kind of theism,
declares that he is driven to a belief in immortality because he
must believe in the reasonableness of God's work. And it seems to me
that if indeed--as is plainly the case--moral ends are supreme in
our life's history, it brings utter intellectual bewilderment and
confusion to suppose that these ends are kept in view up till the
moment of death, and that then down comes the guillotine and cuts
off all. God does not take the rough ore out of the mine, and deal
with it, and change it to polished steel, and shape His weapons, and
then take them when they are at their highest temper and their
sharpest edge, and break them across His knee. No! if here we are
shaped, it is because yonder there is work for the tool.

So all here is apprenticeship, and the issues of to-day are recorded
in eternity. We are like men perched up in a signal-box by the side
of the line; we pull over a lever here, and it lifts an arm half a
mile off. The smallest wheel upon one end of a shaft may cause
another ten times its diameter to revolve, at the other end of the
shaft through the wall there. Here we prepare, yonder we achieve.

II. Note the consequent littleness and greatness of this present.

'Thou hast been faithful in a very little.' Some of you may remember
a recent sermon on the previous part of this parable, in which I
tried to bring out an explanation of the small sum with which these
servants were entrusted--the pound apiece for their little retail
businesses--and found reason to believe that the interpretation of
that gift was the Gospel of Jesus Christ which, in comparison with
the world's wisdom and philosophies and material forces, seemed such
a very insignificant thing. If we keep that interpretation in view
in treating my present text, then there is hinted to us the contrast
between the necessary limitations and incompletenesses even of the
revelation of God in Jesus Christ which we have here, and the flood
of glory and of light, which shall pour upon our eyes when the veil
of flesh and sense has dropped away. Here we know in part; here,
even with the intervention of the Eternal and Incarnate Word of God,
the Revealer of the Father, we see as in a glass darkly; there face
to face. The magnificences and the harmonies of that great
revelation of God in Jesus Christ, which transcends all human
thought and all worldly wisdom, are but a point, in comparison with
the continent of illumination which shall come to us hereafter. 'The
moon that rules the night' is the revelation that we have to-day,
the reflection and echo of the sun that will rule the unsetting day
of the heavens.

But I pass from that aspect of the words before us to the other,
which, I suppose, is rather to be kept in view, in which the
faithfulness in a very little points to the smallness of this
present, as measured against that infinite future to which it
conducts. Much has been said upon that subject, which is very
antagonistic to the real ideas of Christianity. Life here, and this
present, have been depreciated unduly, untruly, and unthankfully.
And harm has been done, not only to the men who accept that
estimate, but to the world that scoffs at it. There is nothing in
the Bible, which is at all in sympathy with the so-called religious
depreciation of the present, but there is this--'the things that are
seen are temporal; the things that are unseen are eternal.' The
lower hills look high when beheld from the flat plain that stretches
on this side of them; but, if the mist lifts, the great white peaks
come out beyond them, glittering in the sunshine, and with the
untrodden snows on their inaccessible pinnacles; and nobody thinks
about the green foothills, with the flowers upon them, any more.
Brethren, think away the mist, for you can, and open your eyes, and
see the snow-clad hills of eternity, and then you will understand
how low is the elevation of the heights in the foreground. The
greatness of the future makes the present little, but the little
present is great, because its littleness is the parent of the great
future. 'The child is father of the man'; and earth's narrow range
widens out into the infinitude of eternity and of heaven. The only
thing that gives real greatness and sublimity to our mortal life is
its being the vestibule to another. Historically you will find that,
wherever faith in a future life has become dim, as it has become dim
in large sections of the educated classes to-day, there the general
tone of strenuous endeavour has dropped, and the fatal feeling of
'It is not worth while' begins to creep over society. 'Is life worth
living?' is the question that is asked on all sides of us to-day.
And the modern recrudescence of pessimism has along with it, as one
of the main thoughts which cut the nerves of effort, doubt of, and
disbelief in, a future. It is because the very little opens out into
the immeasurably great, and the passing moments tick us onwards into
an unpassing eternity, that the moments are worth living through,
and the fleeting insignificances of earth's existence become solemn
and majestic as the portals of heaven.

III. Notice the future form of activity prepared for by faithful
trading.

'Thou hast been faithful in a very little; have thou authority over
ten cities.' Now I do not need to spend a word in dwelling on the
contrast between the two pictures of the huckster with his little
shop and the pound of capital to begin with, and the vizier that has
control of ten of the cities of his master. That is too plain to
need any enforcement. We are all here, all us Christian people
especially, like men that keep a small shop, in a back street, with
a few trivial things in the window, but we are heirs of a kingdom.
That is what Christ wants us to lay to heart, so that the little
shop shall not seem so very small, and its smoky obscurity shall be
irradiated by true visions of what it will lead to.

Nor do I wish to risk any kind of fanciful and precarious
speculations as to the manner and the sphere of the authority that
is here set forth; only I would keep to one or two plain things.
Faithfulness here prepares for participation in Christ's authority
hereafter. For we are not to forget that whilst the master, the
nobleman, was away seeking the kingdom, all that he could give his
servants was the little stock-in-trade with which he started them,
and that it is because he has won his kingdom that he is able to
dispense to them the larger gifts of dominion over the ten and the
five cities. The authority is delegated, but it is more than that--
it is shared. For it is participation in, and not merely delegation
from, the King and His rule, that is set forth in this and in other
places of Scripture, for 'they shall sit down with Me on My throne,
even as I also overcame and am set down with My Father on His
throne.'

If, then, the rule set forth, in whatever sphere and in whatever
fashion it may be exercised, is participation in Christ's authority,
let us not forget that therefore it is a rule of which the manifestation
is service. In heaven as on earth, and for the Lord in heaven as for the
Lord on earth, and for the servants in heaven as for the servants on
earth, the law stands irrefragable and eternal--'If any man will be
chief among you, let him be your minister.' The authority over the ten
cities is the capacity and opportunity of serving and helping every
citizen in them all. What that help may be let us leave. It is better
to be ignorant than to speculate about matters where there is no
possibility of certainty. Ignorance is more impressive than knowledge,
only be sure that no dignity can live amidst the pure light of the
heavens, except after the fashion of the dignity of the Lord of all,
who there, as here, is the servant of all.

But there is a thought in connection with this great though dim
revelation of the future, which may well be laid to heart by us. And
that is, that however close and direct the dependence on, and the
communion with, Jesus Christ, the King of all His servants, in that
future state is, it shall not be so close and direct as to exclude
room for the exercise of brotherly sympathy and brotherly aid. We
shall have Christ for our life and our light and our glory. But
there, as here, we shall help one another to have Him more fully,
and to understand Him more perfectly. What further lies in these
great words, I do not venture to guess. Enough to know that Christ
will be all in all, and that Christ in each will help the others to
know Christ more fully.

Only remember, we have to take this great conception of the future
as being one that implies largely increased and ennobled activity. A
great deal of very cheap ridicule has been cast upon the Christian
conception of the future life as if it was an eternity of idleness
and of repose. Of repose, yes; of idleness, no! For it is no
sinecure to be the governor of ten cities. There will be a good deal
of work to be done, in order to discharge that office properly. Only
it will be work that does not disturb repose, and at one and the
same moment His servants will serve in constant activity, and gaze
upon His face in calm contemplation. Christ's session at the right
hand of God does not interfere with Christ's continual activity
here. And, in like manner, His servants shall rest from their
labours, but not from their work; they shall serve Him undisturbed,
and shall repose, but not idly.

IV. Lastly, our texts remind us of the variety in recompense which
corresponds to diversity in faithfulness.

I need but say a word about that. The one man gets his ten cities
because his faithfulness has brought in ten pounds. The other gets
five, corresponding to his faithfulness. As I said, our Lord pays,
not for results, except in so far as these are conditioned and
secured by the diligence of His servants. And so we come to the old
familiar, and yet too often forgotten, conception of degrees in
dignity, degrees in nearness to Him. That thought runs all through
the New Testament representations of a future life, sometimes more
clearly, sometimes more obscurely, but generally present. It is in
entire accordance with the whole conception of that future, because
the Christian notion of it is not that it is an arbitrary reward,
but that it is the natural outcome of the present; and, of course,
therefore, varying according to the present, of which it is the
outcome. We get what we have wrought for. We get what we are capable
of receiving, and what we are capable of receiving depends upon what
has been our faithfulness here.

Now, that is perfectly consistent with the other side of the truth
which the twin parable sets forth--viz., that the recompenses of the
future are essentially one. All the servants, who were entrusted
with the Talents, received the same eulogium, and entered into the
same joy of their Lord. That is one side of the truth. And the other
is, that the degree in which Christian people, when they depart
hence, possess the one gift of eternal life, and Christ-shared joy
is conditioned by their faithfulness and diligence here. Do not let
the Gospel that says 'The gift of God is eternal life' make you
forget the completing truths, that the measure in which a man
possesses that eternal life depends on his fitness for it, and that
fitness depends on his faithfulness of service and his union with
his Lord.

We obscure this great truth often by reason of the way in which we
preach the deeper truth on which it rests--forgiveness and
acceptance all unmerited, through faith in Jesus Christ. But the two
things are not contradictory; they are complementary. No man
will be faithful as a steward who is not full of faith as a penitent
sinner. No man will enter into the joy of his Lord, who does not
enter in through the gate of penitence and trust, but, having
entered, we are ranked according to the faithfulness of our service
and diligence of stewardship. 'Wherefore, giving all diligence, make
your calling and election sure, for so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you _abundantly_ into the everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.'




A NEW KIND OF KING


    'And when He was come nigh, even now at the descent of
    the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the
    disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud
    voice for all the mighty works that they had seen;
    38. Saying, Blessed be the King that cometh in the
    name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the
    highest. 38. And some of the Pharisees from among the
    multitude said unto Him, Master, rebuke Thy disciples.
    40. And He answered and said unto them, I tell you
    that, if these should hold their peace, the stones
    would immediately cry out. 41. And when He was come
    near, He beheld the city, and wept over it, 42. Saying,
    If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy
    day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now
    they are hid from thine eyes. 43. For the days shall
    come upon thee, that thine enemies shall cast a trench
    about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in
    on every side, 44. And shall lay thee even with the
    ground, and thy children within thee; and they shall
    not leave in thee one stone upon another; because thou
    knewest not the time of thy visitation. 45. And he
    went into the temple, and began to cast out them that
    sold therein, and them that bought; 46. Saying unto
    them, It is written, My house is the house of prayer:
    but ye have made it a den of thieves. 47. And He
    taught daily in the temple. But the chief priests and
    the scribes and the chief of the people sought to
    destroy Him, 48. And could not find what they might
    do: for all the people were very attentive to hear
    Him.'--LUKE xix. 37-48.

'He went on before.' What concentrated determination, and almost
eagerness, impelled His firm and swift steps up the steep, weary
road! Mark tells that the disciples followed, 'amazed'--as they well
might be--at the unusual haste, and strange preoccupation on the
face, set as a flint.

Luke takes no notice of the stay at Bethany and the sweet seclusion
which soothed Jesus there. He dwells only on the assertion of
royalty, which stamped an altogether unique character on the
remaining hours of Christ's life.

I. The narrative brings into prominence Christ's part in originating
the triumphal entry (vs. 30-34). He sent for the colt with the
obvious intention of stimulating the people to just such a
demonstration as followed.

As to the particulars, we need only note that the most obvious
explanation of His knowledge of the circumstances that the
messengers would encounter, is that it was supernatural. Only one
other explanation is possible; namely, that the owners of the animal
were secret disciples, with whom our Lord had arranged to send for
it, and had settled a sign and countersign, by which they would know
His messengers. But that is a less natural explanation.

Note the remarkable blending of dignity and poverty in 'The Lord
hath need of him.' It asserts sovereign authority and absolute
rights, and it confesses need and penury. He is a King, but He has
to borrow even a colt to make His triumphal entry on. Though He was
rich, for our sakes He became poor.

Jesus then deliberately brought about His public entry. He thereby
acts in a way perfectly unlike His whole previous course. And He
stirs up popular feelings at a time when they were specially
excitable by reason of the approaching Passover and its crowds.
Formerly He had avoided the danger which He now seems to court, and
had gone up to the feast 'as it were in secret.' But it was fitting
that once, for the last time, He should assert before the gathered
Israel that He was their King, and should make a last appeal.
Formerly He had sought to avoid attracting the attention of the
rulers; now He knows that the end is near, and deliberately makes
Himself conspicuous, though--or we might say because--He knew that
thereby He precipitated His death.

The nature of His dominion is as plainly taught by the humble pomp
as is its reality. A pauper King, who makes His public entrance into
His city mounted on a borrowed ass, with His followers' clothes for
a saddle, attended by a shouting crowd of poor peasants, for weapons
or banners had but the branches plucked from other people's trees,
was a new kind of king.

We do not need Matthew's quotation of the prophet's vision of the
meek King coming to Zion on an ass, to understand the contrast of
this kingdom with such a dominion as that of Rome, or of such
princes as the Herods. Gentleness and peace, a sway that rests not
on force nor wealth, are shadowed in that rustic procession and the
pathetic poverty of its leader, throned on a borrowed colt, and
attended, not by warriors or dignitaries, but by poor men unarmed,
and saluted, not with the blare of trumpets, but with the shouts of
joyful, though, alas! fickle hearts.

II. We have the humble procession with the shouting disciples and
the background of hostile spies. The disciples eagerly caught at the
meaning of bringing the colt, and threw themselves with alacrity
into what seemed to them preparation for the public assertion of
royalty, for which they had long been impatient. Luke tells us that
they lifted Jesus on to the seat which they hurriedly prepared,
while some spread their garments in the way--the usual homage to a
king:

  'Ride on triumphantly; behold, we lay
  Our lusts and proud wills in Thy way.'

How different the vision of the future in their minds and His! They
dreamed of a throne; He knew it was a Cross. Round the southern
shoulder of Olivet they came, and, as the long line of the Temple
walls, glittering in the sunshine across the valley, burst on the
view, and their approach could be seen from the city, they broke
into loud acclamations, summoning, as it were, Jerusalem to welcome
its King.

Luke's version of their chant omits the Jewish colouring which it
has in the other Gospels, as was natural, in view of his Gentile
readers. Christ's royalty and divine commission are proclaimed from
a thousand throats, and then up swells the shout of praise, which
echoes the angels' song at Bethlehem, and ascribes to His coming,
power to make peace in heaven with an else alienated world, and thus
to make the divine glory blaze with new splendour even in the
highest heavens.

Their song was wiser than they knew, and touched the deepest,
sweetest mysteries of the unity of the Son with the Father, of
reconciliation by the blood of His Cross, and of the new lustre
accruing to God's name thereby, even in the sight of principalities
and powers in heavenly places. They meant none of these things,
but they were unconscious prophets. Their shouts died away, and
their faith was almost as short-lived. With many of them, it
withered before the branches which they waved.

High-wrought emotion is a poor substitute for steady conviction. But
cool, unemotional recognition of Christ as King is as unnatural. If
our hearts do not glow with loyal love, nor leap up to welcome Him;
if the contemplation of His work and its issues on earth and in
heaven does not make our dumb tongues sing--we have need to ask
ourselves if we believe at all that He is the King and Saviour of
all and of us. There were cool observers there, and they make the
foil to the glad enthusiasm. Note that these Pharisees, mingling in
the crowd, have no title for Jesus but 'Teacher.' He is no king to
them. To those who regard Jesus but as a human teacher, the
acclamations of those to whom He is King and Lord always sound
exaggerated.

People with no depth of religious life hate religious emotion, and
are always seeking to repress it. A very tepid worship is warm
enough for them. Formalists detest genuine feeling. Propriety is
their ideal. No doubt, too, these croakers feared that this tumult
might come to formidable size, and bring down Pilate's heavy hand on
them.

Christ's answer is probably a quoted proverb. It implies His entire
acceptance of the character which the crowd ascribed to Him, His
pleasure in their praises, and, in a wider aspect, His vindication
of outbursts of devout feeling, which shock ecclesiastical martinets
and formalists.

III. We see the sorrowing King plunged in bitter grief in the very
hour of His triumph. Who can venture to speak of that infinitely
pathetic scene? The fair city, smiling across the glen, brings
before His vision the awful contrast of its lying compassed by
armies and in ruins. He hears not the acclamation of the crowd. 'He
wept,' or, rather, 'wailed,'--for the word does not imply tears so
much as cries. That sorrow is a sign of His real manhood, but it is
also a part of His revelation of the very heart of God. The form is
human, the substance divine. The man weeps because God pities.
Christ's sorrow does not hinder His judgments. The woes which wring
His heart will nevertheless be inflicted by Him. Judgment is His
'strange work,' alien from His desires; but it is His work. The eyes
which are as a flame of fire are filled with tears, but their glance
burns up the evil.

Note the yearning in the unfinished sentence, 'If thou hadst known.'
Note the decisive closing of the time of repentance. Note the minute
prophetic details of the siege, which, if ever they were spoken, are
a distinct proof of His all-seeing eye. And from all let us fix in
our hearts the conviction of the pity of the judge, and of the
judgment by the pitying Christ.

IV. We have Christ's exercise of sovereign authority in His Father's
house. Luke gives but a summary in verses 45-48, dwelling mainly on
two points. First he tells of casting out the traders. Two things
are brought out in the compressed narrative--the fact, and the
Lord's vindication of it. As to the former, it was fitting that at
the end of His career, as at the beginning, He should cleanse the
Temple. The two events are significant as His first and last acts.
The second one, as we gather from the other Evangelists, had a
greater severity about it than the first.

The need for a second purifying indicated how sadly transient had
been the effect of the first, and was thus evidence of the depth of
corruption and formalism to which the religion of priests and people
had sunk. Christ had come to cleanse the Temple of the world's
religion, to banish from it mercenaries and self-interested
attendants at the altar, and, in a higher application of the
incident, to clear away all the degradations and uncleannesses which
are associated with worship everywhere but in His Church, and which
are ever seeking, like poisonous air, to find their way in thither
also, through any unguarded chink.

The vindication of the act is in right royal style. The first
cleansing was defended by Him by pointing to the sanctity of 'My
Father's house'; the second, by claiming it as 'My house.' The
rebuke of the hucksters is sterner the second time. The profanation,
once driven out and returning, is deeper; for whereas, in the first
instance, it had made the Temple 'a house of merchandise,' in the
second it turned it into a 'den of robbers.' Thus evil assumes a
darker tint, like old oak, by lapse of time, and swiftly becomes
worse, if rebuked and chastised in vain.

The second part of this summary puts in sharp contrast three
things--Christ's calm courage in continuous teaching in the Temple,
the growing bitter hatred of the authorities, who drew in their train
the men of influence holding no office, and the eager hanging of the
people on His words, which baffled the murderous designs of the
rulers. The same intentional publicity as in the entrance is
obvious. Jesus knew that His hour was come, and willingly presents
Himself a sacrifice. Meekly and boldly He goes on the appointed way.
He sees all the hate working round Him, and lets it work. The day's
task of winning some from impending ruin shall still be done. So
should His servants live, in patient discharge of daily duty, in the
face of death, if need be.

The enemies, who heard His words and found in them only food for
deeper hatred, may warn us of the possibilities of antagonism to Him
that lie in the heart, and of the terrible judgment which they drag
down on their own heads, who hear, unmoved, His daily teaching, and
see, unrepentant, His dying love. The crowd that listened, and, in
less than a week yelled 'Crucify Him,' may teach us to take heed how
we hear, and to beware of evanescent regard for His teaching, which,
if it do not consolidate into resolved and thoroughgoing acceptance
of His work and submission to His rule, will certainly cool into
disregard, and may harden into hate.




TENANTS WHO WANTED TO BE OWNERS


    'Then began He to speak to the people this parable; A
    certain man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to
    husbandmen, and went into a far country for a long
    time. 10. And at the season he sent a servant to the
    husbandmen, that they should give him of the fruit of
    the vineyard: but the husbandmen beat him, and sent
    him away empty. 11. And again he sent another servant:
    and they beat him also, and entreated him shamefully,
    and sent him away empty. 12. And again he sent a third:
    and they wounded him also, and cast him out. 13. Then
    said the lord of the vineyard, What shall I do? I will
    send my beloved son: it may be they will reverence him
    when they see him. 14. But when the husbandmen saw him,
    they reasoned among themselves, saying, This is the
    heir: come, let us kill him, that the inheritance may
    be ours. 15. So they cast him out of the vineyard, and
    killed him. What therefore shall the lord of the
    vineyard do unto them? 16. He shall come and destroy
    these husbandmen, and shall give the vineyard to
    others. And when they heard it, they said, God forbid.
    17. And he beheld them, and said, what is this then that
    is written, The stone which the builders rejected, the
    same is become the head of the corner? 18. Whosoever
    shall fall upon that stone shall be broken; but on
    whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.
    19. And the chief priests and the scribes the same hour
    sought to lay hands on Him; and they feared the people:
    for they perceived that He had spoken this parable
    against them.'--LUKE xx. 9-19.

As the crisis came near, Jesus increased His severity and plainness
of speech. This parable, which was spoken very near the end of the
protracted duel with the officials in the Temple, is transparent in
its application, and hit its mark immediately. The rulers at once
perceived that it was directed against them. The cap fitted too well
not to be put on. But it contains prophecy as well as history, and
the reference to Jesus' impending fate is almost as transparent as
the indictment of the rulers, while the prediction of the
transference of the vineyard to others is as easy of translation as
either of the other points.

Such plain speaking was fitting for last words. The urgency of
Christ's pleading love, as much as the intensity of His moral
indignation, made them plain.

I. We note, first, the vineyard, its lord and its tenants. The
metaphor was familiar, for Isaiah had 'sung a song touching' Israel
as God's vineyard, and other prophets had caught up the emblem, so
that it had become a commonplace, known by all. The parable
distinctly alludes to Isaiah's words, and almost reproduces them.
Matthew's version enlarges on details of the appliances provided by
the owner, which makes the parallel with Isaiah still more
noticeable. But Luke summarises these into the simple 'planted.'
That covers the whole ground.

God had given Israel a system of revelation, law, and worship, which
was competent to produce in those who received it, the fruit of
obedience and thankfulness. The husbandmen are primarily the rulers,
as the scribes and chief priests perceived; but the nation which
endorsed, by permitting their action, is included. The picture drawn
applies to us as truly as to the Jews. The transference of the
vineyard to another set of tenants, which Christ threatened at the
close of the parable, has been accomplished, and so we, by our
possession of the Gospel, are entrusted with the vineyard, and are
responsible for rendering the fruits of holy living and love.

The owner 'let it out, and went into another country for a long
time.' That is a picturesque way of saying that we have apparent
possession, and are left free to act, God not being manifestly close
to us. He stands off, as it were, from the creatures whom He has
made, and gives them room to do as they will. But all our
possessions, as well as the revelation of Himself in Christ, are
only let to us, and we have rent to pay.

The collectors sent for the fruit are, of course, the series of
prophets. Luke specifies three--a round number, indicating
completeness. He says nothing about the times between their
missions, but implies that the three covered the whole period till
the sending of the son. Their treatment was uniform, as the history
of Israel proved. The habit of rejecting the prophets was
hereditary.

There is such a thing as national solidarity stretching through
ages. The bold charge made by Stephen was only an echo of this
parable, when he cried, 'As your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the
prophets did not your fathers persecute?' Each generation made the
ancestral sin its own, and staggered under a heavier burden of
guilt, till, at last, came a generation which had to bear the
penalty of all the blood of prophets shed from the beginning.
Nations live, though their component atoms die, and only national
repudiation of bequeathed sins can avert the crash which, sooner or
later, avenges them.

The husbandmen treated the messengers with increasing contumely and
cruelty. Content with beating the first, they added shameful
treatment in the second case, and proceeded to wounding in the
third. If God's repeated appeals do not melt, they harden, the
heart. The persistence of His messengers leads to fiercer hatred, if
it does not produce yielding love. There is no bitterness equal to
that of the man who has often stiffened conscience against the
truth.

II. So far, no doubt could be entertained of the meaning of the
scathing parable. There was probably as little about that of the
next part. We cannot but notice the broad distinction which Jesus
draws between Himself and the mightiest of the prophets. They were
the owner's 'slaves'; He was His 'beloved Son.' The writer of the
Epistle to the Hebrews begins his letter with the same contrast,
which he may have learned from the parable. It is a commonplace for
us, but let us ponder how it must have sounded to that hostile,
eager crowd, and ask ourselves how such assumptions can be
reconciled with the 'sweet reasonableness' of Jesus if he belonged
to the same category as an Isaiah or a Micah.

The yearning of divine love for the fruit of reverence and obedience
is wonderfully expressed by the bold putting of an uncertain hope
into the owner's mouth. He must have known that he was running a
risk in sending his son, but he so much desires to bring the
dishonest workmen back to their duty that he is willing to run it.
The highly figurative expression is meant to emphasise God's longing
for men's hearts, and His patient love which 'hopeth all things' and
will not cease from effort to win us so long as an arrow remains in
His quiver.

III. Our Lord now passes to prophecy. Deep sadness is in His tone as
He tells how the only effect of His coming had been to stir up
opposition. They 'saw Him' and were they touched? No, they only
gripped their privileges the tighter, and determined more fiercely
to assert their ownership.

Nothing is more remarkable in the parable than the calmness of Jesus
in announcing His impending fate. He knows it all, and His voice has
no tremor, as He tells it as though He were speaking of another. The
very announcement that He penetrated the murderous designs hidden in
many of the hearers' hearts would tend to precipitate their
execution of these; but He is ready for the Cross, and its nearness
has no terror, not because He was impassive, or free from the
shrinking proper to flesh, but because He was resolved to save.
Therefore He was resolved to suffer.

The husbandmen's reasonings with one another bring into plain words
thoughts which probably were not consciously held by any even of the
rulers. They open the question as to how far the rulers knew the
truth of Christ's claims. They at least knew what these were, and
they had fought down dawning convictions which, fairly dealt with,
would have broadened into daylight. They would not have been so
fiercely antagonistic if they had not been pricked by an uneasy
doubt whether, after all, perhaps there was something in these
claims.

Nothing steels men against admitting a truth so surely as the
suspicion that, if they were to inquire a little farther, they might
find themselves believing it. Knowledge and ignorance blended in
these rulers as in us all. If they had not known at all, they would
not have needed the Saviour's dying prayer for their forgiveness; if
they had known fully, its very ground would have been taken away.

The motive put into their mouths is the wish to seize the vineyard
for their own; and was not the very soul of the rulers' hostility
the determination to keep hold of the prerogatives of their offices,
while priests and people alike were deaf to Jesus, because they
wished to be no more troubled by being reminded of their obligations
to render obedience to God? The root of all rejection of Christ is
the desire of self-will to reign supreme. Men resent being reminded
that they are tenants, and are determined to assert ownership.

Jesus carries the hearers beyond the final crime which filled the
measure of sin, and exhausted the resources of God. The sharp turn
from narrative to question, in verse 15, not only is like the sudden
thrust of a spear, but marks the transition from the present and
