torture his other children, would not be designated as a God but a
Devil? Were the Martian to be further informed that each one of God's
children was represented in actual figures by hundreds of millions and
that these have been living on the planet Earth for hundreds of
thousands of years, and were the visitor to contemplate the vast
incomprehensible number of souls that have been confined to Hell by such
a father, might he not cut his visit short? He would be apt to repeat
with James Mill, "Think of a being who would make a Hell, who would
create the human race with the infallible foreknowledge and therefore
with the intention that the great majority of them should be consigned
to horrible and everlasting torment." I believe that our guest would
assert that if such a Being actually existed and demanded worship, he
would certainly have revealed his true belief to the first man Adam, and
therefore saved his children an inestimable amount of suffering.

Were the visitor to be further pressed by the zealot with the vision of
eternal hell, I believe he would retort that there is no reason for God
to punish those who doubt or deny faith in His existence, since it is
His own doing; and if He desired each one of His children to worship Him
according to the precepts of a certain creed, He surely would have
instilled that creed into man's make-up together with the rest of his
characteristics. Undoubtedly, He would not esteem any creed which damned
the human intellect by cursing the doubts which are the necessary
consequence of its exercise, or the creed which cursed the moral faculty
by asserting the guilt of honest error.

If our visitor would but glance at the history, the evolution, of
religious beliefs, he would realize and soundly assert that all
religions are human in their origins, erroneous in their theories, and
ridiculous in their threats and rewards.




CHAPTER II

THE KORAN AND THE OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS

    _The Jews emerge into history, not a nation of keen spiritual
    aspirations and altruistic ethics, but that pagan people,
    worshipping rocks, sheep and cattle, and spirits of caves and wells,
    of whom the Old Testament, tending towards its higher ideal, gives
    fragmentary but convincing evidence_.

    JAMES T. SHOTWELL.

    _Consider Jahveh. Cruel god of a horde of nomadic invaders settling
    in a land of farmers, he had his images, ranging in elaboration from
    an uncut mazzebah or asherah, to a golden bull. He was plural by
    place and tribe and function. What did the prophetic movement do
    with his sacred powers? It identified his taboos with a written
    constitution_.

    HORACE M. KALLEN.

    _The mental attitude of these priest-dominated ancestors of ours is
    amazing. They were like children in the hands of unscrupulous
    teachers. In reading these old chronicles it is impossible not to be
    shocked by the incongruity ever arising out of the juxtaposition of
    theory and practice_.

    LLEWELYN POWYS.


Our Martian visitor, having withstood the blasts of the Zealot, is
approached by a Mohammedan who places in his hands the Koran and tells
him that it is a divinely inspired revelation, as revealed by Allah
through his prophet, Mohammed. Having already had some experience with
earthly religionists, the Martian is disposed to avail himself of the
historical evidence regarding the life of Mohammed.

He finds that Mohammed, from all accounts, was a demagogue, a charlatan,
and a victim of mental disease. It strikes him strangely that such an
individual should be chosen by Allah as his disciple on earth to make
known his commands. He notes Mohammed's appearance on earth in 600 A.D.
and wonders why the Creator should have procrastinated for such a long
time; but decides to read the revelations anyhow.

He discovers that "from the literary point of view, the Koran has little
merit. Declamation, repetition, puerility, a lack of logic, and
incoherence strike him at every turn. He finds it humiliating to the
human intellect to think that this mediocre literature has been the
subject of innumerable commentaries and that millions of men are still
wasting time in absorbing it."

A Hebrew next takes his turn at this obstinate guest and sets before him
the Old Testament. Again, the Martian is informed that it is an inspired
book actuated by God.

In his attempt to find the historical evidence corroborating this book,
the Martian finds that authentic history begins for the Israelites with
the constitution of Saul's monarchy about 1100 B.C. All that precedes
this--the deluge, the dispersal of mankind, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, the
captivity in Egypt, Moses, Joshua, and the conquest of Canaan, is more
or less mythical.

In the Old Testament, our Martian reads the first chapter, glances at
the chronology, and is immediately bewildered since he has a fair
knowledge of our scientific advances. As he reads on, he becomes aware
of a host of errors, contradictions, and manifest absurdities. When he
questions the zealous Hebrew, he comes in contact with what he is
informed is Concordism, which he perceives is a false science that
consists in determining, at any cost, a perfect harmony between modern
science and the knowledge possessed by God's people. He is thus told
that the days of creation were not days at all, but periods; although
the Bible mentions the morning and evening of each day. Delving further
in this most holy of revelations, he learns that God is represented in a
manner most unworthy of what such a being should be represented. He
finds the Lord walking in the cool of the evening, showing his hind
quarters to Moses, ordering abominable massacres, and punishing chiefs
who had not killed enough people. On further perusal, there is revealed,
"A great deal of Oriental bombast, incoherence and absurdity, that the
marvels recounted are often ludicrous or grotesque."

In a chance moment, when the Hebrew had relaxed his hold for a second, a
vile heretic points out to the visitor (_Exodus XXII, 18_): "Thou shalt
not suffer a witch to live!" and explains the witchcraft delusion to
him.

From a comparison between Exodus XXXIV and Exodus XX, he is at a loss to
decipher which are the true commandments that the Lord gave to Moses.
The first five books of the Pentateuch, he finds, are attributed to
Moses, although they contain the account of the latter's death. On
inquiry, he learns that this is still maintained by the synagogue. His
Martian intellect is unable to comprehend the logic of a God who would
demand human and animal sacrifice, and the story of Abraham about to
sacrifice his son Isaac fills him with disgust. His estimate of the
mentality of Jehovah receives a severe jolt when he reads in Leviticus
XVI, "Herewith shall Aaron come unto the holy place with a young bullock
for a sin offering and a ram for a burnt offering. He shall put on the
holy linen coat, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh,
and he shall be girded with the linen girdle, and with the linen mitre
shall he be attired; they are the holy garments; and he shall bathe his
flesh in water and put them on. And he shall take of the congregation of
the children of Israel two he-goats for a sin offering, and one ram for
a burnt offering. And Aaron shall present the bullock of the sin
offering, which is for himself, and he shall make atonement for himself
and for his houses. And he shall take the two goats and set them before
the Lord at the door of the tent of the meeting."

Our visitor reads on to Leviticus XVIII, after which he must stop to
question the Hebrew, for here he finds, "None of you shall approach to
any that is near of kin to him, to uncover their nakedness; I am the
Lord. The nakedness of thy father, even the nakedness of thy mother,
shalt thou not uncover; she is thy mother; thou shalt not uncover her
nakedness. The nakedness of thy father's wife shalt thou not uncover; it
is thy father's nakedness. The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of
thy father, or daughter of thy mother, whether she be born at home, or
abroad, even their nakedness thou shalt not uncover. The nakedness of
thy son's wife--the nakedness of the wife of thy father--the nakedness
of thy father's sister, thy mother's sister, the nakedness of thy
daughter-in-law, thy brother's wife, the nakedness of a woman and her
daughter, thou shalt not uncover. And unto a woman separated by her
uncleanliness thou shalt not approach to uncover her nakedness. Thou
shalt not be carnally with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself with
her. Thou shalt not be with mankind as with womankind. And thou shalt
not be with any beast to defile thyself thereto; neither shall any woman
stand before a beast to lie down thereto; it is confusion."

The Martian, totally aghast, is constrained to exclaim that he cannot
believe that a Deity should find it necessary to place this in a divine
revelation. The Hebrew Zealot relents somewhat to explain that perhaps
this was not revealed, but found its way into the divine text as a
moral lesson to the primitive tribes for which it was written. To this,
our guest counters with the remark that if this be a parable of manners
and morals, then, from what he observes on the earth, we, Earthlings,
have certainly outgrown the need for such coarse and obscene statements
made some 2000 years ago; and that on Mars, although the inhabitants are
not blessed with such divine revelations, common sense and reason have
taught their most primitive men the same lessons in morality while they
were yet in their infancy.

Reflecting on this maze of contradictions, the Martian determines to
analyze the Old Testament and the Hebrew religion in the same manner
that he would investigate any other problem presented to him.

Thirty-five hundred years ago, the Hebrews were a pastoral, primitive
people inhabiting the wilderness known today as the Arabian Desert.
Their religion was that of all other primitive peoples--Animism, an
illusion which made primitive man recognize everywhere spirits similar
to his own spirit. They worshiped the spirits of the sun and the moon,
the mountains and rocks, as well as the spirits of the dead.

It appears certain that the barrenness of this desert land necessitated
these wandering tribes to migrate to adjacent areas of greater
fertility. To the north lay the fertile valleys of the Tigris and
Euphrates and the coast of the Mediterranean Sea; to the west lay the
land of the Egyptians. Time and time again, these Bedouin tribes hurled
themselves against the inhabitants of the northern fertile valleys.
Babylonia, to the northeast, was the first country to be invaded, and
later Canaan to the northwest. Successful at times in establishing
themselves in Babylonia and Canaan, they were at other times driven back
into the desert when the native inhabitants in turn attacked the
invaders. Migrating into Egypt in search of food, they were made a
captive nation and escaped again into the desert when the Egyptians were
engaged in fighting the savage invaders from Libya.

The leader of this flight from Egypt was the prophet Moses. The Martian
decides to investigate the character and deeds of this influential
figure at another time. It is probable that the exodus gave the proper
stimulus for the beginnings of a distinctive Hebrew religion, and was
the reason for their finally establishing themselves in Canaan, with
Jehovah as their chief deity. It has often been proclaimed that the
value of Judaism has been in first establishing a religion of
monotheism; but it must not be forgotten that centuries before the
Hebrews escaped into the desert, the Egyptians were tending to
monotheism. It is known that one god was exalted over all the rest in
Egypt, and that as far back as 1375 B.C. King Ikhnaton made the religion
of Egypt an absolute monotheism. The Hebrews, in proclaiming their
Yahveh as the one and supreme deity, were but following what they had
assimilated from the Egyptians. The faith of these desert marauders, at
the time of their entrance into Canaan, was as crude and savage as the
Hebrews themselves. Brought into contact with the gods of the
Phoenicians and Babylonians, their Yahveh underwent a change, as have
all other creeds since that time when brought into contact with another
creed. The final idea of Yahveh accepted by the Hebrews was not the
product of a sudden revelation but of a gradual evolution.

The Hebrews, about the twelfth century B.C., gained access into Canaan,
and at first were successful in warfare, so that under King David they
presented the aspect of a united nation. However, following the
extravagant reign of King Solomon, the nation was embroiled in a
revolution, and the land was divided into two kingdoms--Israel in the
north, Judah in the south. These two tiny kingdoms were habitually at
war with each other and, finally, in 722 B.C. Israel was conquered,
while in 586 B.C., Judah was defeated and its population either
scattered or taken into captivity.

In 538 B.C., Cyrus of Persia conquered Babylonia and set the exiles
free. Returning to their own land, the exiles took back with them the
law code which the priests had manufactured for them. Then began a
period of priestly domination and corruption, a period of subjugation to
Rome, of insurrection against Rome, and the capture and destruction of
Jerusalem in 70 A.D. With the capture of Jerusalem, the Hebrew nation
was finally dispersed.

Just as the Martian was able to trace the evolution of the Hebrews from
the stage of the marauding tribes of the Arabian desert who wandered
into Egypt, Canaan, and Babylonia, and finally established a kingdom for
themselves which was dispersed by Rome; just so could he trace the
evolution of their religious beliefs from their incipient crudities to
their not too great refinement at 70 A.D. This evolution of the Hebrew
religion is best exemplified by an analysis of the Old Testament itself.

There are several canons, or official collection of books which comprise
the Old Testament. The Jews and Protestants accept fewer books than the
Roman Catholics. The Jewish Canon consists of those so-called sacred
books of which the Synagogue possessed Hebrew texts about a century
before the Christian era. "About 150 B.C. the sacred books of the Jews
were translated into Greek for the use of those Egyptian Jews who could
not read Hebrew. This translation is called the Septuagint, from a
tradition that seventy or seventy-two translators had worked upon it."
(_Salomon Reinach, "Orpheus._") The earliest manuscripts of the Hebrew
Bible date only from the tenth century A.D., but there are very much
older manuscripts of the Greek and Latin translations in existence. At
the time of Jesus Christ, three divisions of the Old Testament were
recognized. These were, the Law, the Prophets, and the other Scriptures.
The first five books, Genesis, Exodus, Numbers, Leviticus, and
Deuteronomy, are known as the Pentateuch, and are attributed to Moses
himself; although, as has been noted, they contain the account of his
death. This conception of the Mosaic origin of the Pentateuch was
accepted by the Israelites as early as the fifth century B.C. and has
been maintained by the Synagogue since that time. Following the example
of the Hebrews, the Christian Churches accepted this version as to
origin, and the Roman Catholic Church still upholds this view. The
Jewish Synagogue and the various Christian Churches further hold that
the Old Testament is a collection of works inspired or dictated by God.
Even as late as 1861, the famous Dean Burgon, in a sermon preached at
Oxford University, declared, "The Bible is none other than the voice of
Him that sitteth upon the throne. Every book of it, every chapter of it,
every verse of it, every syllable of it, every letter of it, is the
direct utterance of the Most High. The Bible is none other than the Word
of God, not some part of it more, some part of it less, but all alike
the utterance of Him who sitteth upon the throne, faultless, unerring,
supreme." The Martian compared this statement with the words of the
scholar Loisy, "If God himself wrote the Bible, we must believe Him to
be either ignorant or untruthful."

As he delves further into the intricacies of the construction of the
Bible, our visitor perceives that the Old Testament gradually evolved
from the tenth century to the second century B.C., and in its present
form is mainly a fifth century compilation, so distorting the facts
that it has taken scholars one hundred and fifty years to get them
straight. "It may rightly be said that there is not a single book in the
Bible which is original in the sense of having been written by one man,
for all the books are made up of older documents or pre-existing sources
which were combined with later materials, undergoing, in this way,
several revisions and editions at the hands of different scribes or
compilers. Deep traces have therefore been left upon the text of the
Bible by these several stages of expansions, additions, modifications,
revisions, and incorporations--they appear to the scholar of biblical
literature much like the striations grooved in the rocks by large
glaciers to the student of Geology." (_Trattner, "Unravelling the Book
of Books._")

The Martian ascertains that to most thinking men it has become very
obvious that the Bible is the work of man, and not the inspiration of a
god; that an increasing number of liberal theologians are discarding the
theory of the divine inspiration of the Bible. He likewise clearly
perceives that there are as yet many men that have given this matter but
little thought; with the Divine inspiration looming up as a corner stone
in the Hebrew faith he realizes that it behooves him to carry his
investigations further.

The Christians, accepting the Old Testament as a book dictated by God,
had fixed the age of the earth as 4004 B.C. The harm done by the
Christian ecclesiastics in attempting to force science to conform to the
ridiculous concept of the construction of the universe as contained in
the Bible, and as interpreted by the Church, the Martian considers in a
further chapter. Scientists incline to the view that the earth has
existed as a separate planet for something like two thousand million
years (2,000,000,000). The rocks give a history of 16,000,000,000. Just
as in the study of the origin of primitive beliefs, one finds that man
made his gods and invented all that they are reported to have said, so a
study of the Old Testament reveals that the ancient Hebrew invented his
God, and manufactured the vast mass of myth and fable that are recorded
as the words and deeds of God. Throughout the ages, the words of these
ancient Hebrews have been taken as the words of a god.

"Everything goes to show that the Hebrew literature was produced like
other literatures. Hebrews were not the first to tell tales. When they
did come to write 'for our learning' they borrowed from other people.
The only reason why anything more than a literary attention is paid to
these old Jewish writings is that Jesus was a Jew. When Christianity was
founded--a difficult date to fix--there was no such thing as a Bible.
The old Brahmans and Buddhists had Holy Scriptures; the Egyptians had a
