simple-natured and sensuous athlete is traced up to the same source.

But again, we see another sphere of the Spirit's working in the
manifestations of it in the experience of the primitive Church. These
are, as we all know, accompanied with miracles, speaking with tongues
and working wonders. The signs of that Spirit in those days were
visible and audible. As I said, when the river first came into its
bed, it came like the tide in Morecambe Bay, breast-high, with a
roar and a rush. But it was quiet after that. In the context we have a
whole series of manifestations of this Divine Spirit, some of them
miraculous and some being natural faculties heightened, but all
concerned with the Church as a society, and being for the benefit of
the community.

But there is another class. If you turn to the Epistle to the
Galatians, you will find a wonderful list there of what the Apostle
calls 'the fruit of the Spirit,' beginning with 'love, joy, peace.'
These are all moral and religious, bearing upon personal experience
and the completeness of the individual character.

Now, let us include all these aspects in our conception of the fruit
of the Spirit's working on men--the secular, if we may use that word,
as exhibited in the Old Testament; the miraculous, as seen in the
first days of the Church; the ecclesiastical, if we may so designate
the endowments mentioned in the context, and the purely personal,
moral, and religious emotions and acts. The plain fact is that
everything in a Christian's life, except his sin, is the
manifestation of that Divine Spirit, from whom all good thoughts,
counsels, and works do proceed. He is the 'Spirit of adoption,' and
whenever in my heart there rises warm and blessed the aspiration
'Abba! Father!' it is not my voice only, but the voice of that Divine
Spirit. He is the Spirit of intercession; and whenever in my soul
there move yearning desires after infinite good, child-like longings
to be knit more closely to Him, that, too, is the voice of God's
Spirit; and our prayers are then 'sweet, indeed, when He the Spirit
gives by which we pray.' In like manner, all the variety of Christian
emotions and experiences is to be traced to the conjoint operation of
that Divine Spirit as the source, and my own spirit as influenced by,
and the organ of, the Spirit of God. If I may take a very rough
illustration, there is a story in the Old Testament about a king, to
whom were given a bow and arrow, with the command to shoot. The
prophet's hand was laid on the king's weak hand, and the weak hand
was strengthened by the touch of the other; and with one common pull
they drew back the string and the arrow sped. The king drew the bow,
but it was the prophet's hand grasping his wrist that gave him
strength to do it. And that is how the Spirit of God will work with
us if we will.

III. Finally, consider the purpose of all the diverse manifestations
of the one universal gift.

'To profit withal'--for his own good who possesses it, and for the
good of all the rest of his brethren.

Now, that involves two plain things. There have been people in the
Christian Church who have said, 'We have all the Spirit, and
therefore we do not need one another.' There may be isolation, and
self-sufficiency, and a host of other evils coming in, if we only
grasp the thought, 'The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man,' but they are all corrected if we go on and say, 'to profit
withal.' For every one of us has something, and no one of us has
everything; so, on the one hand, we want each other, and, on the
other hand, we are responsible for the use of what we have.

You get the life, not in order that you may plume yourself on its
possession, nor in order that you may ostentatiously display it,
still less in order that you may shut it up and do nothing with it;
but you get the life in order that it may spread through you to
others.

  'The least flower with a brimming cup may stand,
  And share its dew-drop with another near.'

We each have the life that God's grace may fructify through us to
all. Power is duty; endowment is obligation; capacity prescribes
work. 'The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to
profit withal.'

You can regulate the flow. You have the sluice; you can shut it or
open it. I have said that the condition, and the only condition, of
possessing the fulness of God's Spirit is faith in Jesus Christ.
Therefore, the more you trust the more you have, and the less your
faith the less the gift. You can get much or little, according to the
greatness or the smallness, the fixity or the transiency, of your
desires. If you hold the empty cup with a tremulous hand, the
precious liquid will not be poured into it--for some of it will be
spilt--in the same fulness as it would be if you held it steadily. It
is the old story--the miraculous flow of the oil stopped when the
widow had no more pots and vessels to bring. The reason why some of
us have so little of that Divine Spirit is because we have not held
out our vessels to be filled. You can diminish the flow by ignoring
it, and that is what a host of so-called Christian people do
nowadays. You can diminish it by neglecting to use the little that
you have for the purpose for which it was given you. Does anybody
profit by your spiritual life? Do you profit much by it yourselves?
Has it ever been of the least good to anybody else in the world? 'The
manifestation of the Spirit is given to' you, if you are a Christian
man or woman, more or less. And if you shut it up, and do never an
atom of good with it, either to yourselves or to anybody else, of
course it will slip away; and, sometime or other, to your
astonishment, you will find that the vessels are empty, and that the
Spirit of the Lord has departed from you. 'Grieve not the Holy Spirit
of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of redemption.'

[Footnote 1: Whitsunday.]




WHAT LASTS

   'Whether there be prophecies, they shall fail; whether
   there be tongues, they shall cease; whether there be
   knowledge, it shall vanish away. 13. And now abideth
   faith, hope, charity, these three....'--1 COR. xiii. 8, 13.


We discern the run of the Apostle's thought best by thus omitting the
intervening verses and connecting these two. The part omitted is but
a buttress of what has been stated in the former of our two verses;
and when we thus unite them there is disclosed plainly the Apostle's
intention of contrasting two sets of things, three in each set. The
one set is 'prophecies, tongues, knowledge'; the other, 'faith, hope,
charity.' There also comes out distinctly that the point mainly
intended by the contrast is the transiency of the one and the
permanence of the other. Now, that contrast has been obscured and
weakened by two mistakes, about which I must say a word.

With regard to the former statement, 'Whether there be prophecies,
they shall fail; whether there be tongues, they shall cease,' that
has been misunderstood as if it amounted to a declaration that the
miraculous gifts in the early Church were intended to be of brief
duration. However true that may be, it is not what Paul means here.
The cessation to which he refers is their cessation in the light of
the perfect Future. With regard to the other statement, the abiding
of faith, hope, charity, that, too, has been misapprehended as if it
indicated that faith and hope belonged to this state of things only,
and that love was the greatest of the three, because it was
permanent. The reason for that misconception has mainly lain in the
misunderstanding of the force of '_Now_,' which has been taken to
mean 'for the present,' as an implied contrast to an unspoken 'then';
just as in the previous verse we have, '_Now_ we see through a glass,
_then_ face to face.' But the 'now' in this text is not, as the
grammarians say, temporal, but logical. That is, it does not refer to
time, but to the sequence of the Apostle's thought, and is equivalent
to 'so then.' 'So then abideth faith, hope, charity.'

The scope of the whole, then, is to contrast the transient with the
permanent, in Christian experience. If we firmly grasped the truth
involved, our estimates would be rectified and our practice
revolutionised.

I. I ask this question--What will drop away?

Paul answers, 'prophecies, tongues, knowledge.' Now these three were
all extraordinary gifts belonging to the present phase of the
Christian life. But inasmuch as these gifts were the heightening of
natural capacities and faculties, it is perfectly legitimate to
enlarge the declaration and to use these three words in their widest
signification. So understood, they come to this, that all our present
modes of apprehension and of utterance are transient, and will be
left behind.

'Knowledge, it shall cease,' and as the Apostle goes on to explain,
in the verses which I have passed over for my present purpose, it
shall cease because the perfect will absorb into itself the
imperfect, as the inrushing tide will obliterate the little pools in
the rocks on the seashore. For another reason, the knowledge, the
mode of apprehension belonging to the present, will pass--because
here it is indirect, and there it will be immediate. 'We shall know
face to face,' which is what philosophers mean by intuition. Here our
knowledge 'creeps from point to point,' painfully amassing facts, and
thence, with many hesitations and errors, groping its way towards
principles and laws. Here it is imperfect, with many a gap in the
circumference; or like the thin red line on a map which shows the
traveller's route across a prairie, or like the spider's thread in
the telescope, stretched athwart the blazing disc of the sun--'but
then face to face.' Incomplete knowledge shall be done away; and many
of its objects will drop, and much of what makes the science of earth
will be antiquated and effete. What would the hand-loom weaver's
knowledge of how to throw his shuttle be worth in a weaving-shed with
a thousand looms? Just so much will the knowledges of earth be when
we get yonder.

Modes of utterance will cease. With new experiences will come new
methods of communication. As a man can speak, and a beast can only
growl or bark, so a man in heaven, with new experiences, will have
new methods of communication. The comparison between that mode of
utterance which we now have, and that which we shall then possess,
will be like the difference between the old-fashioned semaphore, that
used to wave about clumsy wooden arms in order to convey
intelligence, and the telegraph.

Think, then, of a man going into that future life, and saying 'I knew
more about Sanscrit than anybody that ever lived in Europe'; 'I sang
sweet songs'; 'I was a past master in philology, grammars, and
lexicons'; 'I was a great orator.' 'Tongues shall cease'; and the
modes of utterance that belonged to earth, and all that holds of
them, will drop away, and be of no more use.

If these things are true, brethren, with regard even to the highest
form of these high and noble things, how much more and more solemnly
true are they with regard to the aims and objects which most of us
have in view? They will all drop away, and we shall be left, stripped
of what, for most of us, has made the whole interest and activity of
our lives.

II. What will last?

'So then, abideth these three, faith, hope, love.' When Paul takes
three nouns and couples them with a verb in the singular, he is not
making a slip of the pen, or committing a grammatical blunder which a
child could correct. But there is a great truth in that piece of
apparent grammatical irregularity; for the faith, the hope, and the
love, for which he can only afford a singular verb, are thereby
declared to be in their depth and essence one thing, and it, the
triple star, abides, and continues to shine. The three primitive
colours are unified in the white beam of light. Do not correct the
grammar, and spoil the sense, but discern what he means when he says,
'Now, abid_eth_ faith, hope, love.' For this is what he means,
that the two latter come out of the former, and that without it they
are nought, and that it without them is dead.

Faith breeds Hope. _There_ is the difference between earthly hopes
and Christian people's hopes. Our hopes, apart from the revelation of
God in Jesus Christ, are but the balancing of probabilities, and the
scale is often dragged down by the clutch of eager desires. But all
is baseless and uncertain, unless our hopes are the outcome of our
faith. Which, being translated into other words, is just this, that
the one basis on which men can rest--ay! even for the immediate
future, and the contingencies of life, as well as for the solemnities
and certainties of heaven--any legitimate and substantial hope is
trust in Jesus Christ, His word, His love, His power, and for the
heavenly future, in His Resurrection and present glory. A man who
believes these things, and only that man, has a rock foundation on
which he can build his hope.

Faith, in like manner, is the parent of Love. Paul and John, diverse
as they are in the whole cast of their minds, the one being
speculative and the other mystical, the one argumentative and the
other simply gazing and telling what he sees, are precisely agreed in
regard to this matter. For, to the Apostle of Love, the foundation of
all human love towards God is, 'We have known and believed the love
that God hath to us,' and 'We love Him because He first loved us,'
and to Paul the first step is the trusting reception of the love of
God, 'commended to us' by the fact that 'whilst we were yet sinners
Christ died for us,' and from that necessarily flows, if the faith be
genuine, the love that answers the sacrifice and obeys the Beloved.
So faith, hope, love, these three are a trinity in unity, and it
abideth. That is the main point of our last text. Let me say a word
or two about it.

I have said that the words have often been misunderstood as if the
'now' referred only to the present order of things, in which faith
and hope are supposed to find their only appropriate sphere. But that
is clearly not the Apostle's meaning here, for many reasons with
which I need not trouble you. The abiding of all three is eternal
abiding, and there is a heavenly as well as an earthly form of faith
and hope as well as of love. Just look at these points for a moment.

'Faith abides,' says Paul, yonder, as here. Now, there is a common
saying, which I suppose ninety out of a hundred people think comes
out of the Bible, about faith being lost in sight. There is no such
teaching in Scripture. True, in one aspect, faith is the antithesis
of sight. True, Paul does say 'We walk by faith, not by sight.' But
that antithesis refers only to part of faith's significance. In so
far as it is the opposite of sight, of course it will cease to be in
operation when 'we shall know even as we are known' and 'see Him as
He is.' But the essence of faith is not in the absence of the person
trusted, but the emotion of trust which goes out to the person,
present or absent. And in its deepest meaning of absolute dependence
and happy confidence, faith abides through all the glories and the
lustres of the heavens, as it burns amidst the dimnesses and the
darknesses of earth. For ever and ever, on through the irrevoluble
ages of eternity, dependence on God in Christ will be the life of the
glorified, as it was the life of the militant, Church. No millenniums
of possession, and no imaginable increases in beauty and perfectness
and enrichment with the wealth of God, will bring us one inch nearer
to casting off the state of filial dependence which is, and ever will
be, the condition of our receiving them all. Faith 'abides.'

Hope 'abides.' For it is no more a Scriptural idea that hope is lost
in fruition, than it is that faith is lost in sight. Rather that
Future presents itself to us as the continual communication of an
inexhaustible God to our progressively capacious and capable spirits.
In that continual communication there is continual progress. Wherever
there is progress there must be hope. And thus the fair form, which
has so often danced before us elusive, and has led us into bogs and
miry places and then faded away, will move before us through all the
long avenues of an endless progress, and will ever and anon come back
to tell us of the unseen glories that lie beyond the next turn, and
to woo us further into the depths of heaven and the fulness of God.
Hope 'abides.'

Love 'abides.' I need not, I suppose, enlarge upon that thought which
nobody denies, that love is the eternal form of the human relation to
God. It, too, like the mercy which it clasps, 'endureth for ever.'

But I may remind you of what the Apostle does not explain in our
text, that it is greater than its linked sisters, because whilst
faith and hope belong only to a creature, and are dependent and
expectant of some good to come to themselves, and correspond to
something which is in God in Christ, the love which springs from
faith and hope not only corresponds to, but resembles, that from
which it comes and by which it lives. The fire kindled is cognate
with the fire that kindles; and the love that is in man is like the
love that is in God. It is the climax of his nature; it is the
fulfilling of all duty; it is the crown and jewelled clasp of all
perfection. And so 'abideth faith, hope, love, and the greatest of
these is love.'

III. Lastly, what follows from all this?

First, let us be quite sure that we understand what this abiding love
is. I dare say you have heard people say 'Ah! I do not care much
about Paul's theology. Give me the thirteenth chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians. That is beautiful; that praise of Love;
_that_ comes home to men.' Yes, very beautiful. Are you quite sure
that you know what Paul means by 'love'? I do not use the word
charity, because that lovely word, like a glistening meteor that
falls upon the earth, has a rust, as it were, upon its surface that
dims its brightness very quickly. Charity has come to mean an
indulgent estimate of other people's faults; or, still more
degradingly, the giving of money out of your pockets to other
people's necessities. These are what the people who do not care much
about Paul's theology generally suppose that he means here. But these
do not exhaust his meaning. Paul's notion of love is the response of
the human love to the divine, which divine is received into the heart
by simple faith in Jesus Christ. And his notion of love which never
faileth, and endureth all things, and hopeth all things, is love to
men, which is but one stream of the great river of love to God. If we
rightly understand what he means by love, we shall find that his
praise of love is as theological as anything that he ever wrote. We
shall never get further than barren admiration of a beautiful piece
of writing, unless our love to men has the source and root to which
Paul points us.

Again, let us take this great thought of the permanence of faith,
hope, and love as being the highest conception that we can form of
our future condition. It is very easy to bewilder ourselves with
speculations and theories of another life. I do not care much about
them. The great gates keep their secret well. Few stray beams of
light find their way through their crevices. The less we say the less
likely we are to err. It is easy to let ourselves be led away, by
turning rhetoric into revelation, and accepting the symbols of the
New Testament as if they carried anything more than images of the
realities. But far beyond golden pavements, and harps, and crowns,
and white robes, lies this one great thought that the elements of the
imperfect, Christlike life of earth are the essence of the perfect,
Godlike life in heaven. 'Now abide these three, faith, hope, love.'

Last of all, let us shape our lives in accordance with these
certainties. The dropping away of the transient things is no argument
for neglecting or despising them; for our handling of them makes our
characters, and our characters abide. But it is a very excellent
argument for shaping our lives so as to seek first the first things,
and to secure the permanent qualities, and so to use the transient as
that it shall all help us towards that which does not pass.

What will a Manchester man that knows nothing except goods and office
work, and knows these only in their superficial aspect, and not as
related to God, what, in the name of common-sense, will he do with
himself when he gets into a world where there is not a single ledger,
nor a desk, nor a yard of cloth of any sort? What will some of us do
when, in like manner, we are stripped of all the things that we have
cared about, and worked for, and have made our aims down here?
Suppose that you knew that you were under sailing orders to go
somewhere or other, and that at any moment a breathless messenger
might appear and say, 'Come along! we are all waiting for you'; and
suppose that you never did a single thing towards getting your outfit
ready, or preparing yourself in any way for that which might come at
any moment, and could not but come before very long. Would you be a
wise man? But that is what a great many of us are doing; doing every
day, and all day long, and doing that only. 'He shall leave them in
the midst of his days,' says a grim text, 'and at his latter end
shall be a fool.'

What will drop? Modes of apprehension, modes of utterance,
occupations, duties, relationships, loves; and we shall be left
standing naked, stripped, as it were, to the very quick, and only as
much left as will keep our souls alive. But if we are clothed with
faith, hope, love, we shall not be found naked. Cultivate the high
things, the permanent things; then death will not wrench you
violently from all that you have been and cared for; but it will
usher you into the perfect form of all that you have been and done
upon earth. All these things will pass, but faith, hope, love, 'stay
not behind nor in the grave are trod,' but will last as long as
Christ, their Object, lives, and as long as we in Him live also.




THE POWER OF THE RESURRECTION

   'I delivered unto you first of all that which I
   also received, how that Christ died for our sins
   according to the Scriptures; 4. And that He was
   buried, and that He rose again the third day
   according to the Scriptures.'--1 COR. xv. 3, 4.

Christmas day is probably not the true anniversary of the Nativity,
but Easter is certainly that of the Resurrection. The season is
appropriate. In the climate of Palestine the first fruits of the
harvest were ready at the Passover for presentation in the Temple. It
was an agricultural as well as a historical festival; and the
connection between that aspect of the feast and the Resurrection of
our Lord is in the Apostle's mind when he says, in a subsequent part
of this chapter, that Christ is 'risen from the dead and become the
first fruits of them that slept.'

In our colder climate the season is no less appropriate. The 'life
re-orient out of dust' which shows itself to-day in every bursting
leaf-bud and springing flower is Nature's parable of the spring that
awaits man after the winter of death. No doubt, apart from the
Resurrection of Jesus, the yearly miracle kindles sad thoughts in
mourning hearts, and suggests bitter contrasts to those who sorrow,
having no hope, but the grave in the garden has turned every blossom
into a smiling prophet of the Resurrection.

And so the season, illuminated by the event, teaches us lessons of
hope that 'we shall not all die.' Let us turn, then, to the thoughts
naturally suggested by the day, and the great fact which it brings to
each mind, and confirmed thereafter by the miracle that is being
wrought round about us.

I. First, then, in my text, I would have you note the facts of Paul's
gospel.

'First of all ... I delivered' these things. And the 'first' not only
points to the order of time in the proclamation, but to the order of
importance as well. For these initial facts are the fundamental
facts, on which all that may follow thereafter is certainly built.
Now the first thing that strikes me here is that, whatever else the
system unfolded in the New Testament is, it is to begin with a simple
record of historical fact. It becomes a philosophy, it becomes a
religious system; it is a revelation of God; it is an unveiling of
man; it is a body of ethical precepts. It is morals and philosophy
and religion all in one; but it is first of all a story of something
that took place in the world.

If that be so, there is a lesson for men whose work it is to preach
it. Let them never forget that their business is to insist upon the
truth of these great, supernatural, all-important, and fundamental
facts, the death and the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. They must
evolve all the deep meanings that lie in them; and the deeper they
dig for their meanings the better. They must open out the endless
treasures of consolation and enforce the omnipotent motives of action
which are wrapped up in the facts; but howsoever far they may carry
their evolving and their application of them, they will neither be
faithful to their Lord nor true stewards of their message unless,
clear above all other aspects of their work, and underlying all other
forms of their ministry, there be the unfaltering
proclamation--'first of all,' midst of all, last of all--'how that
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,' and 'that He
was raised again according to the Scriptures.'

Note, too, how this fundamental and original character of the gospel
which Paul preached, as a record of facts, makes short work of a
great deal that calls itself 'liberal Christianity' in these days. We
are told that it is quite possible to be a very good Christian man,
and reject the supernatural, and turn away with incredulity from the
story of the Resurrection. It may be so, but I confess that it
puzzles me to understand how, if the fundamental character of
Christian teaching be the proclamation of certain facts, a man who
does not believe those facts has the right to call himself a
Christian.

Note, further, how there is an element of explanation involved in the
proclamation of the facts which turns them into a gospel. Mark how
'that _Christ_ died,' not _Jesus_. It is a great truth, that the man,
our Brother, Jesus, passed through the common lot, but that is not
what Paul says here, though he often says it. What he says is that
'_Christ_ died.' Christ is the name of an office, into which is
condensed a whole system of truth, declaring that it is He who is the
Apex, the Seal, and ultimate Word of all divine revelation. It was
the _Christ_ who died; unless it was so, the death of Jesus is no
gospel.

'He died for our sins.' Now, if the Apostle had only said 'He died
for us,' that might conceivably have meant that, in a multitude of
different ways of example, appeal to our pity and compassion and the
like, His death was of use to mankind. But when he says 'He died
_for our sins_,' I take leave to think that that expression has
no meaning, unless it means that He died as the expiation and
sacrifice for men's sins. I ask you, in what intelligible sense could
Christ 'die for our sins' unless He died as bearing their punishment
and as bearing it for us? And then, finally, 'He died and rose ...
according to the Scriptures,' and so fulfilled the divine purposes
revealed from of old.

To the fact that a man was crucified outside the gates of Jerusalem,
'and rose again the third day,' which is the narrative, there are
added these three things--the dignity of the Person, the purpose of
His death, the fulfilment of the divine intention manifested from of
old. And these three things, as I said, turn the narrative into a
Gospel.

So, brethren, let us remember that, without all three of them, the
death of Jesus Christ is nothing to us, any more than the death of
thousands of sweet and saintly men in the past has been, who may have
seen a little more of the supreme goodness and greatness than their
fellows, and tried in vain to make purblind eyes participate in their
vision. Do you think that these twelve fishermen would ever have
shaken the world if they had gone out with the story of the Cross,
unless they had carried along with it the commentary which is
included in the words which I have emphasised? And do you suppose
that the type of Christianity which slurs over the explanation, and
so does not know what to do with the facts, will ever do much in the
world, or will ever touch men? Let us liberalise our Christianity by
all means, but do not let us evaporate it; and evaporate it we surely
shall if we falter in saying with Paul, 'I declare, first of all,
that which received,' how that the death and resurrection were the
death and resurrection of the Christ, 'for our sins, according to the
Scriptures.' These are the facts which make Paul's gospel.

II. Now I ask you to look, in the second place, at what establishes
the facts.

We have here, in this chapter, a statement very much older than our
existing written gospels. This epistle is one of the four letters of
Paul which nobody that I know of--with some quite insignificant
exceptions in modern times--has ever ventured to dispute. It is
admittedly the writing of the Apostle, written before the gospels,
and in all probability within five-and-twenty years of the date of
the Crucifixion. And what do we find alleged by it as the state of
things at its date? That the belief in the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ was the subject of universal Christian teaching, and was
accepted by all the Christian communities. Its evidence to that fact
is undeniable; because there was in the early Christian Church a very
formidable and large body of bitter antagonists of Paul's, who would
have been only too glad to have convicted him, if they could, of any
misrepresentation of the usual notions, or divergence from the usual
type of teaching. So we may take it as undeniable that the
representation of this chapter is historically true; and that within
five-and-twenty years of the death of Jesus Christ every Christian
community and every Christian teacher believed in and proclaimed the
fact of the Resurrection.

But if that be so, we necessarily are carried a great deal nearer the
Cross than five-and-twenty years; and, in fact, there is not, between
the moment when Paul penned these words and the day of Pentecost, a
single chink in the history where you can insert such a tremendous
innovation as the full-fledged belief in a resurrection coming in as
something new.

I do not need to dwell at all upon this other thought, that, unless
the belief that Jesus Christ had risen from the dead originated at
the time of His death, there would never have been a Church at all.
Why was it that they did not tumble to pieces? Take the nave out of
the wheel and what becomes of the spokes? A dead Christ could never
have been the basis of a living Church. If He had not risen from the
dead, the story of His disciples would have been the same as that
which Gamaliel told the Sanhedrim was the story of all former
pseudo-Messiahs such as that man Theudas. 'He was slain, and as many
as followed him were dispersed and came to naught.' Of course! The
existence of the Church demands, as a pre-requisite, the initial
belief in the Resurrection. I think, then, that the
contemporaneousness of the evidence is sufficiently established.

What about its good faith? I suppose that nobody, nowadays, doubts
the veracity of these witnesses. Anybody that knows an honest man
when he sees him, anybody that has the least ear for the tone of
sincerity and the accent of conviction, must say that they may have
been fanatics, they may have been mistaken, but one thing is clear as
sunlight, they were not false witnesses for God.

What, then, about their competency? Their simplicity, their
ignorance, their slowness to believe, their stupor of surprise when
the fact first dawned upon them, which they tell not with any idea of
manufacturing evidence in their own favour, but simply as a piece of
history, all tend to make us certain that there was no play of a
morbid imagination, no hysterical turning of a wish into a fact, on
the part of these men. The sort of things which they say that they
saw and experienced are such as to make any such supposition
altogether absurd. There are long conversations, appearances
appealing to more than one sense, appearances followed by
withdrawals, sometimes in the morning, sometimes in the evening,
sometimes at a distance, as on the mountain, sometimes close by, as
in the chamber, to single souls and to multitudes. Fancy five hundred
people all at once smitten with the same mistake, imagining that they
saw what they did not see! Miracles may be difficult to believe, they
are not half so difficult to believe as absurdities. And this modern
explanation of the faith in the Resurrection I venture respectfully
to designate as absurd.

But there is one other point to which I would like to turn for a
moment; and that is that little clause in my text that 'He was
buried.' Why does Paul introduce that amongst his facts? Possibly in
order to affirm the reality of Christ's death; but I think for
another reason. If it be true that Jesus Christ was laid in that
sepulchre, a stone's throw outside the city gate, do you not see what
a difficulty that fact puts in the way of disbelief or denial of His
Resurrection? If the grave--and it was not a grave, remember, like
ours, but a cave, with a stone at the door of it, that anybody could
roll away for entrance--if the grave was there, why, in the name of
common-sense, did not the rulers put an end to the pestilent heresy
by saying, 'Let us go and see if the body is there'?

Modern deniers of the Resurrection may fairly be asked to front this
thought--If Jesus Christ's body was in the sepulchre, how was it
possible for belief in the Resurrection to have been originated, or
maintained? If His body was not in the grave, what had become of it?
If His friends stole it away then they were deceivers of the worst
type in preaching a resurrection; and we have already seen that that
hypothesis is ridiculous. If His enemies took it away, for which they
had no motive, why did they not produce it and say, 'There is an
answer to your nonsense. There is the dead man. Let us hear no more
of this absurdity of His having risen from the dead'?

'He died ... according to the Scriptures, and He was buried.' And the
angels' word carries the only explanation of the fact which it
proclaims, 'He is not here--He is risen.'

I take leave to say that the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is
established by evidence which nobody would ever have thought of
doubting unless for the theory that miracles were impossible. The
reason for disbelief is not the deficiency of the evidence, but the
bias of the judge.

III. And now I have no time to do more than touch the last thought. I
have tried to show what establishes the facts. Let me remind you, in
a sentence or two, what the facts establish.

I by no means desire to suspend the whole of the evidence for
Christianity on the testimony of the eyewitnesses to the
Resurrection. There are a great many other ways of establishing the
truth of the Gospel besides that, upon which I do not need to dwell
now. But, taking this one specific ground which my text suggests,
what do the facts thus established prove?

Well, the first point to which I would refer, and on which I should
like to enlarge, if I had time, is the bearing of Christ's
Resurrection on the acceptance of the miraculous. We hear a great
deal about the impossibility of miracle and the like. It upsets the
certainty and fixedness of the order of things, and so forth, and so
forth. Jesus Christ has risen from the dead; and that opens a door
wide enough to admit all the rest of the Gospel miracles. It is of no
use paring down the supernatural in Christianity, in order to meet
the prejudices of a quasi-scientific scepticism, unless you are
prepared to go the whole length, and give up the Resurrection. There
is the turning point. The question is, Do you believe that Jesus
Christ rose from the dead, or do you not? If your objections to the
supernatural are valid, then Christ is not risen from the dead; and
you must face the consequences of that. If He is risen from the dead,
then you must cease all your talk about the impossibility of miracle,
and be willing to accept a supernatural revelation as God's way of
making Himself known to man.

But, further, let me remind you of the bearing of the Resurrection
upon Christ's work and claims. If He be lying in some forgotten
grave, and if all that fair thought of His having burst the bands of
death is a blunder, then there was nothing in His death that had the
least bearing upon men's sin, and it is no more to me than the deaths
of thousands in the past. But if He is risen from the dead, then the
Resurrection casts back a light upon the Cross, and we understand
that His death is the life of the world, and that 'by His stripes we
are healed.'

But, further, remember what He said about Himself when He was in the
world--how He claimed to be the Son of God; how He demanded absolute
obedience, implicit trust, supreme love, how He identified faith in
Himself with faith in God--and consider the Resurrection as bearing
on the reception or rejection of these tremendous claims. It seems to
me that we are brought sharp up to this alternative--Jesus Christ
rose from the dead, and was declared by the Resurrection to be the
Son of God with power; or Jesus Christ has _not_ risen from the
dead--and what then? Then He was either deceiver or deceived, and in
either case has no right to my reverence and my love. We may be
thankful that men are illogical, and that many who reject the
Resurrection retain reverence, genuine and deep, for Jesus Christ.
But whether they have any right to do so is another matter. I confess
for myself that, if I did not believe that Jesus Christ had risen
from the dead, I should find it very hard to accept, as an example of
conduct, or as religious teacher, a man who had made such great
claims as He did, and had asked from me what He asked. It seems to me
that He is either a great deal more, or a great deal less, than a
beautiful saintly soul. If He rose from the dead He is much more; if
He did not, I am afraid to say how much less He is.

And, finally, the bearing of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ upon
our own hopes of the future may be suggested. It teaches us that life
has nothing to do with organisation, but persists apart from the
body. It teaches us that a man may pass from death and be unaltered in
the substance of his being; and it teaches us that the earthly
house of our tabernacle may be fashioned like unto the glorious house
in which He dwells now at the right hand of God. There is no other
absolute proof of immortality than the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

If we accept with all our hearts and minds Paul's Gospel in its
fundamental facts, we need not fear to die, because He has died, and
by dying has been the death of death. We need not doubt that we shall
live again, because He was dead and is alive for ever more. This
Samson has carried away the gates on His strong shoulders, and death
is no more a dungeon but a passage. If we rest ourselves upon Him,
then we can take up, for ourselves and for all that are dear to us
and have gone before us, the triumphant song, 'O Death, where is thy
sting?' 'Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ.'




REMAINING AND FALLING ASLEEP

   'After that He was seen of above five hundred brethren
   at once; of whom the greater part remain unto this
   present, but some are fallen asleep.'--1 COR. xv. 6.


There were, then, some five-and-twenty years after the Resurrection,
several hundred disciples who were known amongst the churches as
having been eyewitnesses of the risen Saviour. The greater part
survived; some, evidently a very few, had died. The proportion of the
living to the dead, after five-and-twenty years, is generally the
opposite. The greater part have 'fallen asleep'; some, a
comparatively few, remain 'unto this present.' Possibly there was
some divine intervention which supernaturally prolonged the lives of
these witnesses, in order that their testimony might be the more
lasting. But, be that as it may, they evidently were men of mark, and
some kind of honour and observance surrounded them, as was very
natural, and as appears from the fact that Paul here knows so
accurately (and can appeal to His fellow-Christians' accurate
knowledge) the proportion between the survivors and the departed. We
read of one of them in the Acts of the Apostles at a later date than
this, one Mnason, an 'original disciple.'

So we get a glimpse into the conditions of life in the early Church,
interesting and of value in an evidential point of view. But my
purpose at present is to draw your attention to the remarkable
language in which the Apostle here speaks of the living and the dead
amongst these witnesses. In neither case does he use the simple,
common words 'living' or 'dead'; but in the one clause he speaks of
their 'remaining,' and in the other of their 'falling asleep'; both
phrases being significant, and, as I take it, both being traced up to
the fact of their having seen the risen Lord as the cause why their
life could be described as a 'remaining,' and their death as a
'falling asleep.' In other words, we have here brought before us, by
these two striking expressions, the transforming effect upon life and
upon death of the faith in a risen Lord, whether grounded on sight or
not. And it is simply to these two points that I desire to turn now.

I. First, then, we have to consider what life may become to those who
see the risen Christ.

'The greater part remain until this present.' Now the word _remain_
is no mere synonym for living or surviving. It not only tells us the
fact that the survivors were living, but the kind of life that they
did live. It is very significant that it is the same expression as
our Lord used in the profound prophetic words, 'If I will that he
tarry till I come, what is that to thee?' Now we are told in John's
Gospel that 'that saying went abroad amongst the brethren,' and
inasmuch as it was a matter of common notoriety in the early Church,
it is by no means a violent supposition that it may be floating in
Paul's memory here, and may determine his selection of this
remarkable expression 'they remain,' or 'they tarry,' and they were
tarrying till the Master came. So, then, I think if we give due
weight to the significance of the phrase, we get two or three
thoughts worth pondering.

One of them is that the sight of a risen Christ will make life calm
and tranquil. Fancy one of these 500 brethren, after that vision,
going back to his quiet rural home in some little village amongst the
hills of Galilee. How small and remote from Him, and unworthy to
ruffle or disturb the heart in which the memory of that vision was
burning, would seem the things that otherwise would have been
important and distracting! The faith which we have in the risen
Christ ought to do the same thing for us, and will do it in the
measure in which there shines clearly before that inward eye, which
is our true means of apprehending Him, the vision which shone before
the outward gaze of that company of wondering witnesses. If we build
our nests amidst the tossing branches of the world's trees, they will
sway with every wind, and perhaps be blown from their hold altogether
by such a storm as we all have sometimes to meet. But we may build
our nests in the clefts of the rock, like the doves, and be quiet, as
they are. Distractions will cease to distract, and troubles will
cease to agitate, and across the heaving surface of the great ocean
there will come a Form beneath whose feet the waves smooth
themselves, and at whose voice the winds are still. They who see
Christ need not be troubled. The ship that is empty is tossed upon
the ocean, that which is well laden is steady. The heart that has
Christ for a passenger need not fear being rocked by any storm.
Calmness will come with the vision of the Lord, and we shall abide or
'remain,' for there will be no need for us to flee from this Refuge
to that, nor shall we be driven from our secure abode by any
contingencies. 'He that believeth shall not make haste.'

It is a good thing to cultivate the disposition that says about most
of the trifles of this life, 'It does not much matter'; but the only
way to prevent wholesome contempt of the world's trivialities from
degenerating into supercilious indifference is, to base it upon
Christ, discerned as near us and bestowing upon us the calmness of
His risen life. Make Him your scale of importance, and nothing will
be too small to demand and be worthy of the best efforts of your
work, but nothing will be too great to sweep you away from the
serenity of your faith.

Again, the vision of the risen Christ will also lead to patient
persistence in duty. If we have Him before us, the distasteful duty
which He sets us will not be distasteful, and the small tasks, in
which great faithfulness may be manifested, will cease to be small.
If we have Him before us we have in that risen Christ the great and
lasting Example of how patient continuance in well-doing triumphs
over the sorrows that it bears, by and in patiently bearing them, and
is crowned at last with glory and honour. The risen Christ is the
Pattern for the men who will not be turned aside from the path of
duty by any obstacles, dangers, or threats. The risen Christ is the
signal Example of glory following upon faithfulness, and of the crown
being the result of the Cross. The risen Christ is the manifest
Helper of them that put their trust in Him; and one of the plainest
lessons and of the most imperative commands which come from the
