nevertheless I do just the contrary, and if I am disliked it
cannot be helped. Let the novices not come to me if they do not
want to learn the truth."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Before a reproof[20] bear fruit it must cost something and be
free from the least trace of passion. Kindness must not degenerate
into weakness. When we have had good reason for finding fault, we
must leave it, and not allow ourselves to worry over having given
pain. To seek out the delinquent for the purpose of consoling her,
is to do more harm than good. Left alone, she is compelled to look
beyond creatures, and to turn to God; she is forced to see her
faults and to humble herself. Otherwise she would become
accustomed to expect consolation after a merited rebuke, and would
act like a spoilt child who stamps and screams, knowing well that
by this means its mother will be forced to return and dry its
tears."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"'Let the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God, be ever
in your mouth and in your hearts.'[21] If we find any one
particular person disagreeable we should never be disheartened,
much less cease our endeavour to reform that soul. We should wield
_the sword of the Spirit,_ and so correct her faults. Things
should never be allowed to pass for the sake of our own ease. We
must carry on the war even when there is no hope of victory.
Success matters nothing, and we must fight on and never complain:
'I shall gain nothing from that soul, she does not understand,
there is nothing for it but to abandon her.' That would be the act
of a coward. We must do our duty to the very end."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Formerly, if any of my friends were in trouble, and I did not
succeed in consoling them when they came to see me, I left the
parlour quite heart-broken. Soon, however, Our Lord made me
understand how incapable I was of bringing comfort to a soul, and
from that day I no longer grieved when my visitors went away
downcast. I confided to God the sufferings of those so dear to me,
and I felt sure that He heard my prayer. At their next visit I
learned that I was not mistaken. After this experience, I no
longer worry when I have involuntarily given pain. . . . I simply
ask Our Lord to make amends."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"What do you think of all the graces that have been heaped upon
you?"--"I think 'the Spirit of God breatheth where He will.'"[22]

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Mother," she one day said to the Prioress, "were I unfaithful,
were I to commit even the smallest infidelity, I feel that my soul
would be plunged into the most terrible anguish, and I should be
unable to welcome death."

Mother Prioress evinced surprise at hearing her speak in this
strain, and she continued: "I am speaking of infidelity in the
matter of pride. If, for example, I were to say: 'I have acquired
such or such a virtue and I can practise it'; or again: 'My God,
Thou knowest I love Thee too much to dwell on one single thought
against faith,' straightway I should be assailed by the most
dangerous temptations and should certainly yield. To prevent this
misfortune I have but to say humbly and from my heart: 'My God, I
beseech Thee not to let me be unfaithful.'

"I understand clearly how St. Peter fell. He placed too much
reliance on his own ardent nature, instead of leaning solely on
the Divine strength. Had he only said: 'Lord, give me strength to
follow Thee unto death!' the grace would not have been refused him.

"How is it, Mother, that Our Lord, knowing what was about to
happen, did not say to him: 'Ask of Me the strength to do what is
in thy mind?' I think His purpose was to give us a twofold
lesson--first: that He taught His Apostles nothing by His presence
which He does not teach us through the inspirations of grace; and
secondly: that, having made choice of St. Peter to govern the
whole Church, wherein there are many sinners, He wished him to
test in himself what man can do without God's help. This is why
Jesus said to him before his fall: 'Thou being once converted
confirm thy brethren';[23] that is, 'Tell them the story of thy
sin--show them by thy own experience, how necessary it is for
salvation to rely solely upon Me.'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

I was much afflicted at seeing her ill, and I often exclaimed:
"Life is so dreary!" "Life is not dreary"--she would immediately
say; "on the contrary, it is most gay. Now if you said: 'Exile is
dreary,' I could understand. It is a mistake to call 'life' that
which must have an end. Such a word should be only used of the
joys of Heaven--joys that are unfading--and in this true meaning
life is not sad but gay--most gay. . . ."

Her own gaiety was a thing of delight. For several days she had
been much better, and we were saying to her: "We do not yet know
of what disease you will die. . . ." "But," she answered, "I shall
die of death! Did not God tell Adam of what he would die when He
said to him: 'Thou shalt die of death'?"[24]

"Then death will come to fetch you?"--"No, not death, but the Good
God. Death is not, as pictures tell us, a phantom, a horrid
spectre. The Catechism says that it is the separation of soul and
body--no more! Well, I do not fear a separation which will unite
me for ever to God."

"Will the _Divine Thief,"_ some one asked, "soon come to steal His
little bunch of grapes?" "I see Him in the distance, and I take
good care not to cry out: 'Stop thief!' Rather, I call to Him:
'This way, this way!'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

Asked under what name we should pray to her in Heaven, she
answered humbly: "Call me _Little Therese."_

*   *   *   *   *   *

I was telling her that the most beautiful angels, all robed in
white, would bear her soul to Heaven: "Fancies like those," she
answered, "do not help me, and my soul can only feed upon truth.
God and His Angels are pure spirits. No human eye can see them as
they really are. That is why I have never asked extraordinary
favours. I prefer to await the Eternal Vision."

"To console me at your death I have asked God to send me a
beautiful dream."--"That is a thing I would never do . . . ask for
consolations. Since you wish to resemble me, you know what are my
ideas on this:

'Fear not, O Lord, that I shall waken Thee: I shall await in peace
the Heavenly Shore.'

"It is so sweet to serve God in the dark night and in the midst of
trial. After all, we have but this life in which to live by faith."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"I am happy at the thought of going to Heaven, but when I reflect
on these words of Our Lord: 'I come quickly, and My reward is with
Me, to render to every man according to his works,'[25] I think
that He will find my case a puzzle: I have no works. . . . Well,
He will render unto me _according to His own works!"_

*   *   *   *   *   *

"The chief plenary indulgence, which is within reach of everybody,
and can be gained without the ordinary conditions, is that of
charity--which 'covereth a multitude of sins.'"[26]

*   *   *   *   *   *

"Surely you will not even pass through Purgatory. If such a thing
should happen, then certainly nobody goes straight to
Heaven."--"That gives me little thought. I shall be quite content
with the Merciful God's decision. Should I go to Purgatory, I
shall--like the three Hebrew children in the furnace--walk amid
the flames singing the Canticle of Love."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"In Heaven you will be placed among the Seraphim." "If so, I shall
not imitate them. At the sight of God _they cover themselves with
their wings_[27]: I shall take good care not to hide myself with
mine."

*   *   *   *   *   *

I showed her a picture which represented Joan of Arc being
comforted in prison by her Voices, and she remarked: "I also am
comforted by an interior voice. From above, the Saints encourage
me, saying: 'So long as thou art a captive in chains, thou canst
not fulfill thy mission, but later on, after thy death, will come
thy day of triumph.'"

*   *   *   *   *   *

"In Heaven, God will do all I desire, because on earth I have
never done my own will."

*   *   *   *   *   *

"You will look down upon us from Heaven, will you not?"--"No, I
will come down."

*   *   *   *   *   *

Some months before the death of Soeur Therese, _The Life of St.
Aloysius_ was being read in the refectory, and one of the Mothers
was struck by the mutual and tender affection which existed
between the young Saint and the aged Jesuit, Father Corbinelli.

"You are little Aloysius," she said to Therese, "and I am old
Father Corbinelli--be mindful of me when you enter Heaven." "Would
you like me to fetch you thither soon, dear Mother?" "No, I have
not yet suffered enough." "Nay, Mother, I tell you that you have
suffered quite enough." To which Mother Hermance replied: "I dare
not say Yes. . . . In so grave a matter I must have the sanction
of authority." So the request was made to Mother Prioress, who,
without attaching much importance to it, gave her sanction.

Now, on one of the last days of her life, Soeur Therese, scarcely
able to speak owing to her great weakness, received through the
infirmarian a bouquet of flowers. It had been gathered by Mother
Hermance, and was accompanied by an entreaty for one word of
affection. The message: "Tell Mother Hermance of the Heart of
Jesus that during Mass this morning I saw Father Corbinelli's
grave close to that of little Aloysius."

"That is well," replied the good Mother, greatly touched; "tell
Soeur Therese that I have understood. . . ." And from that moment
she felt convinced her death was near. It took place just one year
later, and, according to the prediction of the "Little Aloysius,"
the two graves lie side by side.

*   *   *   *   *   *

The last words penned by the hand of Soeur Therese were: "O Mary,
were I Queen of Heaven, and wert thou Therese, I should wish to be
Therese, that I might see thee Queen of Heaven!"
_____________________________

[1] Cf. Matt. 20:23.

[2] Cf. Ps. 67[68]:28.

[3] Cf. Prov. 1:4.

[4] Judith 15:11.

[5] Ecclus. 11:12, 13, 22, 23, 24.

[6] Jer. 10:23.

[7] Cf. Psalm 93[94]:18.

[8] _Imit.,_ I, xvi. 4.

[9] John 14:2.

[10] Cf. Psalm 111[112]:5.

[11] Cant. 1:2.

[12] Cf. 2 Esdras 4:17.

[13] Matt. 25:36.

[14] Prov. 16:32.

[15] Luke 2:50.

[16] Luke 2:33.

[17] Ps. 118[119]:112.

[18] Ephes. 6:17.

[19] Cf. Cant. 5:7, 3:4.

[20] In this and the following "counsel" it should be remembered
that it is a Novice-Mistress who is speaking. [Ed.]

[21] Cf. Ephes. 6:17; Isaias 61:21.

[22] Cf. John 3:8.

[23] Luke 22:32.

[24] Cf. Gen. 2:17. A play on the French: _Tu mourras de mort._
[Ed.]

[25] Apoc. 22:12.

[26] Prov. 10:12.

[27] Cf. Isaias 6:2.

_____________________________


LETTERS OF SOEUR THERESE
THE LITTLE FLOWER OF JESUS

_____________________________


LETTERS OF SOEUR THERESE TO HER SISTER CELINE

I

J.M.J.T.

May 8, 1888.

DEAREST CELINE,--There are moments when I wonder whether I am
really and truly in the Carmel; sometimes I can scarcely believe
it. What have I done for God that He should shower so many graces
upon me?

A whole month has passed since we parted; but why do I say parted?
Even were the wide ocean between us, our souls would remain as
one. And yet I know that not to have me is real suffering, and if
I listened to myself I should ask Jesus to let me bear the sadness
in your stead! I do not listen, as you see; I should be afraid of
being selfish in wishing for myself the better part--I mean the
suffering. You are right--life is often burdensome and bitter. It
is painful to begin a day of toil, especially when Jesus hides
Himself from our love. What is this sweet Friend about? Does He
not see our anguish and the burden that weighs us down? Why does
He not come and comfort us?

Be not afraid. . . . He is here at hand. He is watching, and it is
He who begs from us this pain, these tears. . . . He needs them
for souls, for our souls, and He longs to give us a magnificent
reward. I assure you that it costs Him dear to fill us with
bitterness, but He knows that it is the only means of preparing us
to know Him as He knows Himself, and to become ourselves Divine!
Our soul is indeed great and our destiny glorious. Let us lift
ourselves above all things that pass, and hold ourselves far from
the earth! Up above, the air is so pure. . . . Jesus may hide
Himself, but we know that He is there.


II

October 20, 1888.

MY DEAREST SISTER,--Do not let your weakness make you unhappy.
When, in the morning, we feel no courage or strength for the
practice of virtue, it is really a grace: it is the time to "lay
the axe to the root of the tree,"[1] relying upon Jesus alone. If
we fall, an act of love will set all right, and Jesus smiles. He
helps us without seeming to do so; and the tears which sinners
cause Him to shed are wiped away by our poor weak love. Love can
do all things. The most impossible tasks seem to it easy and
sweet. You know well that Our Lord does not look so much at the
greatness of our actions, nor even at their difficulty, as at the
love with which we do them. What, then, have we to fear?

You wish to become a Saint, and you ask me if this is not
attempting too much. Celine, I will not tell you to aim at the
seraphic holiness of the most privileged souls, but rather to be
"perfect as your Heavenly Father is perfect."[2] You see that your
dream--that our dreams and our desires--are not fancies, since
Jesus Himself has laid their realisation upon us as a commandment.


III

January, 1889.

MY DEAR LITTLE CELINE,--Jesus offers you the cross, a very heavy
cross, and you are afraid of not being able to carry it without
giving way. Why? Our Beloved Himself fell three times on the way
to Calvary, and why should we not imitate our Spouse? What a
favour from Jesus, and how He must love us to send us so great a
sorrow! Eternity itself will not be long enough to bless Him for
it. He heaps his favours upon us as upon the greatest Saints.
What, then, are His loving designs for our souls? That is a secret
which will only be revealed to us in our Heavenly Home, on the day
when "the Lord shall wipe away all our tears."[3]

Now we have nothing more to hope for on earth--"the cool evenings
are passed"[4]--for us suffering alone remains! Ours is an
enviable lot, and the Seraphim in Heaven are jealous of our
happiness.

The other day I came across this striking passage: "To be resigned
and to be united to the will of God are not the same; there is the
same difference between them as that which exists between union
and unity; in union there are still two, in unity there is but
one."[5] Yes, let us be one with God even in this life; and for
this we should be more than resigned, we should embrace the Cross
with joy.


IV

February 28, 1889.

MY DEAR LITTLE SISTER,--Jesus is "a Spouse of blood."[6] He wishes
for Himself all the blood of our hearts. You are right--it costs
us dear to give Him what He asks. But what a joy that it does
cost! It is happiness to bear our crosses, and to feel our
weakness in doing so.

Celine, far from complaining to Our Lord of this cross which He
sends us, I cannot fathom the Infinite Love which had led Him to
treat us in this way. Our dear Father must indeed be loved by God
to have so much suffering given to him. I know that by humiliation
alone can Saints be made, and I also know that our trial is a mine
of gold for us to turn to account. I, who am but a little grain of
sand, wish to set to work, though I have neither courage nor
strength. Now this very want of power will make my task easier,
for I wish to work for love. Our martyrdom is beginning . . . Let
us go forth to suffer together, dear sister, and let us offer our
sufferings to Jesus for the salvation of souls.


V

