Papias, one of the very earliest of the fathers, actually speaks of the
apostles simply as _the elders_. See Euseb. book iii. chap. 39.

[47:3] Thus, Simon Zelotes is said to have travelled into Egypt and
thence passed into Mesopotamia and Persia, where he suffered martyrdom;
whilst, according to others, he travelled through Egypt to Mauritania
and thence to Britain, where he was crucified. See Cave's "Lives of the
Apostles," Life of Simon the Zealot. No weight can be attached to such
legends. Origen states that the Apostle Thomas laboured in Parthia, and
Andrew in Scythia. "In Genesim," Opera, tom. ii. p. 24.

[47:4] Acts vi. 6.

[48:1] Matt. vii. 16.

[48:2] Acts xxvi. 16; Luke x. 2; 1 Tim. i. 12.

[48:3] Such was Valentine, the most formidable of the Gnostic
heresiarchs, said to be a disciple of Theodas, the companion of Paul.
Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. Paul of Samosata and Arius were able to boast,
at least as much as their antagonists, of their apostolic descent.

[49:1] 1 John iv. 1, 6.

[49:2] 2 John 10, 11.

[49:3] Gal. i. 8, 9.

[50:1] Luke x. 16.

[50:2] 2 Cor. iii. 1-3.

[51:1] Acts i. 3.

[51:2] Luke xxiv. 46, 47.

[52:1] Acts ii. 41.

[52:2] Acts ii. 44, 45.

[53:1] See Acts iv. 34. Barnabas was probably obliged to go to Cyprus to
complete the sale.

[53:2] Acts vi. 1.

[54:1] Acts vi. 2, 3.

[54:2] Acts i. 15, 23. They selected two, and not knowing which to
prefer, they decided finally by lot.

[54:3] Acts vi. 6.

[55:1] Acts iv. 18.

[55:2] Acts iv. 19.

[55:3] That is, A.D. 34, dating the crucifixion A.D. 31. Tillemont, but
on entirely different grounds, assigns the same date to the martyrdom of
Stephen. See "Memoires pour servir a L'Histoire Ecclesiastique des six
premiers siecles," tome prem. sec. par. p. 420. Stephen's martyrdom
probably occurred about the feast of Tabernacles.

[55:4] Daniel ix. 27. A _day_ in prophetic language denotes a _year_.
Ezek. iv. 4, 5. A prophetic week, or seven days, is, therefore,
equivalent to seven years.

[56:1] "The one week, or Passion-week, in the midst of which our Lord
was crucified A.D. 31, began with His public ministry A.D. 28, and ended
with the martyrdom of Stephen A.D. 34."--_Hales' Chronology_, ii. p.
518. Faber and others, who hold that the one week terminated with the
crucifixion, are obliged to adopt the untenable hypothesis that John the
Baptist and our Lord together preached seven years. The view here taken
is corroborated by the statement in Dan. ix. 27--"_In the midst of the
week_ he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease,"--as
Christ by one sacrifice of Himself "perfected for ever them that are
sanctified."

[56:2] Matt, xxviii. 19.

[57:1] Acts viii. 6, 12.

[57:2] John iv. 9.

[57:3] Acts viii. 1.

[57:4] Luke xxiv. 47; Acts i. 4.

[57:5] Acts i. 8.

[57:6] Acts viii. 27-38.

[57:7] Acts x. 19, 30, 32.

[57:8] Acts x. 1.

[58:1] Acts x. 2.

[58:2] Acts xxi. 39.

[58:3] Strabo, xiv. p. 673.

[58:4] Rom. xi. 13; 1 Tim. ii. 7; 2 Tim. i. 11.

[58:5] Matt. x. 5, 6.

[59:1] 1 Cor. xv. 8.

[59:2] Rom. i. 1.

[59:3] Acts xxii. 3.

[59:4] Acts xxii. 3.

[59:5] Acts xxvi. 5.

[59:6] Acts vii. 58.

[60:1] Acts xxvi. 10. [Greek: psephon]. See Alford on Acts xxvi. 10, and
Acts viii. 1. See also "The Life and Epistles of St Paul" by Conybeare
and Howson, i. 85. Edit., London, 1852. Paul says that "all the Jews"
knew his manner of life _from his youth_--a declaration from which we
may infer that he was a person of note. See Acts xxvi. 4. There is a
tradition that he aspired to be the son-in-law of the high priest.
Epiphanius, "Ad Haer.," 1, 2, Sec. 16 and Sec. 25.

[60:2] Acts ix. 2, and xxii. 5.

[60:3] Acts ix. 3-21.

[60:4] Gal. i. 17, 18.

[60:5] This date may be established thus:--Stephen, as has been shewn,
was martyred A.D. 34. See note, p. 55 of this chapter. Paul seems to
have been converted in the same year, and therefore, if he returned to
Damascus three years afterwards, he must have been in that city in A.D.
37. It would appear, from another source of evidence, that this is the
true date. The Emperor Tiberius died A.D. 37, and Aretas immediately
afterwards seems to have obtained possession of Damascus. He was in
possession of it when Paul was now there. See 2 Cor. xi. 32, 33. It is
probable that he remained master of the place only a very short time.

[60:6] Gal. i. 12.

[60:7] 2 Cor. xi. 5.

[61:1] Acts ix. 17, 18.

[61:2] Acts xiii. 1, 2.

[61:3] Simeon or Niger, according to Epiphanius, was one of the Seventy.
"Haeres," 20, sec. 4. Luke, the writer of the Book of the Acts, is said
to have been one of the Seventy, and some have asserted that he is the
same as Lucius of Cyrene, mentioned Acts xiii. 1.

[61:4] Ananias, by whom he was baptized, was, according to the Greek
martyrologies, one of the Seventy. See Burton's "Lectures," i. 88, note.
It is evident that Ananias was a person of note among the Christians of
Damascus.

[62:1] Acts ix. 23.

[62:2] See Josephus' "Antiquities," xviii. 5.

[62:3] See Burton's "Lectures," i. 116, 117.

[62:4] 2 Cor. xi. 32, 33.

[62:5] Acts ix. 26, 27.

[62:6] This statement rests on the authority of a monk of Cyprus, named
Alexander, a comparatively late writer. See Burton's "Lectures," i. 56,
note.

[62:7] Acts xxii. 21.

[63:1] Acts ix. 29, 30.

[63:2] Gal. i. 21.

[63:3] Acts xv. 23, 41.

[63:4] Acts xi. 25, 26.

[64:1] Griesbach, Lachmann, Alford, and other critics of great note,
here prefer [Greek: Hellenas] to [Greek: Hellenistas], but the common
rending is better supported by the authority of manuscripts, and more in
accordance with Acts xiv. 27, where Paul and Barnabas are represented,
long afterwards, as declaring to the Church of Antioch how God "had
opened the door of faith _unto the Gentiles_." See an excellent
vindication of the _textus receptus_ in the _Journal of Sacred
Literature_ for January 1857, No. VIII., p. 285, by the Rev. W. Kay,
M.A., Principal of Bishop's College, Calcutta.

[64:2] Acts xi. 20.

[65:1] John xix. 19-22.

[65:2] Acts xi. 27-30.

[66:1] It is obvious from Acts ix. 31, xxvi. 20, and Gal. i. 22, that
such churches now existed.

[66:2] Acts xii. 3, 24, 25.

[66:3] Clem. Alex. Strom, vi. p. 742, note; Edit. Potter. Eusebius,
v. 18.

[66:4] "Antiquities," xix. c. 8, Sec. 2, xx. c. 2, Sec. 5.

[66:5] Acts xii. 20-23.

[66:6] From the comparative table of chronology appended to Wieseler's
"Chronologie des apostolischen Zeitalters," it appears that the date
given in the text is adopted by no less than twenty of the highest
chronological authorities, including Ussher, Pearson, Spanheim,
Tillemont, Michaelis, Hug, and De Wette. It is also adopted by Burton.
Wieseler himself, apparently on insufficient grounds, adopts A.D. 45.

[67:1] Though Peter was taught, by the case of Cornelius, that "God also
to the Gentiles had granted repentance unto life" (Acts xi. 18), and
though he doubtless felt himself a debtor, both to the Greeks and to the
Jews, yet still he continued to cherish the conviction that his mission
was, primarily to his kinsmen according to the flesh. James and John had
the same impression. See Gal. ii. 9; James i. 1; 1 Pet. i. 1.

[68:1] Acts xii. 2.

[68:2] Acts xxii. 17-21.

[68:3] I here partially adopt the translation of Conybeare and Howson.
Their work is one of the most valuable contributions to sacred
literature which has appeared in the present century.

[68:4] The Second Epistle to the Corinthians was written about fourteen
years after this, or towards the close of A.D. 57. See Chap. IX. of this
Section. The Jews often reckoned current time as if it were complete.

[68:5] 2 Cor. xii. 2-4.

[68:6] Exodus iii. 2-10.

[68:7] Isaiah vi. 1, 2, 8, 9.

[70:1] Acts xiii. 1-3.

[70:2] Acts iv. 36.

[71:1] Deut. xxxiii. 10.

[72:1] Rom. i. 1.

[73:1] Gen. xlviii. 13-15.

[73:2] Lev. viii. 18, and iv. 4.

[73:3] Num. xxvii. 18.

[74:1] 1 Tim. v. 17.

[74:2] This portion of the apostolic history may illustrate 1 Tim. iv.
14, for Paul had official authority conferred on him "by prophecy," or
in consequence of a revelation made, perhaps, through one of the
prophets of Antioch, "with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery." Something similar, probably, occurred in the case of
Timothy. But, in ordinary circumstances, the rulers of the Church must
judge of a divine call to the ministry from the gifts and graces of the
candidate for ordination.

[75:1] Acts xiii. 4.

[75:2] Acts xiii. 4.

[75:3] Acts iv. 36.

[75:4] Until this date we read of "Barnabas and Saul," now of "Paul and
Barnabas." Paul was the Roman, and Saul the Hebrew name of the great
apostle. His superior qualifications had now full scope for development,
and accordingly, as he takes the lead, he is henceforth, generally named
before Barnabas.

[75:5] 2 Cor. xi. 26,--[Greek: potamon].

[76:1] Acts xv. 38.

[76:2] Acts xv. 39.

[76:3] Acts xiv. 6.

[76:4] Acts xiv. 23.

[76:5] [Greek: Cheirotonesantes de autois kat' ekklesian
presbuterous].--The interpretation given in the text is sanctioned by
the highest authorities. See Rothe's "Anfange der Christlichen Kirche,"
p. 150; Alford on Acts xiv. 23; Burton's "Lectures," i. 150;
Baumgarten's "Acts of the Apostles," Acts xiv. 23; Litton's "Church of
Christ," p. 595.

[76:6] Acts xiv. 27.

[76:7] They set out on the mission probably in A.D. 44, and returned to
Antioch in A.D. 50. The Council of Jerusalem took place the year
following.

[77:1] Acts xiii. 48.

[77:2] Acts xiv. 13.

[77:3] Acts xiii. 6-8.

[77:4] Acts xiii. 50.

[77:5] Acts xiv. 2.

[78:1] Acts xiv. 19.

[78:1] 2 Tim. iii. 10, 11.

[79:1] Acts xv. 1.

[79:2] This inference was indeed admitted. See Acts xv. 5, 24.

[79:3] Gal. v. 2-4, vi. 13, 14.

[79:4] Acts xvi. 31; John iii. 36.

[80:1] Luke xxiii. 43.

[80:2] Ps. ii. 12.

[80:3] Acts xv. ii.

[81:1] Acts xv. 2.

[81:2] Acts xv. 23, 24, 41.

[81:3] Acts xvi. 4.

[81:4] Paul and Barnabas, with the other deputies, were sent "to
Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders" (Acts xv. 2); "when they were
come to Jerusalem, they were received of the church, and of the apostles
and elders" (Acts xv. 4); and the decrees are said to have been ordained
"of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem" (Acts xvi. 4); but
not one of these statements necessarily implies that these rulers were
exclusively elders _of the Church of Jerusalem_.

[82:1] It has been argued by Burton ("Lectures," vol. i. p. 122), that
the first visit of Paul to Jerusalem after his conversion took place
about the time of one of the great festivals, as he is said, on the
occasion, to have "disputed against the Grecians" (Acts ix. 29), who
were likely then to have been very numerous in the city. If he arrived
now at the time of the same festival, the interval must have been
precisely fourteen years.

[82:2] Gal. ii. 1. Some make these fourteen years to include the three
years mentioned Gal. i. 18, but this interpretation does violence to the
languages of the apostle. The system of chronology here adopted requires
no such forced expositions. Paul came to Jerusalem three years after his
conversion, that is, in A.D. 37; and fourteen years after, that is, in
A.D. 51, he was at this Synod.

[82:3] Acts ix. 26.

[83:1] Acts xxi. 20.

[83:2] Acts xxi. 21.

[83:3] Acts xv. 5.

[83:4] Gal. ii. 4. It is here taken for granted that the visit to
Jerusalem, mentioned in the second chapter of the Epistle to the
Galatians, is the same as that described in the fifteenth of Acts. Paul
says that he went up "by revelation" (Gal. ii. 2),--a statement from
which it appears that he was divinely instructed to adopt this method of
settling the question.

[83:5] Gal. ii. 12.

[83:6] Gal. ii. 2.

[83:7] Acts xvi. 4, xxi. 25.

[84:1] Acts xv. 12.

[84:2] Acts xv. 22.

[84:3] Acts xv. 23.

[84:4] The expression here used--"the multitude" ([Greek: to
plethos])--is repeatedly applied in the New Testament to the Sanhedrim,
a court consisting of not more than seventy-two members. See Luke
xxiii. 1; Acts xxiii. 7. There were probably more individuals present
at this meeting.

[84:5] Acts xv. 2.

[84:6] 1 Cor. xii. 28; Eph. iv. 11.

[84:7] In Acts xi. 27, we read of "prophets" who came "from Jerusalem
unto Antioch."

[84:8] Acts xv. 23. "The apostles, and elders, _and_ brethren."

[84:9]The context may appear to be favourable to this interpretation,
for the two deputies now chosen--"Judas surnamed Barsabas, and
Silas"--who are said to have been "chief men among _the brethren_" (ver.
22), are likewise described as "_prophets_ also themselves" (ver. 32).
In Acts xviii. 27, "the brethren" appear to be distinguished from "the
disciples."

[85:1] This reading, which is adopted by Mill in the Prolegomena to his
New Testament, as well as by Lachmann, Neander, Alford, and Tregelles,
is supported by the authority of the Codex Vaticanus, the Codex
Alexandrinus, the Codex Ephraemi, and the Codex Bezae. It is likewise to
be found in by far the most valuable cursive MS. yet known. It is
confirmed also by the early testimony of Irenaeus, and by the Latin of
the Codex Bezae, a version more ancient than the Vulgate, as well as by
the Vulgate itself. The reading in the _textus receptus_ may be
accounted for by the growth of the doctrine of apostolical succession;
as, when the hierarchy was in its glory, transcribers could not
understand how the apostles and elders could be fellow presbyters.

[85:2] It is worthy of note that Peter, fourteen or fifteen years
afterwards, speaks in the style here indicated. Thus he says--"The
elders which are among you, I exhort, _who am also an elder_" ([Greek:
sumpresbuteros]).--(l Pet. v. 1.)

[85:3] Acts xv. 28.

[86:1] Gal. iii. 2.

[86:2] Acts xv. 8-10.

[86:3] Acts xi. 15, 17.

[86:4] This style of speaking was used by councils in after-ages, and
often in cases when it was singularly inappropriate.

[87:1] Acts xv. 29.

[87:2] See 1 Cor. x. 23, 31, 32.

[88:1] "Since the eating of such food, as Paul expressly teaches (1 Cor.
x. 19, 33), was not sinful in itself, and yet to be avoided out of
tenderness to those who thought it so, the abstinence here recommended
must be understood in the same manner."--_Alexander on the Acts,_ ii.
84.

[89:1] Gal. ii. 12.

[89:2] Gal. ii. 9.

[89:3] Gal. ii. 13.

[90:1] Acts xvi. 9.

[90:2] Acts xvi. 12.

[91:1] "The _Jus Italicum_ raised provincial land to the same state of
_immunity from taxation_ which belonged to land in Italy."--_Conybeare
and Howson,_ i. 302, note.

[91:2] Not the Strymon. See Conybeare and Howson, i. 316.

[91:3] Acts xvi. 14.

[91:4] Acts xvi. 14.

[92:1] Acts xvi. 16-18.

[92:2] They may have perceptive powers of which we can form no
conception, and may thus discern the approach of particular events as
distinctly an we can now calculate the ebb and flow of the tides, or the
eclipses of the sun and moon.

[92:3] Matt. viii. 28, 29; Mark i. 24, 25; Luke iv. 34, 35.

[93:1] Acts xvi. 18.

[93:2] Acts xvi. 19.

[93:3] In some parts of the Empire magistrates and men of rank acted
gratuitously, but a large portion of the priests subsisted on the
emoluments of office.

[94:1] Acts xvi. 24.

[94:2] Acts xvi. 25.

[95:1] Acts xvi. 26.

[95:2] Acts xvi. 28. "By a singular historical coincidence, this very
city of Philippi, or its neighbourhood, had been signalised within a
hundred years, not only by the great defeat of Brutus and Cassius, but
by the suicide of both, and by a sort of wholesale self-destruction on
the part of their adherents."--Alexander on the Acts, ii. 122, 123.

[96:1] Acts xvi. 29, 30.

[97:1] Acts xvi. 31.

[98:1] Acts xvi. 33, 34.

[98:2] Acts xvi. 35.

[98:3] Paul says that he was "free born" (Acts xxii. 28). It was
unlawful to scourge a Roman citizen, or even, except in extraordinary
cases, to imprison him without trial. He had also the privilege of
appeal to the Emperor.

[98:4] Acts xvi. 37.

[99:1] Acts xvi. 39.

[99:2] Acts xvi. 40.

[99:3] Phil. iv. 14-16.

[100:1] Acts xvii. 4.

[100:2] Acts xvii. 7.

[100:3] Acts xvii. 8. [Greek: etaraxan--tous politarchas]. It has been
remarked that the name here given to the magistrates (politarchs), does
not occur in ancient literature; but it is a curious and important fact
that a Greek inscription, on an arch still to be seen at this place,
demonstrates the accuracy of the sacred historian. This arch supplies
evidence that it was erected about the time when the Republic was
passing into the Empire, and that it was in existence when Paul now
preached there. It appears from it that the magistrates of Thessalonica
were called politarchs, and that they were seven in number. What is
almost equally striking is that three of the names in the inscription
are Sopater, Gaius, and Secundus, the same as those of three of Paul's
friends in this district. Conybeare and Howson, i. 360.

[101:1] Acts xvii. 11.

[102:1] Acts xvii. 16.

[102:2] Acts xvii. 17.

[102:3] See Conybeare and Howson, i. 241.

[102:4] See Alford on Acts xiii. 9, and xxiii. 1.

[102:5] 2 Cor. x. 10.

[102:6] 2 Cor. x. 10.

[102:7] Acts xvii. 18.

[103:1] [Greek: Adikei Sokrates--etera de kaina daimonia
eispheron.]--_Xen. Mem._ i. 1.

[103:2] Acts xvii. 19, 20. It is very evident that he was not arraigned
before the court of Areopagus as our English translation seems to
indicate.

[104:1] Acts xvii. 22, 23. This translation obviously conveys the
meaning of the original more distinctly than our English version. See
Alford, ii. 178; and Conybeare and Howson, i. 406.

[104:2] It is a curious fact that the impostor Apollonius of Tyana, who
was the contemporary of the apostle, speaks of Athens as a place "where
altars are raised _to the unknown Gods_." "Life," by Philostratus, book
vi. c. 3. See also Pausanias, Attic, i. 4.

[105:1] See Cudworth's "Intellectual System, with Notes by Mosheim," i.
513, 111. Edition, London, 1845.

[105:2] See Mosheim's "Commentaries on the Affairs of the Christians
before Constantine," by Vidal, i. 42.

[105:3] Acts xvii. 24.

[105:4] See Alford on Acts xvii. 26.

[105:5] Acts xvii. 26.

[105:6] Acts xvii. 25, 26.

[106:1] Acts xvii. 29.

[106:2] Acts xvii. 31.

[106:3] Cudworth, with Notes by Mosheim, ii. 120, and Mosheim's
"Commentaries," by Vidal, i. 42.

[106:4] Acts xvii. 32.

[106:5] Acts xvii. 21.

[107:1] Acts xvii. 34.

[107:2] These writings, which made their appearance not earlier than the
fourth or fifth century, were held in great reputation, particularly by
the Mystics, in the Middle Ages.

[107:3] Burton's "Lectures," i. 183.

[108:1] 1 Cor. ii. 1, 2, 4, 5.

[109:1] Strabo, lib. viii. vol. i., p. 549; Edit. Oxon. 1807.

[109:2] Acts xviii. 6.

[109:3] Acts xviii. 8.

[109:4] 1 Cor. i. 26.

[109:5] Rom. xvi. 23. This epistle was written from Corinth.

[109:6] Acts xviii. 8.

[109:7] 1 Cor. i. 14; Rom. xvi. 23.

[109:8] Acts xviii. 2, 26; Rom. xvi. 3; 1 Cor. xvi. 19; 2 Tim. iv. 19.

[110:1] Acts xviii. 2.

[110:2] "Rabbi Judah saith, 'He that teacheth not his son a trade, doth
the same as if he taught him to be a thief;' and Rabban Gamaliel saith,
'He that hath a trade in his hand, to what is he like? He is like a
vineyard that is fenced.'"--See _Alford on Acts_, xviii. 3.

[110:3] Acts xviii. 3.

[111:1] Epiphanius, "Haer.," xxx. 16.

[111:2] Acts xviii. 11.

[112:1] Acts xviii. 9, 10.

[112:2] See 1 Cor. i. 11, and xi. 20, 21; and 2 Cor. xii. 21, and
xiii. 2.

[112:3] See 1 Cor. vi. 9-11.

[112:4] Acts xviii. 12.

[112:5] Acts xviii. 13.

[113:1] Acts xviii. 14-16.

[113:2] Acts xviii. 17.

[113:3] 1 Thess. v. 12, 13.

[113:4] 2 Thess. ii. 2.

[113:5] 2 Thess. ii. 3-12.

[113:6] 1 Thess. i. 9.

[114:1] [Greek: Tas paradoseis].

[114:2] 2 Thess. ii. 15. Paul is here speaking, not of what had been
handed down from preceding generations, but of what had been established
by his own apostolic authority, so that the rendering "traditions" in
our English version is a peculiarly unhappy translation.

[115:1] Acts xviii. 18.

[115:2] See Conybeare and Howson, i. 454.

[115:3] Acts xviii. 19.

[116:1] Acts xviii. 24.

[116:2] Acts xviii. 25.

[116:3] Acts xviii. 26.

[116:4] It is worthy of note that she is named before Aquila in Acts
xviii. 18; Rom. xvi. 3; and 2 Tim. iv. 19.

[116:5] 1 Cor. xiv. 34, 35; 1 Tim. ii. 12.

[117:1] Acts xviii. 24.

[117:2] Acts xviii. 27.

[117:3] Acts xviii. 27, 28.

[117:4] 1 Cor. iii. 4-6.

[118:1] Acts xviii. 22.

[118:2] Acts xviii. 23.

[118:3] Acts xvi. 6.

[118:4] Acts xix. 8.

[118:5] Acts xix. 9.

[119:1] That this epistle was written after the second visit appears
from Gal. iv. 13. Mr Ellicott asserts that "the first time" is here the
preferable translation of [Greek: to proteron], and yet, rather
inconsistently, adds, that "no historical conclusions can safely be
drawn from this expression alone." See his "Critical and Grammatical
Commentary on Galatians," iv. 13.

[119:2] Gal. i. 6, iii. 1.

[120:1] Gal. ii. 16, iv. 1-4, v. 1.

[120:2] 1 Cor. xvi. 7; 2 Cor. xii. 14, xiii. 1.

[120:3] The Acts take no notice of various parts of his early career as
a preacher. Compare Acts ix. 20-26 with Gal. i. 17.

[120:4] 2 Cor. xi. 25.

[120:5] 2 Cor. xi. 26.

[120:6] Titus i. 5.

[120:7] See Titus i. 6-11, ii. 1, 7, 8, 15, iii. 8-11. The reasons
assigned in support of a later date for the writing of this epistle do
not appear at all satisfactory. Paul directs the evangelist (Titus iii.
12) to come to him to Nicopolis, for he had "determined there to
winter." This Nicopolis was in Greece, in the province of Achaia, and we
know that Paul wintered there in A.D. 57-58. Acts xx. 2, 3. See Schaff's
"Apostolic Church," i. 390.

[120:8] 2 Cor. ii. 13, vii. 6, 13, viii. 6, 16, 23, xii. 18; Gal. ii.
1, 3.

[121:1] Acts xix. 10.

[121:2] See Col. iv. 13, 15, 16. These churches were not, however,
founded by Paul. See Col. ii. 1.

[121:3] "This was the largest of the Greek temples. The area of the
Parthenon at Athens was _not one fourth_ of that of the temple of
Ephesus."--_Smith's Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography, Art._
EPHESUS.

[121:4] Conybeare and Howson, ii. 72.

[121:5] Acts xix. 35.

[122:1] Conybeare and Howson, ii. 73. Minucius Felix in his Octavius
speaks of Diana as represented "at Ephesus with many distended breasts
ranged in tiers."

[122:2] Conybeare and Howson, ii. 13.

[122:3] His Life, written by Philostratus about A.D. 210, is full of
lying wonders. His biographer mentions his visit to Ephesus, book iv. 1.

[123:1] Acts xix. 11, 12.

[123:2] Acts xix. 16, 17.

[123:3] The piece of silver here mentioned was worth about tenpence, so
that the estimated value of the books burned was about L2000.

[123:4] Acts xix. 19, 20.

[123:5] It was written not long before Paul left Ephesus, and probably
about the time of the Passover. 1 Cor. v. 7, xvi. 5-8.

[123:6] 1 Cor. i. 11.

[123:7] 1 Cor. v. 1.

[123:8] 1 Cor. xv. 12. This passage supplies evidence that errorists
very soon made their appearance in the Christian Church, and furnishes
an answer to those chronologists who date all the Pastoral Epistles
after Paul's release from his first imprisonment, on the ground that the
Gnostics had no existence at an earlier period.

[124:1] Acts xix. 24.

[124:2] Conybeare and Howson, ii. 74.

[124:3] Acts xix. 25.

[125:1] Acts xix. 25-27.

[125:2] Acts xix. 28.

[125:3] See Conybeare and Howson, ii. 79-81.

[125:4] Acts xix. 29.

[125:5] See Hackett's "Commentary on the Acts of the Apostles," p. 273.

[125:6] Acts xix. 31.

[126:1] Acts xx. 34. The Asiarchs "derived their title from the name of
the province, as the corresponding officers in Cyprus, Syria, and Lydia,
were called Cypriarchs, Syriarchs, Lydiarchs. Those of Asia are said to
have been ten in number.... As the games and sacrifices over which these
Asiarchs presided, were provided at their own expense, they were always
chosen from the richest class, and may be said to represent the highest
rank of the community."--_Alexander on the Acts_, ii. 210.

[126:2] 2 Tim. iv. 14.

[126:3] Acts xix. 34. It has been observed that, according to the ideas
of the heathen, this unintermitted cry was, in itself, _an act of
worship_; and hence we may understand why it was so long continued, but
it is surely a notable example of "vain repetitions." See Hackett, p.
275.

[127:1] Acts xix. 40.

[127:2] Acts xix. 32.

[127:3] Our English version "robbers of _churches_" is obviously
incorrect.

[127:4] Acts xix. 37. It is plain from this passage that the apostle,
when referring to the Gentile worship, avoided the use of language
calculated to give unnecessary offence.

[128:1] 1 Cor. xvi. 8.

[128:2] Acts xx. 1.

[128:3] Rom. xv. 19.

[128:4] See Acts xix. 22.

[128:5] 1 Tim. i. 3.

[128:6] 1 Tim. i. 2.

[129:1] According to the chronology adopted in our English Bible, all
the Pastoral Epistles were written after Paul's release from his first
imprisonment, and this theory has recently been strenuously advocated by
Conybeare and Howson, Alford, and Ellicott; but their reasonings are
exceedingly unsatisfactory. For, I. The statement of Conybeare and
Howson that "the three epistles were nearly contemporaneous with each
other" is a mere assertion resting on no solid foundation; as
resemblance in style, especially when all the letters were dictated by
