"HE WILL HIDE ME."

(Isa. 49:2.)

Miss Mary Elizabeth Servoss, the author of this trustful hymn, was born
in Schenectady, N.Y., Aug. 22, 1849. When a very young girl her
admiration of Fanny Crosby's writings, and the great and good service
they were doing in the world, inspired her with a longing to resemble
her. Though her burden was as real, it was not like the other's, and her
opportunities for religious meditation and literary work were fewer than
those of the elder lady, but the limited number of hymns she has written
have much of the spirit and beauty of their model.

Providence decreed for her a life of domestic care and patient waiting.
For eighteen years she was the constant attendant of a disabled
grandmother, and long afterwards love and duty made her the home nurse
during her mother's protracted illness and the last sickness of her
father, until both parents passed away.

From her present home in Edeson, Ill., some utterances of her chastened
spirit have found their way to the public, and been a gospel of
blessing. Besides "He Will Hide Me" other hymns of Miss Servoss are
"Portals of Light," "He Careth," "Patiently Enduring," and "Gates of
Praise," the last being the best known.

    When the storms of life are raging.
      Tempests wild on sea and land,
    I will seek a place of refuge
      In the shadow of God's hand.

  CHORUS.
    He will hide me, He will hide me,
    Where no harm can e'er betide me,
    He will hide me, safely hide me
      In the shadow of His hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

    So while here the cross I'm bearing,
      Meeting storms and billows wild,
    Jesus for my soul is caring,
      Naught can harm His Father's child.
        He will hide me, etc.


_THE TUNE._

An animating choral in nine-eight tempo, with a swinging movement and
fugue chorus, is rather florid for the hymn, but undeniably musical. Mr.
James McGranahan was the composer. He was born in Adamsville, Pa., July
4, 1840. His education was acquired mostly at the public schools, and
both in general knowledge and in musical accomplishments it may be said
of him that he is "self-made."

Music was born in him, and at the age of nineteen, with some valuable
help from men like Bassini, Webb, Root and Zerrahn, he had studied to so
good purpose that he taught music classes himself. This talent, joined
to the gift of a very sweet tenor voice, made him the natural successor
of the lamented Bliss, and, with Major D.W. Whittle, he entered on a
career of gospel work, making between 1881 and 1885 two successful tours
of England, Scotland and Ireland, and through the chief American
cities.

Among his publications are the _Male Chorus Book_, _Songs of the Gospel_
and the _Gospel Male Choir_.

Resides at Kinsman, O.


"REVIVE THY WORK, O LORD."

(Heb. 3:2.)

The supposed date of the hymn is 1860; the author, Albert Midlane. He
was born at Newport on the Isle of Wight, Jan. 23, 1825 a business man,
but, being a Sunday-school teacher, he was prompted to write verses for
children. The habit grew upon him till he became a frequent and
acceptable hymn-writer, both for juvenile and for general use. English
collections have at least three hundred credited to him.

    Revive Thy work, O Lord,
      Thy mighty arm make bare,
    Speak with the voice that wakes the dead,
      And make Thy people hear.


_THE TUNE._

Music and words together make a song-litany alive with all the old
psalm-tune unction and the new vigor; and both were upon Mr. McGranahan
when he wrote the choral. It is one of his successes.

    Revive thy work, O Lord,
      Exalt Thy precious name,
    And by the Holy Ghost our love
      For Thee and Thine inflame.

  REFRAIN.
    Revive Thy work, O Lord,
      And give refreshing showers;
    The glory shall be all Thine own,
      The blessing shall be ours.


"WHERE IS MY WANDERING BOY TO-NIGHT?"

This remarkable composition--words and music by Rev. Robert Lowry--has a
record among sacred songs like that of "The Prodigal Son" among
parables.

A widowed lady of culture, about forty years of age, who was an
accomplished vocalist, had ceased to sing, though her sweet voice was
still in its prime. The cause was her sorrow for her runaway boy. She
had not heard from him for five years. While spending a week with
friends in a city distant from home, her hidden talent was betrayed by
the friends to the pastor of their church, where a revival was in
progress, and persuasion that seemed to put a duty upon her finally
procured her consent to sing a solo.

The church was crowded. With a force and feeling that can easily be
guessed she sang "Where Is My Boy Tonight?" and finished the first
stanza. She began the second,--

    Once he was pure as morning dew,
      As he knelt at his mother's knee,
    No face was so bright, no heart more true,
      And none were so sweet as he;

--and as the congregation caught up the refrain,--

      O where is my boy tonight?
      O where is my boy tonight?
    My heart overflows, for I love him he knows,
      O where is my boy tonight?

--a young man who had been sitting in a back seat made his way up the
aisle and sobbed, "Mother, I'm here!" The embrace of that mother and her
long-lost boy turned the service into a general hallelujah. At the
inquiry meeting that night there were many souls at the Mercy Seat who
never knelt there before--and the young wanderer was one.

[Illustration: Philip Doddridge, D.D.]

Mr. Sankey, when in California with Mr. Moody, sang this hymn in one of
the meetings and told the story of a mother in the far east who had
commissioned him to search for her missing son. By a happy providence
the son was in the house--and the story and the song sent him home
repentant.

At another time Mr. Sankey sang the same hymn from the steps of a
snow-bound train, and a man between whose father and himself had been
trouble and a separation, was touched, and returned to be reconciled
after an absence of twenty years.

At one evening service in Stanberry, Mo., the singing of the hymn by the
leader of the choir led to the conversion of one boy who was present,
and whose parents were that night praying for him in an eastern state,
and inspired such earnest prayer in the hearts of two other runaway
boys' parents that the same answer followed.

There would not be room in a dozen pages to record all the similar
saving incidents connected with the singing of "Where Is My Wandering
Boy?" The rhetoric of love is strong in every note and syllable of the
solo, and the tender chorus of voices swells the song to heaven like an
antiphonal prayer.

Strange to say, Dr. Lowry set lightly by his hymns and tunes, and
deprecated much mention of them though he could not deny their success.
An active Christian since seventeen years of age, through his early
pulpit service, his six years' professorship, and the long pastorate in
Plainfield, N.J., closed by his death, he considered preaching to be his
supreme function as it certainly was his first love. Music was to him "a
side-issue," an "efflorescence," and writing a hymn ranked far below
making and delivering a sermon. "I felt a sort of meanness when I began
to be known as a composer," he said. And yet he was the author of a hymn
and tune which "has done more to bring back wandering boys than any
other" ever written.[45]

[Footnote 45: "Where Is My Boy Tonight" was composed for a book of
temperance hymns, _The Fountain of Song_, 1877.]


"ETERNITY."

This is the title and refrain of both Mrs. Ellen M.H. Gates' impressive
poem and its tune.

    O the clanging bells of Time!
      Night and day they never cease;
    We are weaned with their chime,
      For they do not bring us peace.
    And we hush our hearts to hear,
      And we strain our eyes to see
    If thy shores are drawing near
        Eternity! Eternity!

Skill was needed to vocalize this great word, but the ear of Mr. Bliss
for musical prosody did not fail to make it effective. After the
beautiful harmony through the seven lines, the choral reverently softens
under the rallentando of the closing bars, and dwelling on the
awe-inspiring syllables, solemnly dies away.


TRIUMPH BY AND BY.

This rally-song of the Christian arena is wonderfully stirring,
especially in great meetings, for it sings best in full choral volume.

    The prize is set before us,
    To win His words implore us,
    The eye of God is o'er us
      From on high.
    His loving tones are falling
    While sin is dark, appalling,
   'Tis Jesus gently calling;
      He is nigh!

  CHORUS.
    By and by we shall meet Him,
    By and by we shall greet Him,
    And with Jesus reign in glory,
      By and by!

    We'll follow where He leadeth,
    We'll pasture where He feedeth,
    We'll yield to Him who pleadeth
      From on high.
    Then nought from Him shall sever,
    Our hope shall brighten ever
    And faith shall fail us never;
      He is nigh.

  CHORUS--   By and by, etc.

Dr. Christopher Ruby Blackall, the author of the hymn, was born in
Albany, N.Y., Sept. 18, 1830. He was a surgeon in the Civil War, and in
medical practice fifteen years, but afterwards became connected with the
American Baptist Publication Society as manager of one of its branches.
He has written several Sunday-school songs set to music by W.H. Doane.


_THE TUNE_,

By Horatio R. Palmer is exactly what the hymn demands. The range
scarcely exceeds an octave, but with the words "From on high," the
stroke of the soprano on upper D carries the feeling to unseen summits,
and verifies the title of the song. From that note, through melody and
chorus the "Triumph by and by" rings clear.


"NOT HALF HAS EVER BEEN TOLD"

This is emotional, but every word and note is uplifting, and creates the
mood for religious impressions. The writer, Rev. John Bush Atchison, was
born at Wilson, N.Y., Feb. 18, 1840, and died July 15, 1882.

    I have read of a beautiful city
      Far away in the kingdom of God,
    I have read how its walls are of jasper,
      How its streets are all golden and broad;
    In the midst of the street is Life's River
      Clear as crystal and pure to behold,
    But not half of that city's bright glory
      To mortals has ever been told.

The chorus (twice sung)--

    Not half has been told,

--concludes with repeat of the two last lines of this first stanza.

Mr. Atchison was a Methodist clergyman who composed several good hymns.
"Behold the Stone is Rolled Away," "O Crown of Rejoicing," and "Fully
Persuaded," indicate samples of his work more or less well-known. "Not
Half Has Ever Been Told" was written in 1875.


_THE TUNE._

Dr. Otis F. Presbry, the composer, was a young farmer of York,
Livingston Co., N.Y., born there the 20th of December, 1820. Choice of a
professional life led him to Berkshire Medical College, where he
graduated in 1847. In after years his natural love of musical studies
induced him to give his time to compiling and publishing religious
tunes, with hymns more especially for Sunday-schools.

He became a composer and wrote the melody to Atchison's words in 1877,
which was arranged by a blind musician of Washington, D.C., J.W.
Bischoff by name, with whom he had formed a partnership. The solo is
long--would better, perhaps, have been four-line instead of eight--but
well sung, it is a flight of melody that holds an assembly, and touches
hearts.

Dr. Presbry's best known book was _Gospel Bells_ (1883), the joint
production of himself, Bischoff, and Rev. J.E. Rankin. He died Aug. 20,
1901.


"COME."

One of the most characteristic (both words and music) of the _Gospel
Hymns_--"Mrs. James Gibson Johnson" is the name attached to it as its
author, though we have been unable to trace and verify her claim.

    O, word of words the sweetest,
      O, words in which there lie
    All promise, all fulfillment,
      And end of mystery;
    Lamenting or rejoicing,
      With doubt or terror nigh,
    I hear the "Come" of Jesus,
      And to His cross I fly.

  CHORUS.
      Come, come--
    Weary, heavy-laden, come, O come to me.


_THE TUNE_,

Composed by James McGranahan, delivers the whole stanza in soprano or
tenor solo, when the alto, joining the treble, leads off the refrain in
duet, the male voices striking alternate notes until the full harmony in
the last three bars. The style and movement of the chorus are somewhat
suggestive of a popular glee, but the music of the duet is flexible and
sweet, and the bass and tenor progress with it not in the
ride-and-tie-fashion but marking time with the title-syllable.

The contrast between the spiritual and the intellectual effect of the
hymn and its wakeful tune is illustrated by a case in Baltimore. While
Moody and Sankey were doing their gospel work in that city, a man, who,
it seems, had brought a copy of the _Gospel Hymns_, walked out of one of
the meetings after hearing this hymn-tune, and on reaching home, tore
out the leaves that contained the song and threw them into the fire,
saying he had "never heard such twaddle" in all his life.

The sequel showed that he had been too hasty. The hymn would not leave
him. After hearing it night and day in his mind till he began to
realize what it meant, he went to Mr. Moody and told him he was "a vile
sinner" and wanted to know how he could "come" to Christ. The divine
invitation was explained, and the convicted man underwent a vital
change. His converted opinion of the hymn was quite as remarkably
different. He declared it was "the sweetest one in the book." (_Story of
the Gospel Hymns_.)


"ALMOST PERSUADED."

The Rev. Mr. Brundage tells the origin of this hymn. In a sermon
preached by him many years ago, the closing words were:

"He who is almost persuaded is almost saved, but to be almost saved is
to be entirely lost." Mr. Bliss, being in the audience, was impressed
with the thought, and immediately set about the composition of what
proved one of his most popular songs, deriving his inspiration from the
sermon of his friend, Mr. Brundage. _Memoir of Bliss_.

    Almost persuaded now to believe,
    Almost persuaded Christ to receive;
    Seems now some soul to say
   "Go Spirit, go thy way,
    Some more convenient day
      On Thee I'll call."

       *       *       *       *       *

    Almost persuaded--the harvest is past!

Both hymn and tune are by Mr. Bliss--and the omission of a chorus is in
proper taste. This revival piece brings the eloquence of sense and
sound to bear upon the conscience in one monitory pleading. Incidents in
this country and in England related in Mr. Sankey's book, illustrate its
power. It has a convicting and converting history.


"MY AIN COUNTREE."

This hymn was written by Miss Mary Augusta Lee one Sabbath day in 1860
at Bowmount, Croton Falls, N.Y., and first published in the _New York
Observer_, Dec, 1861. The authoress had been reading the story of John
Macduff who, with his wife, left Scotland for the United States, and
accumulated property by toil and thrift in the great West. In her
leisure after the necessity for hard work was past, the Scotch woman
grew homesick and pined for her "ain countree." Her husband, at her
request, came east and settled with her in sight of the Atlantic where
she could see the waters that washed the Scotland shore. But she still
pined, and finally to save her life, John Macduff took her back to the
heather hills of the mother-land, where she soon recovered her health
and spirits.

    I am far from my hame an' I'm weary aften whiles
    For the langed-for hame-bringing an' my Father's welcome smiles.
    I'll ne'er be fu' content until mine eyes do see
    The shinin' gates o' heaven an' mine ain countree.

    The airt' is flecked wi' flowers mony-tinted, frish an' gay,
    The birdies warble blithely, for my Father made them sae,
    But these sights an' these soun's will naething be to me
    When I hear the angels singin' in my ain countree.

Miss Lee was born in Croton Falls in 1838, and was of Scotch descent,
and cared for by her grandfather and a Scotch nurse, her mother dying in
her infancy. In 1870 she became the wife of a Mr. Demarest, and her
married life was spent in Passaic, N.J., until their removal to
Pasadena, Cal., in hope of restoring her failing health. She died at Los
Angeles, Jan. 8, 1888.


_THE TUNE_

Is an air written in 1864 in the Scottish style by Mrs. Ione T. Hanna,
wife of a banker in Denver, Colo., and harmonized for choral use by
Hubert P. Main in 1873. Its plaintive sweetness suits the words which
probably inspired it. The tone and metre of the hymn were natural to the
young author's inheritance; a memory of her grandfather's home-land
melodies, with which he once crooned "little Mary" to sleep.

Sung as a closing hymn, "My ain countree" sends the worshipper away with
a tender, unworldly thought that lingers.

Mrs. Demarest wrote an additional stanza in 1881 at the request of Mr.
Main.

Some really good gospel hymns and tunes among those omitted in this
chapter will cry out against the choice that passed them by. Others are
of the more ephemeral sort, the phenomena (and the demand) of a
generation. Carols of pious joy with inordinate repetition, choruses
that surprise old lyrics with modern thrills, ballads of ringing sound
and slender verse, are the spray of tuneful emotion that sparkles on
every revival high-tide, but rarely leaves floodmarks that time will not
erase. Religious songs of the demonstrative, not to say sensational,
kind spring impromptu from the conditions of their time--and give place
to others equally spontaneous when the next spiritual wave sweeps by.
Their value lingers in the impulse their novelty gave to the life of
sanctuary worship, and in the Christian characters their emotional power
helped into being.




CHAPTER XIII.

HYMNS, FESTIVAL AND OCCASIONAL.


_CHRISTMAS._


"ADESTE FIDELES."

This hymn is of doubtful authorship, by some assigned to as late a date
as 1680, and by others to the 13th century as one of the Latin poems of
St. Bonaventura, Bishop of Albano, who was born at Bagnarea in Tuscany,
A.D. 1221. He was a learned man, a Franciscan friar, one of the greatest
teachers and writers of his church, and finally a cardinal. Certainly
Roman Catholic in its origin, whoever was its author, it is a Christian
hymn qualified in every way to be sung by the universal church.

        Adeste, fideles
        Laeti triumphantes,
        Venite, venite in Bethlehem;
        Natum videte Regem angelorum.

      CHORUS.
        Venite, adoremus,
        Venite, adoremus!
        Venite, adoremus Dominum.

This has been translated by Rev. Frederick Oakeley (1808-1880) and by
Rev. Edward Caswall (1814-1878) the version of the former being the one
in more general use. The ancient hymn is much abridged in the hymnals,
and even the translations have been altered and modernized in the three
or four stanzas commonly sung. Caswall's version renders the first line
"Come hither, ye faithful," literally construing the Latin words.

The following is substantially Oakeley's English of the "Adeste,
fideles."

      O come all ye faithful
      Joyful and triumphant,
    To Bethlehem hasten now with glad accord;
      Come and behold Him,
      Born the King of Angels.

  CHORUS.
      O come, let us adore Him,
      O come, let us adore Him,
      O come, let us adore Him,
        Christ, the Lord.

      Sing choirs of angels,
      Sing in exultation
    Through Heaven's high arches be your praises poured;
      Now to our God be
      Glory in the highest!
        O come, let us adore Him!

      Yea, Lord, we bless Thee,
      Born for our salvation
    Jesus, forever be Thy name adored!
      Word of the Father
      Now in flesh appearing;
        O come, let us adore Him!

The hymn with its primitive music as chanted in the ancient churches,
was known as "The Midnight Mass," and was the processional song of the
religious orders on their way to the sanctuaries where they gathered in
preparation for the Christmas morning service. The modern tune--or
rather the tune in modern use--is the one everywhere familiar as the
"Portuguese Hymn." (See page 205.)


MILTON'S HYMN TO THE NATIVITY.

      It was the winter wild
      While the Heavenly Child
    All meanly wrapped in the rude manger lies.
      Nature in awe of Him
      Had doffed her gaudy trim
    With her great Master so to sympathize.

       *       *       *       *       *

      No war nor battle sound
      Was heard the world around.
    The idle spear and shield were high uphung.
      The hooked chariot stood
      Unstained with hostile blood,
    The trumpets spake not to the armed throng,
      And Kings sat still with awful eye
    As if they knew their Sovereign Lord was by.

This exalted song--the work of a boy of scarcely twenty-one--is a Greek
ode in form, of two hundred and sixteen lines in twenty-seven strophes.
Some of its figures and fancies are more to the taste of the seventeenth
century than to ours, but it is full of poetic and Christian
sublimities, and its high periods will be heard in the Christmas hymnody
of coming centuries, though it is not the fashion to sing it now.

John Milton, son and grandson of John Miltons, was born in Breadstreet,
London, Dec. 9, 1608, fitted for the University in St. Paul's school,
and studied seven years at Cambridge. His parents intended him for the
church, but he chose literature as a profession, travelled and made
distinguished friendships in Italy, Switzerland and France, and when
little past his majority was before the public as a poet, author of the
Ode to the Nativity, of a Masque, and of many songs and elegies. In
later years he entered political life under the stress of his Puritan
sympathies, and served under Cromwell and his successor as Latin
Secretary of State through the time of the Commonwealth. While in public
duty he became blind, but in his retirement composed "Paradise Lost and
Paradise Regained." Died in 1676.


_THE TUNE._

In the old "Carmina Sacra" a noble choral (without name except "No war
nor battle sound") well interprets portions of the 4th and 5th stanzas
of the great hymn, but replaces the line--

   "The idle spear and shield were high uphung."

--with the more modern and less figurative--

   "No hostile chiefs to furious combat ran."

Three stanzas are also added, by the Rev. H.O. Dwight, missionary to
Constantinople. The substituted line, which is also, perhaps, the
composition of Mr. Dwight, rhymes with--

   "His reign of peace upon the earth began,"

--and as it is not un-Miltonic, few singers have ever known that it was
not Milton's own.

Dr. John Knowles Paine, Professor of Music at Harvard University, and
author of the Oratorio of "St. Peter," composed a cantata to the great
Christmas Ode of Milton, probably about 1868.

Professor Paine died Apr. 25, 1906.

It is worth noting that John Milton senior, the great poet's father, was
a skilled musician and a composer of psalmody. The old tunes "York" and
"Norwich," in Ravenscroft's collection and copied from it in many early
New England singing-books, are supposed to be his.

The Miltons were an old Oxfordshire Catholic family, and John, the
poet's father, was disinherited for turning Protestant, but he prospered
in business, and earned the comfort of a country gentleman. He died,
very aged, in May, 1646, and his son addressed a Latin poem ("Ad
Patrem") to his memory.


"HARK! THE HERALD ANGELS SING."

This hymn of Charles Wesley, dating about 1730, was evidently written
with the "Adeste Fideles" in mind, some of the stanzas, in fact, being
almost like translations of it. The form of the two first lines was
originally--

    Hark! how all the welkin rings,
   "Glory to the King of Kings!"

--but was altered thirty years later by Rev. Martin Madan (1726-1790)
to--

    Hark! the herald angels sing
    Glory to the new-born King!

Other changes by the same hand modified the three following stanzas, and
a fifth stanza was added by John Wesley--

    Hail the heavenly Prince of Peace!
    Hail the Sun of Righteousness!
    Light and life to all He brings,
    Ris'n with healing in His wings.


_THE TUNE._

"Mendelssohn" is the favorite musical interpreter of the hymn. It is a
noble and spirited choral from Felix Mendelssohn Bartholdy's cantata,
"Gott ist Licht."


"JOY TO THE WORLD, THE LORD IS COME!"

This inspirational lyric of Dr. Watts never grows old. It was written in
1719.

    Joy to the world! the Saviour reigns!
      Let men their songs employ
