
(12) Of its rite.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 1]

Whether Confirmation Is a Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that Confirmation is not a sacrament. For
sacraments derive their efficacy from the Divine institution, as
stated above (Q. 64, A. 2). But we read nowhere of Confirmation being
instituted by Christ. Therefore it is not a sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, the sacraments of the New Law were foreshadowed in
the Old Law; thus the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:2-4), that "all in
Moses were baptized, in the cloud and in the sea; and did all eat the
same spiritual food, and all drank the same spiritual drink." But
Confirmation was not foreshadowed in the old Testament. Therefore it
is not a sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, the sacraments are ordained unto man's salvation.
But man can be saved without Confirmation: since children that are
baptized, who die before being confirmed, are saved. Therefore
Confirmation is not a sacrament.

Obj. 4: Further, by all the sacraments of the Church, man is
conformed to Christ, Who is the Author of the sacraments. But man
cannot be conformed to Christ by Confirmation, since we read nowhere
of Christ being confirmed.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Melchiades wrote to the bishops of Spain:
"Concerning the point on which you sought to be informed, i.e.
whether the imposition of the bishop's hand were a greater sacrament
than Baptism, know that each is a great sacrament."

_I answer that,_ The sacraments of the New Law are ordained unto
special effects of grace: and therefore where there is a special
effect of grace, there we find a special sacrament ordained for the
purpose. But since sensible and material things bear a likeness to
things spiritual and intelligible, from what occurs in the life of
the body, we can perceive that which is special to the spiritual
life. Now it is evident that in the life of the body a certain
special perfection consists in man's attaining to the perfect age,
and being able to perform the perfect actions of a man: hence the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:11): "When I became a man, I put away the
things of a child." And thence it is that besides the movement of
generation whereby man receives life of the body, there is the
movement of growth, whereby man is brought to the perfect age. So
therefore does man receive spiritual life in Baptism, which is a
spiritual regeneration: while in Confirmation man arrives at the
perfect age, as it were, of the spiritual life. Hence Pope Melchiades
says: "The Holy Ghost, Who comes down on the waters of Baptism
bearing salvation in His flight, bestows at the font, the fulness of
innocence; but in Confirmation He confers an increase of grace. In
Baptism we are born again unto life; after Baptism we are
strengthened." And therefore it is evident that Confirmation is a
special sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: Concerning the institution of this sacrament there are
three opinions. Some (Alexander of Hales, Summa Theol. P. IV, Q. IX;
St. Bonaventure, Sent. iv, D, 7) have maintained that this sacrament
was instituted neither by Christ, nor by the apostles; but later in
the course of time by one of the councils. Others (Pierre de
Tarentaise, Sent. iv, D, 7) held that it was instituted by the
apostles. But this cannot be admitted; since the institution of a new
sacrament belongs to the power of excellence, which belongs to Christ
alone.

And therefore we must say that Christ instituted this sacrament not
by bestowing, but by promising it, according to John 16:7: "If I go
not, the Paraclete will not come to you, but if I go, I will send Him
to you." And this was because in this sacrament the fulness of the
Holy Ghost is bestowed, which was not to be given before Christ's
Resurrection and Ascension; according to John 7:39: "As yet the
Spirit was not given, because Jesus was not yet glorified."

Reply Obj. 2: Confirmation is the sacrament of the fulness of grace:
wherefore there could be nothing corresponding to it in the Old Law,
since "the Law brought nothing to perfection" (Heb. 7:19).

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 65, A. 4), all the sacraments are
in some way necessary for salvation: but some, so that there is no
salvation without them; some as conducing to the perfection of
salvation; and thus it is that Confirmation is necessary for
salvation: although salvation is possible without it, provided it be
not omitted out of contempt.

Reply Obj. 4: Those who receive Confirmation, which is the sacrament
of the fulness of grace, are conformed to Christ, inasmuch as from
the very first instant of His conception He was "full of grace and
truth" (John 1:14). This fulness was made known at His Baptism, when
"the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape . . . upon Him" (Luke
3:22). Hence (Luke 4:1) it is written that "Jesus being full of the
Holy Ghost, returned from the Jordan." Nor was it fitting to Christ's
dignity, that He, Who is the Author of the sacraments, should receive
the fulness of grace from a sacrament.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 2]

Whether Chrism Is a Fitting Matter for This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that chrism is not a fitting matter for this
sacrament. For this sacrament, as stated above (A. 1, ad 1), was
instituted by Christ when He promised His disciples the Holy Ghost.
But He sent them the Holy Ghost without their being anointed with
chrism. Moreover, the apostles themselves bestowed this sacrament
without chrism, by the mere imposition of hands: for it is written
(Acts 8:17) that the apostles "laid their hands upon" those who were
baptized, "and they received the Holy Ghost." Therefore chrism is not
the matter of this sacrament: since the matter is essential to the
sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, Confirmation perfects, in a way, the sacrament of
Baptism, as stated above (Q. 65, AA. 3, 4): and so it ought to be
conformed to it as perfection to the thing perfected. But the matter,
in Baptism, is a simple element, viz. water. Therefore chrism, which
is made of oil and balm, is not a fitting matter for this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, oil is used as the matter of this sacrament for the
purpose of anointing. But any oil will do for anointing: for
instance, oil made from nuts, and from anything else. Therefore not
only olive oil should be used for this sacrament.

Obj. 4: Further, it has been stated above (Q. 66, A. 3) that water is
used as the matter of Baptism, because it is easily procured
everywhere. But olive oil is not to be procured everywhere; and much
less is balm. Therefore chrism, which is made of these, is not a
fitting matter for this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Registr. iv): "Let no priest dare to
sign the baptized infants on the brow with the sacred chrism."
Therefore chrism is the matter of this sacrament.

_I answer that,_ Chrism is the fitting matter of this sacrament. For,
as stated above (A. 1), in this sacrament the fulness of the Holy
Ghost is given for the spiritual strength which belongs to the
perfect age. Now when man comes to perfect age he begins at once to
have intercourse with others; whereas until then he lives an
individual life, as it were, confined to himself. Now the grace of
the Holy Ghost is signified by oil; hence Christ is said to be
"anointed with the oil of gladness" (Ps. 44:8), by reason of His
being gifted with the fulness of the Holy Ghost. Consequently oil is
a suitable matter of this sacrament. And balm is mixed with the oil,
by reason of its fragrant odor, which spreads about: hence the
Apostle says (2 Cor. 2:15): "We are the good odor of Christ," etc.
And though many other things be fragrant, yet preference is given to
balm, because it has a special odor of its own, and because it
confers incorruptibility: hence it is written (Ecclus. 24:21): "My
odor is as the purest balm."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ, by the power which He exercises in the
sacraments, bestowed on the apostles the reality of this sacrament,
i.e. the fulness of the Holy Ghost, without the sacrament itself,
because they had received "the first fruits of the Spirit" (Rom.
8:23). Nevertheless, something of keeping with the matter of this
sacrament was displayed to the apostles in a sensible manner when
they received the Holy Ghost. For that the Holy Ghost came down upon
them in a sensible manner under the form of fire, refers to the same
signification as oil: except in so far as fire has an active power,
while oil has a passive power, as being the matter and incentive of
fire. And this was quite fitting: for it was through the apostles
that the grace of the Holy Ghost was to flow forth to others. Again,
the Holy Ghost came down on the apostles in the shape of a tongue.
Which refers to the same signification as balm: except in so far as
the tongue communicates with others by speech, but balm, by its odor.
because, to wit, the apostles were filled with the Holy Ghost, as
teachers of the Faith; but the rest of the believers, as doing that
which gives edification to the faithful.

In like manner, too, when the apostles imposed their hands, and when
they preached, the fulness of the Holy Ghost came down under visible
signs on the faithful, just as, at the beginning, He came down on the
apostles: hence Peter said (Acts 11:15): "When I had begun to speak,
the Holy Ghost fell upon them, as upon us also in the beginning."
Consequently there was no need for sacramental sensible matter, where
God sent sensible signs miraculously.

However, the apostles commonly made use of chrism in bestowing the
sacrament, when such like visible signs were lacking. For Dionysius
says (Eccl. Hier. iv): "There is a certain perfecting operation which
our guides," i.e. the apostles, "call the sacrifice of Chrism."

Reply Obj. 2: Baptism is bestowed that spiritual life may be received
simply; wherefore simple matter is fitting to it. But this sacrament
is given that we may receive the fulness of the Holy Ghost, Whose
operations are manifold, according to Wis. 7:22, "In her is the" Holy
"Spirit . . . one, manifold"; and 1 Cor. 12:4, "There are diversities
of graces, but the same Spirit." Consequently a compound matter is
appropriate to this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: These properties of oil, by reason of which it
symbolizes the Holy Ghost, are to be found in olive oil rather than
in any other oil. In fact, the olive-tree itself, through being an
evergreen, signifies the refreshing and merciful operation of the
Holy Ghost.

Moreover, this oil is called oil properly, and is very much in use,
wherever it is to be had. And whatever other liquid is so called,
derives its name from its likeness to this oil: nor are the latter
commonly used, unless it be to supply the want of olive oil.
Therefore it is that this oil alone is used for this and certain
other sacraments.

Reply Obj. 4: Baptism is the sacrament of absolute necessity; and so
its matter should be at hand everywhere. But it is enough that the
matter of this sacrament, which is not of such great necessity, be
easily sent to all parts of the world.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Essential to This Sacrament That the Chrism Which Is
Its Matter Be Previously Consecrated by a Bishop?

Objection 1: It seems that it is not essential to this sacrament,
that the chrism, which is its matter, be previously consecrated by a
bishop. For Baptism which bestows full remission of sins is not less
efficacious than this sacrament. But, though the baptismal water
receives a kind of blessing before being used for Baptism; yet this
is not essential to the sacrament: since in a case of necessity it
can be dispensed with. Therefore neither is it essential to this
sacrament that the chrism should be previously consecrated by a
bishop.

Obj. 2: Further, the same should not be consecrated twice. But the
sacramental matter is sanctified, in the very conferring of the
sacrament, by the form of words wherein the sacrament is bestowed;
hence Augustine says (Tract. lxxx in Joan.): "The word is added to
the element, and this becomes a sacrament." Therefore the chrism
should not be consecrated before this sacrament is given.

Obj. 3: Further, every consecration employed in the sacraments is
ordained to the bestowal of grace. But the sensible matter composed
of oil and balm is not receptive of grace. Therefore it should not be
consecrated.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Innocent I says (Ep. ad Decent.): "Priests,
when baptizing, may anoint the baptized with chrism, previously
consecrated by a bishop: but they must not sign the brow with the
same oil; this belongs to the bishop alone, when he gives the
Paraclete." Now this is done in this sacrament. Therefore it is
necessary for this sacrament that its matter be previously
consecrated by a bishop.

_I answer that,_ The entire sanctification of the sacraments is
derived from Christ, as stated above (Q. 64, A. 3). But it must be
observed that Christ did use certain sacraments having a corporeal
matter, viz. Baptism, and also the Eucharist. And consequently, from
Christ's very act in using them, the matter of these sacraments
received a certain aptitude to the perfection of the sacrament. Hence
Chrysostom (Chromatius, In Matth. 3:15) says that "the waters of
Baptism could never wash away the sins of believers, had they not
been sanctified by contact with our Lord's body." And again, our Lord
Himself "taking bread . . . blessed . . . and in like manner the
chalice" (Matt. 26:26, 27; Luke 22:19, 20). For this reason there is
no need for the matter of these sacraments to be blessed previously,
since Christ's blessing is enough. And if any blessing be used, it
belongs to the solemnity of the sacrament, not to its essence. But
Christ did not make use of visible anointings, so as not to slight
the invisible unction whereby He was "anointed above" His "fellows"
(Ps. 44:8). And hence both chrism, and the holy oil, and the oil of
the sick are blessed before being put to sacramental use. This
suffices for the reply to the First Objection.

Reply Obj. 2: Each consecration of the chrism has not the same
object. For just as an instrument derives instrumental power in two
ways, viz. when it receives the form of an instrument, and when it is
moved by the principal agent; so too the sacramental matter needs a
twofold sanctification, by one of which it becomes fit matter for the
sacrament, while by the other it is applied to the production of the
effect.

Reply Obj. 3: Corporeal matter is receptive of grace, not so as to be
the subject of grace, but only as the instrument of grace, as
explained above (Q. 62, A. 3). And this sacramental matter is
consecrated, either by Christ, or by a bishop, who, in the Church,
impersonates Christ.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 4]

Whether the Proper Form of This Sacrament Is: "I Sign Thee with the
Sign of the Cross," Etc.?

Objection 1: It seems that the proper form of this sacrament is not:
"I sign thee with the sign of the cross, I confirm thee with the
chrism of salvation, in the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost. Amen." For the use of the sacraments is derived from
Christ and the apostles. But neither did Christ institute this form,
nor do we read of the apostles making use of it. Therefore it is not
the proper form of this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, just as the sacrament is the same everywhere, so
should the form be the same: because everything has unity, just as it
has being, from its form. But this form is not used by all: for some
say: "I confirm thee with the chrism of sanctification." Therefore
the above is not the proper form of this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, this sacrament should be conformed to Baptism, as
the perfect to the thing perfected, as stated above (A. 2, Obj. 2).
But in the form of Baptism no mention is made of signing the
character; nor again of the cross of Christ, though in Baptism man
dies with Christ, as the Apostle says (Rom. 6:3-8); nor of the effect
which is salvation, though Baptism is necessary for salvation. Again,
in the baptismal form, only one action is included; and the person of
the baptizer is expressed in the words: "I baptize thee, whereas the
contrary is to be observed in the above form." Therefore this is not
the proper form of this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Is the authority of the Church, who always uses
this form.

_I answer that,_ The above form is appropriate to this sacrament. For
just as the form of a natural thing gives it its species, so a
sacramental form should contain whatever belongs to the species of
the sacrament. Now as is evident from what has been already said (AA.
1, 2), in this sacrament the Holy Ghost is given for strength in the
spiritual combat. Wherefore in this sacrament three things are
necessary; and they are contained in the above form. The first of
these is the cause conferring fulness of spiritual strength which
cause is the Blessed Trinity: and this is expressed in the words, "In
the name of the Father," etc. The second is the spiritual strength
itself bestowed on man unto salvation by the sacrament of visible
matter; and this is referred to in the words, "I confirm thee with
the chrism of salvation." The third is the sign which is given to the
combatant, as in a bodily combat: thus are soldiers marked with the
sign of their leaders. And to this refer the words, "I sign thee with
the sign of the cross," in which sign, to wit, our King triumphed
(cf. Col. 2:15).

Reply Obj. 1: As stated above (A. 2, ad 1), sometimes the effect of
this sacrament, i.e. the fulness of the Holy Ghost, was given through
the ministry of the apostles, under certain visible signs, wrought
miraculously by God, Who can bestow the sacramental effect,
independently of the sacrament. In these cases there was no need for
either the matter or the form of this sacrament. On the other hand,
sometimes they bestowed this sacrament as ministers of the
sacraments. And then, they used both matter and form according to
Christ's command. For the apostles, in conferring the sacraments,
observed many things which are not handed down in those Scriptures
that are in general use. Hence Dionysius says at the end of his
treatise on the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy (chap. vii): "It is not
allowed to explain in writing the prayers which are used in the
sacraments, and to publish their mystical meaning, or the power
which, coming from God, gives them their efficacy; we learn these
things by holy tradition without any display,"* i.e. secretly. [*The
passage quoted in the text of the Summa differs slightly from the
above, which is translated directly from the works of Dionysius.]
Hence the Apostle, speaking of the celebration of the Eucharist,
writes (1 Cor. 11:34): "The rest I will set in order, when I come."

Reply Obj. 2: Holiness is the cause of salvation. Therefore it comes
to the same whether we say "chrism of salvation" or "of
sanctification."

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism is the regeneration unto the spiritual life,
whereby man lives in himself. And therefore in the baptismal form
that action alone is expressed which refers to the man to be
sanctified. But this sacrament is ordained not only to the
sanctification of man in himself, but also to strengthen him in his
outward combat. Consequently not only is mention made of interior
sanctification, in the words, "I confirm thee with the chrism of
salvation": but furthermore man is signed outwardly, as it were with
the standard of the cross, unto the outward spiritual combat; and
this is signified by the words, "I sign thee with the sign of the
cross."

But in the very word "baptize," which signifies "to cleanse," we can
understand both the matter, which is the cleansing water, and the
effect, which is salvation. Whereas these are not understood by the
word "confirm"; and consequently they had to be expressed.

Again, it has been said above (Q. 66, A. 5, ad 1) that the pronoun
"I" is not necessary to the Baptismal form, because it is included in
the first person of the verb. It is, however, included in order to
express the intention. But this does not seem so necessary in
Confirmation, which is conferred only by a minister of excellence, as
we shall state later on (A. 11).
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 5]

Whether the Sacrament of Confirmation Imprints a Character?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacrament of Confirmation does not
imprint a character. For a character means a distinctive sign. But a
man is not distinguished from unbelievers by the sacrament of
Confirmation, for this is the effect of Baptism; nor from the rest of
the faithful, because this sacrament is ordained to the spiritual
combat, which is enjoined to all the faithful. Therefore a character
is not imprinted in this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, it was stated above (Q. 63, A. 2) that a character
is a spiritual power. Now a power must be either active or passive.
But the active power in the sacraments is conferred by the sacrament
of order: while the passive or receptive power is conferred by the
sacrament of Baptism. Therefore no character is imprinted by the
sacrament of Confirmation.

Obj. 3: Further, in circumcision, which is a character of the body,
no spiritual character is imprinted. But in this sacrament a
character is imprinted on the body, when the sign of the cross is
signed with chrism on man's brow. Therefore a spiritual character is
not imprinted by this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ A character is imprinted in every sacrament that
is not repeated. But this sacrament is not repeated: for Gregory II
says (Ep. iv ad Bonifac.): "As to the man who was confirmed a second
time by a bishop, such a repetition must be forbidden." Therefore a
character is imprinted in Confirmation.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 63, A. 2), a character is a
spiritual power ordained to certain sacred actions. Now it has been
said above (A. 1; Q. 65, A. 1) that, just as Baptism is a spiritual
regeneration unto Christian life, so also is Confirmation a certain
spiritual growth bringing man to perfect spiritual age. But it is
evident, from a comparison with the life of the body, that the action
which is proper to man immediately after birth, is different from the
action which is proper to him when he has come to perfect age. And
therefore by the sacrament of Confirmation man is given a spiritual
power in respect of sacred actions other than those in respect of
which he receives power in Baptism. For in Baptism he receives power
to do those things which pertain to his own salvation, forasmuch as
he lives to himself: whereas in Confirmation he receives power to do
those things which pertain to the spiritual combat with the enemies
of the Faith. This is evident from the example of the apostles, who,
before they received the fulness of the Holy Ghost, were in the
"upper room . . . persevering . . . in prayer" (Acts 1:13, 14);
whereas afterwards they went out and feared not to confess their
faith in public, even in the face of the enemies of the Christian
Faith. And therefore it is evident that a character is imprinted in
the sacrament of Confirmation.

Reply Obj. 1: All have to wage the spiritual combat with our
invisible enemies. But to fight against visible foes, viz. against
the persecutors of the Faith, by confessing Christ's name, belongs to
the confirmed, who have already come spiritually to the age of
virility, according to 1 John 2:14: "I write unto you, young men,
because you are strong, and the word of God abideth in you, and you
have overcome the wicked one." And therefore the character of
Confirmation is a distinctive sign, not between unbelievers and
believers, but between those who are grown up spiritually and those
of whom it is written: "As new-born babes" (1 Pet. 2:2).

Reply Obj. 2: All the sacraments are protestations of faith.
Therefore just as he who is baptized receives the power of testifying
to his faith by receiving the other sacraments; so he who is
confirmed receives the power of publicly confessing his faith by
words, as it were _ex officio._

Reply Obj. 3: The sacraments of the Old Law are called "justice of
the flesh" (Heb. 9:10) because, to wit, they wrought nothing
inwardly. Consequently in circumcision a character was imprinted in
the body only, but not in the soul. But in Confirmation, since it is
a sacrament of the New Law, a spiritual character is imprinted at the
same time, together with the bodily character.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 6]

Whether the Character of Confirmation Presupposes of Necessity, the
Baptismal Character?

Objection 1: It seems that the character of Confirmation does not
presuppose, of necessity, the baptismal character. For the sacrament
of Confirmation is ordained to the public confession of the Faith of
Christ. But many, even before Baptism, have publicly confessed the
Faith of Christ by shedding their blood for the Faith. Therefore the
character of Confirmation does not presuppose the baptismal character.

Obj. 2: Further, it is not related of the apostles that they were
baptized; especially, since it is written (John 4:2) that Christ
"Himself did not baptize, but His disciples." Yet afterwards they
were confirmed by the coming of the Holy Ghost. Therefore, in like
manner, others can be confirmed before being baptized.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Acts 10:44-48) that "while Peter was
yet speaking . . . the Holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the
word . . . and [Vulg.: 'for'] they heard them speaking with tongues":
and afterwards "he commanded them to be baptized." Therefore others
with equal reason can be confirmed before being baptized.

_On the contrary,_ Rabanus says (De Instit. Cleric. i): "Lastly the
Paraclete is given to the baptized by the imposition of the high
priest's hands, in order that the baptized may be strengthened by the
Holy Ghost so as to publish his faith."

_I answer that,_ The character of Confirmation, of necessity supposes
the baptismal character: so that, in effect, if one who is not
baptized were to be confirmed, he would receive nothing, but would
have to be confirmed again after receiving Baptism. The reason of
this is that, Confirmation is to Baptism as growth to birth, as is
evident from what has been said above (A. 1; Q. 65, A. 1). Now it is
clear that no one can be brought to perfect age unless he be first
born: and in like manner, unless a man be first baptized, he cannot
receive the sacrament of Confirmation.

Reply Obj. 1: The Divine power is not confined to the sacraments.
Hence man can receive spiritual strength to confess the Faith of
Christ publicly, without receiving the sacrament of Confirmation:
just as he can also receive remission of sins without Baptism. Yet,
just as none receive the effect of Baptism without the desire of
Baptism; so none receive the effect of Confirmation, without the
desire of Confirmation. And man can have this even before receiving
Baptism.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (Ep. cclxv), from our Lord's words,
"'He that is washed, needeth not but to wash his feet' (John 13:10),
we gather that Peter and Christ's other disciples had been baptized,
either with John's Baptism, as some think; or with Christ's, which is
more credible. For He did not refuse to administer Baptism, so as to
have servants by whom to baptize others."

Reply Obj. 3: Those who heard the preaching of Peter received the
effect of Confirmation miraculously: but not the sacrament of
Confirmation. Now it has been stated (ad 1) that the effect of
Confirmation can be bestowed on man before Baptism, whereas the
sacrament cannot. For just as the effect of Confirmation, which is
spiritual strength, presupposes the effect of Baptism, which is
justification, so the sacrament of Confirmation presupposes the
sacrament of Baptism.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 7]

Whether Sanctifying Grace Is Bestowed in This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that sanctifying grace is not bestowed in this
sacrament. For sanctifying grace is ordained against sin. But this
sacrament, as stated above (A. 6) is given only to the baptized, who
are cleansed from sin. Therefore sanctifying grace is not bestowed in
this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, sinners especially need sanctifying grace, by which
alone can they be justified. If, therefore, sanctifying grace is
bestowed in this sacrament, it seems that it should be given to those
who are in sin. And yet this is not true.

Obj. 3: Further, there can only be one species of sanctifying grace,
since it is ordained to one effect. But two forms of the same species
cannot be in the same subject. Since, therefore, man receives
sanctifying grace in Baptism, it seems that sanctifying grace is not
bestowed in Confirmation, which is given to none but the baptized.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Melchiades says (Ep. ad Episc. Hispan.): "The
Holy Ghost bestows at the font the fulness of innocence; but in
Confirmation He confers an increase of grace."

_I answer that,_ In this sacrament, as stated above (AA. 1, 4), the
Holy Ghost is given to the baptized for strength: just as He was
given to the apostles on the day of Pentecost, as we read in Acts 2;
and just as He was given to the baptized by the imposition of the
apostles' hands, as related in Acts 8:17. Now it has been proved in
the First Part (Q. 43, A. 3) that the Holy Ghost is not sent or given
except with sanctifying grace. Consequently it is evident that
sanctifying grace is bestowed in this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: Sanctifying grace does indeed take away sin; but it has
other effects also, because it suffices to carry man through every
step as far as eternal life. Hence to Paul was it said (2 Cor. 12:9):
"My grace is sufficient for thee": and he says of himself (1 Cor.
15:10): "By the grace of God I am what I am." Therefore sanctifying
grace is given not only for the remission of sin, but also for growth
and stability in righteousness. And thus is it bestowed in this
sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: Further, as appears from its very name, this sacrament
is given in order "to confirm" what it finds already there. And
consequently it should not be given to those who are not in a state
of grace. For this reason, just as it is not given to the unbaptized,
so neither should it be given to the adult sinners, except they be
restored by Penance. Wherefore was it decreed in the Council of
Orleans (Can. iii) that "men should come to Confirmation fasting; and
should be admonished to confess their sins first, so that being
cleansed they may be able to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." And
then this sacrament perfects the effects of Penance, as of Baptism:
because by the grace which he has received in this sacrament, the
penitent will obtain fuller remission of his sin. And if any adult
approach, being in a state of sin of which he is not conscious or for
which he is not perfectly contrite, he will receive the remission of
his sins through the grace bestowed in this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 62, A. 2), the sacramental grace
adds to the sanctifying grace taken in its wide sense, something that
produces a special effect, and to which the sacrament is ordained.
If, then, we consider, in its wide sense, the grace bestowed in this
sacrament, it does not differ from that bestowed in Baptism, but
increases what was already there. On the other hand, if we consider
it as to that which is added over and above, then one differs in
species from the other.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 8]

Whether This Sacrament Should Be Given to All?

Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament should not be given to all.
For this sacrament is given in order to confer a certain excellence,
as stated above (A. 11, ad 2). But all are not suited for that which
belongs to excellence. Therefore this sacrament should not be given
to all.

Obj. 2: Further, by this sacrament man advances spiritually to
perfect age. But perfect age is inconsistent with childhood.
Therefore at least it should not be given to children.

Obj. 3: Further, as Pope Melchiades says (Ep. ad Episc. Hispan.)
"after Baptism we are strengthened for the combat." But women are
incompetent to combat, by reason of the frailty of their sex.
Therefore neither should women receive this sacrament.

Obj. 4: Further, Pope Melchiades says (Ep. ad Episc. Hispan.):
"Although the benefit of Regeneration suffices for those who are on
the point of death, yet the graces of Confirmation are necessary for
those who are to conquer. Confirmation arms and strengthens those to
whom the struggles and combats of this world are reserved. And he who
comes to die, having kept unsullied the innocence he acquired in
Baptism, is confirmed by death; for after death he can sin no more."
Therefore this sacrament should not be given to those who are on the
point of death: and so it should not be given to all.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Acts 2:2) that the Holy Ghost in
coming, "filled the whole house," whereby the Church is signified;
and afterwards it is added that "they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost." But this sacrament is given that we may receive that fulness.
Therefore it should be given to all who belong to the Church.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), man is spiritually advanced
by this sacrament to perfect age. Now the intention of nature is that
everyone born corporally, should come to perfect age: yet this is
sometimes hindered by reason of the corruptibility of the body, which
is forestalled by death. But much more is it God's intention to bring
all things to perfection, since nature shares in this intention
inasmuch as it reflects Him: hence it is written (Deut. 32:4): "The
works of God are perfect." Now the soul, to which spiritual birth and
perfect spiritual age belong, is immortal; and just as it can in old
age attain to spiritual birth, so can it attain to perfect
(spiritual) age in youth or childhood; because the various ages of
the body do not affect the soul. Therefore this sacrament should be
given to all.

Reply Obj. 1: This sacrament is given in order to confer a certain
excellence, not indeed, like the sacrament of order, of one man over
another, but of man in regard to himself: thus the same man, when
arrived at maturity, excels himself as he was when a boy.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above, the age of the body does not affect
the soul. Consequently even in childhood man can attain to the
perfection of spiritual age, of which it is written (Wis. 4:8):
"Venerable old age is not that of long time, nor counted by the
number of years." And hence it is that many children, by reason of
the strength of the Holy Ghost which they had received, fought
bravely for Christ even to the shedding of their blood.

Reply Obj. 3: As Chrysostom says (Hom. i De Machab.), "in earthly
contests fitness of age, physique and rank are required; and
consequently slaves, women, old men, and boys are debarred from
taking part therein. But in the heavenly combats, the Stadium is open
equally to all, to every age, and to either sex." Again, he says
(Hom. de Militia Spirit.): "In God's eyes even women fight, for many
a woman has waged the spiritual warfare with the courage of a man.
For some have rivaled men in the courage with which they have
suffered martyrdom; and some indeed have shown themselves stronger
than men." Therefore this sacrament should be given to women.

Reply Obj. 4: As we have already observed, the soul, to which
spiritual age belongs, is immortal. Wherefore this sacrament should
be given to those on the point of death, that they may be seen to be
perfect at the resurrection, according to Eph. 4:13: "Until we all
meet into the unity of faith . . . unto the measure of the age of the
fulness of Christ." And hence Hugh of St. Victor says (De Sacram.
ii), "It would be altogether hazardous, if anyone happened to go
forth from this life without being confirmed": not that such a one
would be lost, except perhaps through contempt; but that this would
be detrimental to his perfection. And therefore even children dying
after Confirmation obtain greater glory, just as here below they
receive more grace. The passage quoted is to be taken in the sense
that, with regard to the dangers of the present combat, those who are
on the point of death do not need this sacrament.
_______________________

NINTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 9]

Whether This Sacrament Should Be Given to Man on the Forehead?

Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament should not be given to man
on the forehead. For this sacrament perfects Baptism, as stated above
(Q. 65, AA. 3, 4). But the sacrament of Baptism is given to man over
his whole body. Therefore this sacrament should not be given on the
forehead only.

Obj. 2: Further, this sacrament is given for spiritual strength, as
stated above (AA. 1, 2, 4). But spiritual strength is situated
principally in the heart. Therefore this sacrament should be given
over the heart rather than on the forehead.

Obj. 3: Further, this sacrament is given to man that he may freely
confess the faith of Christ. But "with the mouth, confession is made
unto salvation," according to Rom. 10:10. Therefore this sacrament
should be given about the mouth rather than on the forehead.

_On the contrary,_ Rabanus says (De Instit. Cleric. i): "The baptized
is signed by the priest with chrism on the top of the head, but by
the bishop on the forehead."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (AA. 1, 4), in this sacrament man
receives the Holy Ghost for strength in the spiritual combat, that he
may bravely confess the Faith of Christ even in face of the enemies
of that Faith. Wherefore he is fittingly signed with the sign of the
cross on the forehead, with chrism, for two reasons. First, because
he is signed with the sign of the cross, as a soldier with the sign
of his leader, which should be evident and manifest. Now, the
forehead, which is hardly ever covered, is the most conspicuous part
of the human body. Wherefore the confirmed is anointed with chrism on
the forehead, that he may show publicly that he is a Christian: thus
too the apostles after receiving the Holy Ghost showed themselves in
public, whereas before they remained hidden in the upper room.

Secondly, because man is hindered from freely confessing Christ's
name, by two things--by fear and by shame. Now both these things
betray themselves principally on the forehead on account of the
proximity of the imagination, and because the (vital) spirits mount
directly from the heart to the forehead: hence "those who are
ashamed, blush, and those who are afraid, pale" (Ethic. iv). And
therefore man is signed with chrism, that neither fear nor shame may
hinder him from confessing the name of Christ.

Reply Obj. 1: By baptism we are regenerated unto spiritual life,
which belongs to the whole man. But in Confirmation we are
strengthened for the combat; the sign of which should be borne on the
forehead, as in a conspicuous place.

Reply Obj. 2: The principle of fortitude is in the heart, but its
sign appears on the forehead: wherefore it is written (Ezech. 3:8):
"Behold I have made . . . thy forehead harder than their foreheads."
Hence the sacrament of the Eucharist, whereby man is confirmed in
himself, belongs to the heart, according to Ps. 103:15: "That bread
may strengthen man's heart." But the sacrament of Confirmation is
required as a sign of fortitude against others; and for this reason
it is given on the forehead.

Reply Obj. 3: This sacrament is given that we may confess freely: but
not that we may confess simply, for this is also the effect of
Baptism. And therefore it should not be given on the mouth, but on
the forehead, where appear the signs of those passions which hinder
free confession.
_______________________

TENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 10]

Whether He Who Is Confirmed Needs One to Stand* for Him?
[*Literally, "to hold him"]

Objection 1: It seems that he who is confirmed needs no one to stand
for him. For this sacrament is given not only to children but also to
adults. But adults can stand for themselves. Therefore it is absurd
that someone else should stand for them.

Obj. 2: Further, he that belongs already to the Church, has free
access to the prince of the Church, i.e. the bishop. But this
sacrament, as stated above (A. 6), is given only to one that is
baptized, who is already a member of the Church. Therefore it seems
that he should not be brought by another to the bishop in order to
receive this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, this sacrament is given for spiritual strength,
which has more vigor in men than in women, according to Prov. 31:10:
"Who shall find a valiant woman?" Therefore at least a woman should
not stand for a man in confirmation.

_On the contrary,_ Are the following words of Pope Innocent, which
are to be found in the Decretals (XXX, Q. 4): "If anyone raise the
children of another's marriage from the sacred font, or stand for
them in Confirmation," etc. Therefore, just as someone is required as
sponsor of one who is baptized, so is someone required to stand for
him who is to be confirmed.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (AA. 1, 4, 9), this sacrament is
given to man for strength in the spiritual combat. Now, just as one
newly born requires someone to teach him things pertaining to
ordinary conduct, according to Heb. 12:9: "We have had fathers of our
flesh, for instructors, and we obeyed [Vulg.: 'reverenced']" them; so
they who are chosen for the fight need instructors by whom they are
informed of things concerning the conduct of the battle, and hence in
earthly wars, generals and captains are appointed to the command of
the others. For this reason he also who receives this sacrament, has
someone to stand for him, who, as it were, has to instruct him
concerning the fight.

Likewise, since this sacrament bestows on man the perfection of
spiritual age, as stated above (AA. 2, 5), therefore he who
approaches this sacrament is upheld by another, as being spiritually
a weakling and a child.

Reply Obj. 1: Although he who is confirmed, be adult in body,
nevertheless he is not yet spiritually adult.

Reply Obj. 2: Though he who is baptized is made a member of the
Church, nevertheless he is not yet enrolled as a Christian soldier.
And therefore he is brought to the bishop, as to the commander of the
army, by one who is already enrolled as a Christian soldier. For one
who is not yet confirmed should not stand for another in Confirmation.

Reply Obj. 3: According to Col. 3 *(Gal. 3:28), "in Christ Jesus
there is neither male nor female." Consequently it matters not
whether a man or a woman stand for one who is to be confirmed.
_______________________

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 11]

Whether Only a Bishop Can Confer This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that not only a bishop can confer this
sacrament. For Gregory (Regist. iv), writing to Bishop Januarius,
says: "We hear that some were scandalized because we forbade priests
to anoint with chrism those who have been baptized. Yet in doing this
we followed the ancient custom of our Church: but if this trouble
some so very much we permit priests, where no bishop is to be had, to
anoint the baptized on the forehead with chrism." But that which is
essential to the sacraments should not be changed for the purpose of
avoiding scandal. Therefore it seems that it is not essential to this
sacrament that it be conferred by a bishop.

Obj. 2: Further, the sacrament of Baptism seems to be more
efficacious than the sacrament of Confirmation: since it bestows full
remission of sins, both as to guilt and as to punishment, whereas
this sacrament does not. But a simple priest, in virtue of his
office, can give the sacrament of Baptism: and in a case of necessity
anyone, even without orders, can baptize. Therefore it is not
essential to this sacrament that it be conferred by a bishop.

Obj. 3: Further, the top of the head, where according to medical men
the reason is situated (i.e. the "particular reason," which is called
the "cogitative faculty"), is more noble than the forehead, which is
the site of the imagination. But a simple priest can anoint the
baptized with chrism on the top of the head. Therefore much more can
he anoint them with chrism on the forehead, which belongs to this
sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Eusebius (Ep. iii ad Ep. Tusc.) says: "The
sacrament of the imposition of the hand should be held in great
veneration, and can be given by none but the high priests. Nor is it
related or known to have been conferred in apostolic times by others
than the apostles themselves; nor can it ever be either licitly or
validly performed by others than those who stand in their place. And
if anyone presume to do otherwise, it must be considered null and
void; nor will such a thing ever be counted among the sacraments of
the Church." Therefore it is essential to this sacrament, which is
called "the sacrament of the imposition of the hand," that it be
given by a bishop.

_I answer that,_ In every work the final completion is reserved to
the supreme act or power; thus the preparation of the matter belongs
to the lower craftsmen, the higher gives the form, but the highest of
all is he to whom pertains the use, which is the end of things made
by art; thus also the letter which is written by the clerk, is signed
by his employer. Now the faithful of Christ are a Divine work,
according to 1 Cor. 3:9: "You are God's building"; and they are also
"an epistle," as it were, "written with the Spirit of God," according
to 2 Cor. 3:2, 3. And this sacrament of Confirmation is, as it were,
the final completion of the sacrament of Baptism; in the sense that
by Baptism man is built up into a spiritual dwelling, and is written
like a spiritual letter; whereas by the sacrament of Confirmation,
like a house already built, he is consecrated as a temple of the Holy
Ghost, and as a letter already written, is signed with the sign of
the cross. Therefore the conferring of this sacrament is reserved to
bishops, who possess supreme power in the Church: just as in the
primitive Church, the fulness of the Holy Ghost was given by the
apostles, in whose place the bishops stand (Acts 8). Hence Pope Urban
I says: "All the faithful should, after Baptism, receive the Holy
Ghost by the imposition of the bishop's hand, that they may become
perfect Christians."

Reply Obj. 1: The Pope has the plenitude of power in the Church, in
virtue of which he can commit to certain lower orders things that
belong to the higher orders: thus he allows priests to confer minor
orders, which belong to the episcopal power. And in virtue of this
fulness of power the Pope, Blessed Gregory, allowed simple priests to
confer this sacrament, so long as the scandal was ended.

Reply Obj. 2: The sacrament of Baptism is more efficacious than this
sacrament as to the removal of evil, since it is a spiritual birth,
that consists in change from non-being to being. But this sacrament
is more efficacious for progress in good; since it is a spiritual
growth from imperfect being to perfect being. And hence this
sacrament is committed to a more worthy minister.

Reply Obj. 3: As Rabanus says (De Instit. Cleric. i), "the baptized
is signed by the priest with chrism on the top of the head, but by
the bishop on the forehead; that the former unction may symbolize the
descent of the Holy Ghost on him, in order to consecrate a dwelling
to God: and that the second also may teach us that the sevenfold
grace of the same Holy Ghost descends on man with all fulness of
sanctity, knowledge and virtue." Hence this unction is reserved to
bishops, not on account of its being applied to a more worthy part of
the body, but by reason of its having a more powerful effect.
_______________________

TWELFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 72, Art. 12]

Whether the Rite of This Sacrament Is Appropriate?

Objection 1: It seems that the rite of this sacrament is not
appropriate. For the sacrament of Baptism is of greater necessity
than this, as stated above (A. 2, ad 4; Q. 65, AA. 3, 4). But certain
seasons are fixed for Baptism, viz. Easter and Pentecost. Therefore
some fixed time of the year should be chosen for this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, just as this sacrament requires devotion both in the
giver and in the receiver, so also does the sacrament of Baptism. But
in the sacrament of Baptism it is not necessary that it should be
received or given fasting. Therefore it seems unfitting for the
Council of Orleans to declare that "those who come to Confirmation
should be fasting"; and the Council of Meaux, "that bishops should
not give the Holy Ghost with imposition of the hand except they be
fasting."

Obj. 3: Further, chrism is a sign of the fulness of the Holy Ghost,
as stated above (A. 2). But the fulness of the Holy Ghost was given
to Christ's faithful on the day of Pentecost, as related in Acts 2:1.
Therefore the chrism should be mixed and blessed on the day of
Pentecost rather than on Maundy Thursday.

_On the contrary,_ Is the use of the Church, who is governed by the
Holy Ghost.

_I answer that,_ Our Lord promised His faithful (Matt. 18:20) saying:
"Where there are two or three gathered together in My name, there am
I in the midst of them." And therefore we must hold firmly that the
Church's ordinations are directed by the wisdom of Christ. And for
this reason we must look upon it as certain that the rite observed by
the Church, in this and the other sacraments, is appropriate.

Reply Obj. 1: As Pope Melchiades says (Ep. ad Epis. Hispan.), "these
two sacraments," viz. Baptism and Confirmation, "are so closely
connected that they can nowise be separated save by death
intervening, nor can one be duly celebrated without the other."
Consequently the same seasons are fixed for the solemn celebration of
Baptism and of this sacrament. But since this sacrament is given only
by bishops, who are not always present where priests are baptizing,
it was necessary, as regards the common use, to defer the sacrament
of Confirmation to other seasons also.

Reply Obj. 2: The sick and those in danger of death are exempt from
this prohibition, as we read in the decree of the Council of Meaux.
And therefore, on account of the multitude of the faithful, and on
account of imminent dangers, it is allowed for this sacrament, which
can be given by none but a bishop, to be given or received even by
those who are not fasting: since one bishop, especially in a large
diocese, would not suffice to confirm all, if he were confined to
certain times. But where it can be done conveniently, it is more
becoming that both giver and receiver should be fasting.

Reply Obj. 3: According to the acts of the Council of Pope Martin,
"it was lawful at all times to prepare the chrism." But since solemn
Baptism, for which chrism has to be used, is celebrated on Easter
Eve, it was rightly decreed, that chrism should be consecrated by the
bishop two days beforehand, that it may be sent to the various parts
of the diocese. Moreover, this day is sufficiently appropriate to the
blessing of sacramental matter, since thereon was the Eucharist
instituted, to which, in a certain way, all the other sacraments are
ordained, as stated above (Q. 65, A. 3).
_______________________

QUESTION 73

OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE EUCHARIST
(In Six Articles)

We have now to consider the sacrament of the Eucharist; and first of
all we treat of the sacrament itself; secondly, of its matter;
thirdly, of its form; fourthly, of its effects; fifthly, of the
recipients of this sacrament; sixthly, of the minister; seventhly, of
the rite.

Under the first heading there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the Eucharist is a sacrament?

(2) Whether it is one or several sacraments?

(3) Whether it is necessary for salvation?

(4) Its names;

(5) Its institution;

(6) Its figures.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 73, Art. 1]

Whether the Eucharist Is a Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the Eucharist is not a sacrament. For two
sacraments ought not to be ordained for the same end, because every
sacrament is efficacious in producing its effect. Therefore, since
both Confirmation and the Eucharist are ordained for perfection, as
Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iv), it seems that the Eucharist is not a
sacrament, since Confirmation is one, as stated above (Q. 65, A. 1;
Q. 72, A. 1).

Obj. 2: Further, in every sacrament of the New Law, that which comes
visibly under our senses causes the invisible effect of the
sacrament, just as cleansing with water causes the baptismal
character and spiritual cleansing, as stated above (Q. 63, A. 6; Q.
66, AA. 1, 3, 7). But the species of bread and wine, which are the
objects of our senses in this sacrament, neither produce Christ's
true body, which is both reality and sacrament, nor His mystical
body, which is the reality only in the Eucharist. Therefore, it seems
that the Eucharist is not a sacrament of the New Law.

Obj. 3: Further, sacraments of the New Law, as having matter, are
perfected by the use of the matter, as Baptism is by ablution, and
Confirmation by signing with chrism. If, then, the Eucharist be a
sacrament, it would be perfected by the use of the matter, and not by
its consecration. But this is manifestly false, because the words
spoken in the consecration of the matter are the form of this
sacrament, as will be shown later on (Q. 78, A. 1). Therefore the
Eucharist is not a sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ It is said in the Collect [*Postcommunion "pro
vivis et defunctis"]: "May this Thy Sacrament not make us deserving
of punishment."

_I answer that,_ The Church's sacraments are ordained for helping man
in the spiritual life. But the spiritual life is analogous to the
corporeal, since corporeal things bear a resemblance to spiritual.
Now it is clear that just as generation is required for corporeal
life, since thereby man receives life; and growth, whereby man is
brought to maturity: so likewise food is required for the
preservation of life. Consequently, just as for the spiritual life
there had to be Baptism, which is spiritual generation; and
Confirmation, which is spiritual growth: so there needed to be the
sacrament of the Eucharist, which is spiritual food.

Reply Obj. 1: Perfection is twofold. The first lies within man
himself; and he attains it by growth: such perfection belongs to
Confirmation. The other is the perfection which comes to man from the
addition of food, or clothing, or something of the kind; and such is
the perfection befitting the Eucharist, which is the spiritual
refreshment.

Reply Obj. 2: The water of Baptism does not cause any spiritual
effect by reason of the water, but by reason of the power of the Holy
Ghost, which power is in the water. Hence on John 5:4, "An angel of
the Lord at certain times," etc., Chrysostom observes: "The water
does not act simply as such upon the baptized, but when it receives
the grace of the Holy Ghost, then it looses all sins." But the true
body of Christ bears the same relation to the species of the bread
and wine, as the power of the Holy Ghost does to the water of
Baptism: hence the species of the bread and wine produce no effect
except from the virtue of Christ's true body.

Reply Obj. 3: A sacrament is so termed because it contains something
sacred. Now a thing can be styled sacred from two causes; either
absolutely, or in relation to something else. The difference between
the Eucharist and other sacraments having sensible matter is that
whereas the Eucharist contains something which is sacred absolutely,
namely, Christ's own body; the baptismal water contains something
which is sacred in relation to something else, namely, the
sanctifying power: and the same holds good of chrism and such like.
Consequently, the sacrament of the Eucharist is completed in the very
consecration of the matter, whereas the other sacraments are
completed in the application of the matter for the sanctifying of the
individual. And from this follows another difference. For, in the
sacrament of the Eucharist, what is both reality and sacrament is in
the matter itself, but what is reality only, namely, the grace
bestowed, is in the recipient; whereas in Baptism both are in the
recipient, namely, the character, which is both reality and
sacrament, and the grace of pardon of sins, which is reality only.
And the same holds good of the other sacraments.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 73, Art. 2]

Whether the Eucharist Is One Sacrament or Several?

Objection 1: It seems that the Eucharist is not one sacrament but
several, because it is said in the Collect [*Postcommunion "pro vivis
et defunctis"]: "May the sacraments which we have received purify us,
O Lord": and this is said on account of our receiving the Eucharist.
Consequently the Eucharist is not one sacrament but several.

Obj. 2: Further, it is impossible for genera to be multiplied without
the species being multiplied: thus it is impossible for one man to be
many animals. But, as stated above (Q. 60, A. 1), sign is the genus
of sacrament. Since, then, there are more signs than one, to wit,
bread and wine, it seems to follow that here must be more sacraments
than one.

Obj. 3: Further, this sacrament is perfected in the consecration of
the matter, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3). But in this sacrament there
is a double consecration of the matter. Therefore, it is a twofold
sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:17): "For we, being
many, are one bread, one body, all that partake of one bread": from
which it is clear that the Eucharist is the sacrament of the Church's
unity. But a sacrament bears the likeness of the reality whereof it
is the sacrament. Therefore the Eucharist is one sacrament.

_I answer that,_ As stated in _Metaph._ v, a thing is said to be one,
not only from being indivisible, or continuous, but also when it is
complete; thus we speak of one house, and one man. A thing is one in
perfection, when it is complete through the presence of all that is
needed for its end; as a man is complete by having all the members
required for the operation of his soul, and a house by having all the
parts needful for dwelling therein. And so this sacrament is said to
be one. Because it is ordained for spiritual refreshment, which is
conformed to corporeal refreshment. Now there are two things required
for corporeal refreshment, namely, food, which is dry sustenance, and
drink, which is wet sustenance. Consequently, two things concur for
the integrity of this sacrament, to wit, spiritual food and spiritual
drink, according to John: "My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood is
drink indeed." Therefore, this sacrament is materially many, but
formally and perfectively one.

Reply Obj. 1: The same Collect at first employs the plural: "May the
sacraments which we have received purify us"; and afterwards the
singular number: "May this sacrament of Thine not make us worthy of
punishment": so as to show that this sacrament is in a measure
several, yet simply one.

Reply Obj. 2: The bread and wine are materially several signs, yet
formally and perfectively one, inasmuch as one refreshment is
prepared therefrom.

Reply Obj. 3: From the double consecration of the matter no more can
be gathered than that the sacrament is several materially, as stated
above.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 73, Art. 3]

Whether the Eucharist Is Necessary for Salvation?

Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament is necessary for salvation.
For our Lord said (John 6:54): "Except you eat the flesh of the Son
of Man, and drink His blood, you shall not have life in you." But
Christ's flesh is eaten and His blood drunk in this sacrament.
Therefore, without this sacrament man cannot have the health of
spiritual life.

Obj. 2: Further, this sacrament is a kind of spiritual food. But
bodily food is requisite for bodily health. Therefore, also is this
sacrament, for spiritual health.

Obj. 3: Further, as Baptism is the sacrament of our Lord's Passion,
without which there is no salvation, so also is the Eucharist. For
the Apostle says (1 Cor. 11:26): "For as often as you shall eat this
bread, and drink the chalice, you shall show the death of the Lord,
until He come." Consequently, as Baptism is necessary for salvation,
so also is this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine writes (Ad Bonifac. contra Pelag. I):
"Nor are you to suppose that children cannot possess life, who are
deprived of the body and blood of Christ."

_I answer that,_ Two things have to be considered in this sacrament,
namely, the sacrament itself, and what is contained in it. Now it was
stated above (A. 1, Obj. 2) that the reality of the sacrament is the
unity of the mystical body, without which there can be no salvation;
for there is no entering into salvation outside the Church, just as
in the time of the deluge there was none outside the Ark, which
denotes the Church, according to 1 Pet. 3:20, 21. And it has been
said above (Q. 68, A. 2), that before receiving a sacrament, the
reality of the sacrament can be had through the very desire of
receiving the sacrament. Accordingly, before actual reception of this
sacrament, a man can obtain salvation through the desire of receiving
it, just as he can before Baptism through the desire of Baptism, as
stated above (Q. 68, A. 2). Yet there is a difference in two
respects. First of all, because Baptism is the beginning of the
spiritual life, and the door of the sacraments; whereas the Eucharist
is, as it were, the consummation of the spiritual life, and the end
of all the sacraments, as was observed above (Q. 63, A. 6): for by
the hallowings of all the sacraments preparation is made for
receiving or consecrating the Eucharist. Consequently, the reception
of Baptism is necessary for starting the spiritual life, while the
receiving of the Eucharist is requisite for its consummation; by
partaking not indeed actually, but in desire, as an end is possessed
in desire and intention. Another difference is because by Baptism a
man is ordained to the Eucharist, and therefore from the fact of
children being baptized, they are destined by the Church to the
Eucharist; and just as they believe through the Church's faith, so
they desire the Eucharist through the Church's intention, and, as a
result, receive its reality. But they are not disposed for Baptism by
any previous sacrament, and consequently before receiving Baptism, in
no way have they Baptism in desire; but adults alone have:
consequently, they cannot have the reality of the sacrament without
receiving the sacrament itself. Therefore this sacrament is not
necessary for salvation in the same way as Baptism is.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says, explaining John 6:54, "This food and
this drink," namely, of His flesh and blood: "He would have us
understand the fellowship of His body and members, which is the
Church in His predestinated, and called, and justified, and
glorified, His holy and believing ones." Hence, as he says in his
Epistle to Boniface (Pseudo-Beda, in 1 Cor. 10:17): "No one should
entertain the slightest doubt, that then every one of the faithful
becomes a partaker of the body and blood of Christ, when in Baptism
he is made a member of Christ's body; nor is he deprived of his share
in that body and chalice even though he depart from this world in the
unity of Christ's body, before he eats that bread and drinks of that
chalice."

Reply Obj. 2: The difference between corporeal and spiritual food
lies in this, that the former is changed into the substance of the
person nourished, and consequently it cannot avail for supporting
life except it be partaken of; but spiritual food changes man into
itself, according to that saying of Augustine (Confess. vii), that he
heard the voice of Christ as it were saying to him: "Nor shalt thou
change Me into thyself, as food of thy flesh, but thou shalt be
changed into Me." But one can be changed into Christ, and be
incorporated in Him by mental desire, even without receiving this
sacrament. And consequently the comparison does not hold.

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism is the sacrament of Christ's death and Passion,
according as a man is born anew in Christ in virtue of His Passion;
but the Eucharist is the sacrament of Christ's Passion according as a
man is made perfect in union with Christ Who suffered. Hence, as
Baptism is called the sacrament of Faith, which is the foundation of
the spiritual life, so the Eucharist is termed the sacrament of
Charity, which is "the bond of perfection" (Col. 3:14).
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 73, Art. 4]

Whether This Sacrament Is Suitably Called by Various Names?

Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament is not suitably called by
various names. For names should correspond with things. But this
sacrament is one, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore, it ought not to
be called by various names.

Obj. 2: Further, a species is not properly denominated by what is
common to the whole genus. But the Eucharist is a sacrament of the
New Law; and it is common to all the sacraments for grace to be
conferred by them, which the name "Eucharist" denotes, for it is the
same thing as "good grace." Furthermore, all the sacraments bring us
help on our journey through this present life, which is the notion
conveyed by "Viaticum." Again something sacred is done in all the
sacraments, which belongs to the notion of "Sacrifice"; and the
faithful intercommunicate through all the sacraments, which this
Greek word _Synaxis_ and the Latin _Communio_ express. Therefore,
these names are not suitably adapted to this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, a host [*From Latin _hostia,_ a victim] seems to be
the same as a sacrifice. Therefore, as it is not properly called a
sacrifice, so neither is it properly termed a "Host."

_On the contrary,_ is the use of these expressions by the faithful.

_I answer that,_ This sacrament has a threefold significance. One
with regard to the past, inasmuch as it is commemorative of our
Lord's Passion, which was a true sacrifice, as stated above (Q. 48,
A. 3), and in this respect it is called a "Sacrifice."

With regard to the present it has another meaning, namely, that of
Ecclesiastical unity, in which men are aggregated through this
Sacrament; and in this respect it is called "Communion" or _Synaxis_.
For Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv) that "it is called Communion
because we communicate with Christ through it, both because we
partake of His flesh and Godhead, and because we communicate with and
are united to one another through it."

With regard to the future it has a third meaning, inasmuch as this
sacrament foreshadows the Divine fruition, which shall come to pass
in heaven; and according to this it is called "Viaticum," because it
supplies the way of winning thither. And in this respect it is also
called the "Eucharist," that is, "good grace," because "the grace of
God is life everlasting" (Rom. 6:23); or because it really contains
Christ, Who is "full of grace."

In Greek, moreover, it is called _Metalepsis_, i.e. "Assumption,"
because, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iv), "we thereby assume the
Godhead of the Son."

Reply Obj. 1: There is nothing to hinder the same thing from being
called by several names, according to its various properties or
effects.

Reply Obj. 2: What is common to all the sacraments is attributed
antonomastically to this one on account of its excellence.

Reply Obj. 3: This sacrament is called a "Sacrifice" inasmuch as it
represents the Passion of Christ; but it is termed a "Host" inasmuch
as it contains Christ, Who is "a host (Douay: 'sacrifice') . . . of
sweetness" (Eph. 5:2).
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 73, Art. 5]

Whether the Institution of This Sacrament Was Appropriate?

Objection 1: It seems that the institution of this sacrament was not
appropriate, because as the Philosopher says (De Gener. ii): "We are
nourished by the things from whence we spring." But by Baptism, which
is spiritual regeneration, we receive our spiritual being, as
Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. ii). Therefore we are also nourished by
Baptism. Consequently there was no need to institute this sacrament
as spiritual nourishment.

Obj. 2: Further, men are united with Christ through this sacrament as
the members with the head. But Christ is the Head of all men, even of
those who have existed from the beginning of the world, as stated
above (Q. 8, AA. 3, 6). Therefore the institution of this sacrament
should not have been postponed till the Lord's supper.

Obj. 3: Further, this sacrament is called the memorial of our Lord's
Passion, according to Matt. 26 (Luke 22:19): "Do this for a
commemoration of Me." But a commemoration is of things past.
Therefore, this sacrament should not have been instituted before
Christ's Passion.

Obj. 4: Further, a man is prepared by Baptism for the Eucharist,
which ought to be given only to the baptized. But Baptism was
instituted by Christ after His Passion and Resurrection, as is
evident from Matt. 28:19. Therefore, this sacrament was not suitably
instituted before Christ's Passion.

_On the contrary,_ This sacrament was instituted by Christ, of Whom
it is said (Mk. 7:37) that "He did all things well."

_I answer that,_ This sacrament was appropriately instituted at the
supper, when Christ conversed with His disciples for the last time.
First of all, because of what is contained in the sacrament: for
Christ is Himself contained in the Eucharist sacramentally.
Consequently, when Christ was going to leave His disciples in His
proper species, He left Himself with them under the sacramental
species; as the Emperor's image is set up to be reverenced in his
absence. Hence Eusebius says: "Since He was going to withdraw His
assumed body from their eyes, and bear it away to the stars, it was
needful that on the day of the supper He should consecrate the
sacrament of His body and blood for our sakes, in order that what was
once offered up for our ransom should be fittingly worshiped in a
mystery."

Secondly, because without faith in the Passion there could never be
any salvation, according to Rom. 3:25: "Whom God hath proposed to be
a propitiation, through faith in His blood." It was necessary
accordingly that there should be at all times among men something to
show forth our Lord's Passion; the chief sacrament of which in the
old Law was the Paschal Lamb. Hence the Apostle says (1 Cor. 5:7):
"Christ our Pasch is sacrificed." But its successor under the New
Testament is the sacrament of the Eucharist, which is a remembrance
of the Passion now past, just as the other was figurative of the
Passion to come. And so it was fitting that when the hour of the
Passion was come, Christ should institute a new Sacrament after
celebrating the old, as Pope Leo I says (Serm. lviii).

Thirdly, because last words, chiefly such as are spoken by departing
friends, are committed most deeply to memory; since then especially
affection for friends is more enkindled, and the things which affect
us most are impressed the deepest in the soul. Consequently, since,
as Pope Alexander I says, "among sacrifices there can be none greater
than the body and blood of Christ, nor any more powerful oblation";
our Lord instituted this sacrament at His last parting with His
disciples, in order that it might be held in the greater veneration.
And this is what Augustine says (Respons. ad Januar. i): "In order to
commend more earnestly the death of this mystery, our Saviour willed
this last act to be fixed in the hearts and memories of the disciples
whom He was about to quit for the Passion."

Reply Obj. 1: We are nourished from the same things of which we are
made, but they do not come to us in the same way; for those out of
which we are made come to us through generation, while the same, as
nourishing us, come to us through being eaten. Hence, as we are
new-born in Christ through Baptism, so through the Eucharist we eat
Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: The Eucharist is the perfect sacrament of our Lord's
Passion, as containing Christ crucified; consequently it could not be
instituted before the Incarnation; but then there was room for only
such sacraments as were prefigurative of the Lord's Passion.

Reply Obj. 3: This sacrament was instituted during the supper, so as
in the future to be a memorial of our Lord's Passion as accomplished.
Hence He said expressively: "As often as ye shall do these things"
[*Cf. Canon of the Mass], speaking of the future.

Reply Obj. 4: The institution responds to the order of intention. But
the sacrament of the Eucharist, although after Baptism in the
receiving, is yet previous to it in intention; and therefore it
behooved to be instituted first. Or else it can be said that Baptism
was already instituted in Christ's Baptism; hence some were already
baptized with Christ's Baptism, as we read in John 3:22.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 73, Art. 6]

Whether the Paschal Lamb Was the Chief Figure of This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the Paschal Lamb was not the chief figure
of this sacrament, because (Ps. 109:4) Christ is called "a priest
according to the order of Melchisedech," since Melchisedech bore the
figure of Christ's sacrifice, in offering bread and wine. But the
expression of likeness causes one thing to be named from another.
Therefore, it seems that Melchisedech's offering was the _principal_
figure of this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, the passage of the Red Sea was a figure of Baptism,
according to 1 Cor. 10:2: "All . . . were baptized in the cloud and
in the sea." But the immolation of the Paschal Lamb was previous to
the passage of the Red Sea, and the Manna came after it, just as the
Eucharist follows Baptism. Therefore the Manna is a more expressive
figure of this sacrament than the Paschal Lamb.

Obj. 3: Further, the principal power of this sacrament is that it
brings us into the kingdom of heaven, being a kind of "viaticum." But
this was chiefly prefigured in the sacrament of expiation when the
"high-priest entered once a year into the Holy of Holies with blood,"
as the Apostle proves in Heb. 9. Consequently, it seems that that
sacrifice was a more significant figure of this sacrament than was
the Paschal Lamb.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 5:7, 8): "Christ our
Pasch is sacrificed; therefore let us feast . . . with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth."

_I answer that,_ We can consider three things in this sacrament:
namely, that which is sacrament only, and this is the bread and wine;
that which is both reality and sacrament, to wit, Christ's true body;
and lastly that which is reality only, namely, the effect of this
sacrament. Consequently, in relation to what is sacrament only, the
chief figure of this sacrament was the oblation of Melchisedech, who
offered up bread and wine. In relation to Christ crucified, Who is
contained in this sacrament, its figures were all the sacrifices of
the Old Testament, especially the sacrifice of expiation, which was
the most solemn of all. While with regard to its effect, the chief
figure was the Manna, "having in it the sweetness of every taste"
(Wis. 16:20), just as the grace of this sacrament refreshes the soul
in all respects.

The Paschal Lamb foreshadowed this sacrament in these three ways.
First of all, because it was eaten with unleavened loaves, according
to Ex. 12:8: "They shall eat flesh . . . and unleavened bread." As to
the second because it was immolated by the entire multitude of the
children of Israel on the fourteenth day of the moon; and this was a
figure of the Passion of Christ, Who is called the Lamb on account of
His innocence. As to the effect, because by the blood of the Paschal
Lamb the children of Israel were preserved from the destroying Angel,
and brought from the Egyptian captivity; and in this respect the
Paschal Lamb is the chief figure of this sacrament, because it
represents it in every respect.

From this the answer to the Objections is manifest.
_______________________

QUESTION 74

OF THE MATTER OF THIS SACRAMENT
(In Eight Articles)

We have now to consider the matter of this sacrament: and first of all
as to its species; secondly, the change of the bread and wine into the
body of Christ; thirdly, the manner in which Christ's body exists in
this sacrament; fourthly, the accidents of bread and wine which
continue in this sacrament.

Under the first heading there are eight points for inquiry:

(1) Whether bread and wine are the matter of this sacrament?

(2) Whether a determinate quantity of the same is required for the
matter of this sacrament?

(3) Whether the matter of this sacrament is wheaten bread?

(4) Whether it is unleavened or fermented bread?

(5) Whether the matter of this sacrament is wine from the grape?

(6) Whether water should be mixed with it?

(7) Whether water is of necessity for this sacrament?

(8) Of the quantity of the water added.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 1]

Whether the Matter of This Sacrament Is Bread and Wine?

Objection 1: It seems that the matter of this sacrament is not bread
and wine. Because this sacrament ought to represent Christ's Passion
more fully than did the sacraments of the Old Law. But the flesh of
animals, which was the matter of the sacraments under the Old Law,
shows forth Christ's Passion more fully than bread and wine.
Therefore the matter of this sacrament ought rather to be the flesh
of animals than bread and wine.

Obj. 2: Further, this sacrament is to be celebrated in every place.
But in many lands bread is not to be found, and in many places wine
is not to be found. Therefore bread and wine are not a suitable
matter for this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, this sacrament is for both hale and weak. But to
some weak persons wine is hurtful. Therefore it seems that wine ought
not to be the matter of this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Alexander I says (Ep. ad omnes orth. i): "In
oblations of the sacraments only bread and wine mixed with water are
to be offered."

_I answer that,_ Some have fallen into various errors about the
matter of this sacrament. Some, known as the Artotyrytae, as
Augustine says (De Haeres. xxviii), "offer bread and cheese in this
sacrament, contending that oblations were celebrated by men in the
first ages, from fruits of the earth and sheep." Others, called
Cataphrygae and Pepuziani, "are reputed to have made their
Eucharistic bread with infants' blood drawn from tiny punctures over
the entire body, and mixed with flour." Others, styled Aquarii, under
guise of sobriety, offer nothing but water in this sacrament.

Now all these and similar errors are excluded by the fact that Christ
instituted this sacrament under the species of bread and wine, as is
evident from Matt. 26. Consequently, bread and wine are the proper
matter of this sacrament. And the reasonableness of this is seen
first, in the use of this sacrament, which is eating: for, as water
is used in the sacrament of Baptism for the purpose of spiritual
cleansing, since bodily cleansing is commonly done with water; so
bread and wine, wherewith men are commonly fed, are employed in this
sacrament for the use of spiritual eating.

Secondly, in relation to Christ's Passion, in which the blood was
separated from the body. And therefore in this sacrament, which is
the memorial of our Lord's Passion, the bread is received apart as
the sacrament of the body, and the wine as the sacrament of the blood.

Thirdly, as to the effect, considered in each of the partakers. For,
as Ambrose (Mag. Sent. iv, D, xi) says on 1 Cor. 11:20, this
sacrament "avails for the defense of soul and body"; and therefore
"Christ's body is offered" under the species of bread "for the health
of the body, and the blood" under the species of wine "for the health
of the soul," according to Lev. 17:14: "The life of the animal
[Vulg.: 'of all flesh'] is in the blood."

Fourthly, as to the effect with regard to the whole Church, which is
made up of many believers, just "as bread is composed of many grains,
and wine flows from many grapes," as the gloss observes on 1 Cor.
10:17: "We being many are . . . one body," etc.

Reply Obj. 1: Although the flesh of slaughtered animals represents
the Passion more forcibly, nevertheless it is less suitable for the
common use of this sacrament, and for denoting the unity of the
Church.

Reply Obj. 2: Although wheat and wine are not produced in every
country, yet they can easily be conveyed to every land, that is, as
much as is needful for the use of this sacrament: at the same time
one is not to be consecrated when the other is lacking, because it
would not be a complete sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: Wine taken in small quantity cannot do the sick much
harm: yet if there be fear of harm, it is not necessary for all who
take Christ's body to partake also of His blood, as will be stated
later (Q. 80, A. 12).
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 2]

Whether a Determinate Quantity of Bread and Wine Is Required for the
Matter of This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that a determinate quantity of bread and wine
is required for the matter of this sacrament. Because the effects of
grace are no less set in order than those of nature. But, "there is a
limit set by nature upon all existing things, and a reckoning of size
and development" (De Anima ii). Consequently, in this sacrament,
which is called "Eucharist," that is, "a good grace," a determinate
quantity of the bread and wine is required.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ gave no power to the ministers of the Church
regarding matters which involve derision of the faith and of His
sacraments, according to 2 Cor. 10:8: "Of our power which the Lord
hath given us unto edification, and not for your destruction." But it
would lead to mockery of this sacrament if the priest were to wish to
consecrate all the bread which is sold in the market and all the wine
in the cellar. Therefore he cannot do this.

Obj. 3: Further, if anyone be baptized in the sea, the entire
sea-water is not sanctified by the form of baptism, but only the
water wherewith the body of the baptized is cleansed. Therefore,
neither in this sacrament can a superfluous quantity of bread be
consecrated.

_On the contrary,_ Much is opposed to little, and great to small. But
there is no quantity, however small, of the bread and wine which
cannot be consecrated. Therefore, neither is there any quantity,
however great, which cannot be consecrated.

_I answer that,_ Some have maintained that the priest could not
consecrate an immense quantity of bread and wine, for instance, all
the bread in the market or all the wine in a cask. But this does not
appear to be true, because in all things containing matter, the
reason for the determination of the matter is drawn from its
disposition to an end, just as the matter of a saw is iron, so as to
adapt it for cutting. But the end of this sacrament is the use of the
faithful. Consequently, the quantity of the matter of this sacrament
must be determined by comparison with the use of the faithful. But
this cannot be determined by comparison with the use of the faithful
who are actually present; otherwise the parish priest having few
parishioners could not consecrate many hosts. It remains, then, for
the matter of this sacrament to be determined in reference to the
number of the faithful absolutely. But the number of the faithful is
not a determinate one. Hence it cannot be said that the quantity of
the matter of this sacrament is restricted.

Reply Obj. 1: The matter of every natural object has its determinate
quantity by comparison with its determinate form. But the number of
the faithful, for whose use this sacrament is ordained, is not a
determinate one. Consequently there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 2: The power of the Church's ministers is ordained for two
purposes: first for the proper effect, and secondly for the end of
the effect. But the second does not take away the first. Hence, if
the priest intends to consecrate the body of Christ for an evil
purpose, for instance, to make mockery of it, or to administer poison
through it, he commits sin by his evil intention, nevertheless, on
account of the power committed to him, he accomplishes the sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: The sacrament of Baptism is perfected in the use of the
matter: and therefore no more of the water is hallowed than what is
used. But this sacrament is wrought in the consecration of the
matter. Consequently there is no parallel.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 3]

Whether Wheaten Bread Is Required for the Matter of This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that wheaten bread is not requisite for the
matter of this sacrament, because this sacrament is a reminder of our
Lord's Passion. But barley bread seems to be more in keeping with the
Passion than wheaten bread, as being more bitter, and because Christ
used it to feed the multitudes upon the mountain, as narrated in John
6. Therefore wheaten bread is not the proper matter of this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, in natural things the shape is a sign of species.
But some cereals resemble wheat, such as spelt and maize, from which
in some localities bread is made for the use of this sacrament.
Therefore wheaten bread is not the proper matter of this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, mixing dissolves species. But wheaten flour is
hardly to be found unmixed with some other species of grain, except
in the instance of specially selected grain. Therefore it does not
seem that wheaten bread is the proper matter for this sacrament.

Obj. 4: Further, what is corrupted appears to be of another species.
But some make the sacrament from bread which is corrupted, and which
no longer seems to be wheaten bread. Therefore, it seems that such
bread is not the proper matter of this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Christ is contained in this sacrament, and He
compares Himself to a grain of wheat, saying (John 12:24): "Unless
the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, itself remaineth
alone." Therefore bread from corn, i.e. wheaten bread, is the matter
of this sacrament.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), for the use of the
sacraments such matter is adopted as is commonly made use of among
men. Now among other breads wheaten bread is more commonly used by
men; since other breads seem to be employed when this fails. And
consequently Christ is believed to have instituted this sacrament
under this species of bread. Moreover this bread strengthens man, and
so it denotes more suitably the effect of this sacrament.
Consequently, the proper matter for this sacrament is wheaten bread.

Reply Obj. 1: Barley bread serves to denote the hardness of the Old
Law; both on account of the hardness of the bread, and because, as
Augustine says (Q. 83): "The flour within the barley, wrapped up as
it is within a most tenacious fibre, denotes either the Law itself,
which was given in such manner as to be vested in bodily sacraments;
or else it denotes the people themselves, who were not yet despoiled
of carnal desires, which clung to their hearts like fibre." But this
sacrament belongs to Christ's "sweet yoke," and to the truth already
manifested, and to a spiritual people. Consequently barley bread
would not be a suitable matter for this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: A begetter begets a thing like to itself in species,
yet there is some unlikeness as to the accidents, owing either to the
matter, or to weakness within the generative power. And therefore, if
there be any cereals which can be grown from the seed of the wheat
(as wild wheat from wheat seed grown in bad ground), the bread made
from such grain can be the matter of this sacrament: and this does
not obtain either in barley, or in spelt, or even in maize, which is
of all grains the one most resembling the wheat grain. But the
resemblance as to shape in such seems to denote closeness of species
rather than identity; just as the resemblance in shape between the
dog and the wolf goes to show that they are allied but not of the
same species. Hence from such grains, which cannot in any way be
generated from wheat grain, bread cannot be made such as to be the
proper matter of this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: A moderate mixing does not alter the species, because
that little is as it were absorbed by the greater. Consequently,
then, if a small quantity of another grain be mixed with a much
greater quantity of wheat, bread may be made therefrom so as to be
the proper matter of this sacrament; but if the mixing be notable,
for instance, half and half; or nearly so, then such mixing alters
the species; consequently, bread made therefrom will not be the
proper matter of this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 4: Sometimes there is such corruption of the bread that
the species of bread is lost, as when the continuity of its parts is
destroyed, and the taste, color, and other accidents are changed;
hence the body of Christ may not be made from such matter. But
sometimes there is not such corruption as to alter the species, but
merely disposition towards corruption, which a slight change in the
savor betrays, and from such bread the body of Christ may be made:
but he who does so, sins from irreverence towards the sacrament. And
because starch comes of corrupted wheat, it does not seem as if the
body of Christ could be made of the bread made therefrom, although
