
     43. "They who were left in their homes were delighted behind God's
     Apostle and were averse from (_Yojahidoo_) exerting with their
     riches and their persons for the cause of God, and said, 'March not
     out in the heat.' Say, a fiercer heat will be the fire of hell!
     Would that they understood this."

           Sale    ... "Employ their substance and their persons
                       for the advancement of God's
                       true religion."

           Rodwell ... "Contending with their riches and their
                       persons."

           Palmer  ... "Fighting strenuously with their wealth
                       and their person."

[Sidenote: (31) _Ibid_, 87.]

     44. "Moreover when a Sura was sent down with 'Believe in God, and
     (_Jahidoo_) toil in company with his Apostle,' those of them who
     are possessed of riches demanded exemption, and said, 'Allow us to
     be with those who sit _at home_.'"

           Sale    ... "Go forth to war."

           Rodwell ... "Contend."

           Palmer  ... "Fight strenuously."

[Sidenote: (32) The Immunity, IX, 89.]

     45. "But the Apostle, and those who share his faith (_Jahadoo_)
     exerted with their substance and their persons, and these ! good
     things await them and these are they who shall be happy."

           Sale    ... "Expose their fortune and their lives."

           Rodwell ... "Contend with purse and person."

           Palmer  ... "Are strenuous with their wealth and
                        with their persons."

[Sidenote: (33) The Table, V, 39.]

     46. "O ye who believe! fear God and desire union with Him and
     (_Jahidoo_) toil on His path. It may be that you will obtain
     happiness."

           Sale    ... "Fight."

           Rodwell ... "Contend earnestly."

           Palmer  ... "Be strenuous."

[Sidenote: (34) _Ibid_, 58.]

     47. "And the faithful will say, 'Are these they who swore by God
     their (_Jahda_) utmost oath that they were surely on your side?'
     Vain their works; and they themselves shall come to ruin."

           Sale    ... "Most firm."

           Rodwell ... "Most solemn."

           Palmer  ... "Most strenuous."

[Sidenote: (35) _Ibid_, 59.]

     48. "O ye who believe! should any of you desert his religion, God
     will then raise up a people whom He loveth, and who love Him, lowly
     towards the faithful, lofty to the unbelievers (_Yojahidoona_)
     striving in the path of God, and not fearing the blame of the
     blamer. This is the Grace of God; on whom He will He bestoweth it,
     and God is all-embracing, Omniscient!"

           Sale    ... "They shall fight for the religion of God."

           Rodwell ... "For the cause of God will they contend."

           Palmer  ... "Strenuous in the way of God."

[Sidenote: _Jihad_ does not mean the waging of war.]

49. These are all the verses of the Koran which contain the word
"_Jahd_" or "_Jihad_," or any derivations from them. I believe that I
have clearly shown by means of a careful comparison between the
translators and commentators and the original passages in the Koran,
that the word _Jahd_ or _Jihad_ in the classical Arabic and as used in
the Koran does not mean waging war or fighting, but only to do one's
utmost and to exert, labour or toil. The meaning which has come to be
ascribed to the word is undoubtedly a conventional one, and is one that
has been applied to it at a period much less recent than the revelation
of the various chapters of the Koran.

[Sidenote: _Katal_ and _Kital_.]

50. I do not mean to contend that the Koran does not contain injunctions
to fight or wage war. There are many verses enjoining the Prophet's
followers to prosecute a defensive war, but not one of aggression. The
words "_katal_" and "_kital_" distinctly indicate this.

[Sidenote: Conclusion.]

51. I have already analysed all the verses containing these words
(_katal_ and _kital_) in this book. What I have aimed at in the Appendix
is to show that those authors and translators who cite certain verses of
the Koran containing the word _Jahd_ or _Jihad_ and its derivations in
support of their assertion, and that the Mohammadan religion sanctions
the waging of war and the shedding of blood, are altogether in the
wrong.

[Footnote 322: The Sihah of Jouhari (who died 397 or 398), the Asas of
Zamakhshire (born 467, died 538 A.H.), Lisanul-Arab of Ibn Mokarram
(born 630, died 711), and Kamoos of Fyrozabadee (born 729, died 816),
_vide_ Lane's Arabic-English Lexicon, Book I, Part II, page 473.]
[Footnote 323: The Misbah by Fayoomee (finished 734 A.H.), _vide_ Lane's
Arabic-English Lexicon, Book I, Part II, page 473.]

[Footnote 324: Sihah, Asas, Ibnel Atheer Jezree, author of Nihayeh (died
606), the Mughrib of Almotarrazi (born 536, died 610), the Misbah and
Kamoos, _vide_ Lane, _ibid_, page 474.]

[Footnote 325: _Vide_ Rodwell's Translation of the Koran _in loco_.]

[Footnote 326: _Vide_ Lane's Arabic-English Lexicon _in loco_.]

[Footnote 327: The Assemblies of Al Hariri, translated from the Arabic
by Thomas Chenry, M.A., Vol. I, Introduction, p. 67. William and
Norgate, 1867.]

[Footnote 328: In the treaty of Medina, which was made as early as the
second year of the Hejira, the word Jihad is used, regarding which Sir
W. Muir says:--"This word came subsequently to have exclusively the
technical signification of Jihad or _crusade_ or _fighting_ for the
Faith. If we give it this signification here, it would involve the
clause in the suspicion of being a later addition; for as yet we have no
distinct development of the intention of Mahomet to impose his religion
on others by force: it would have been dangerous, in the present state
of parties, to advance this principle. The word is sometimes used in the
more general sense in the Coran; Sura XXIX, 5, 69; XX, 77, and a few
other places."--Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, p. 32. Again he says
with reference to Sura II, v. 215, which also contains the same word:
"The word (_Jihad_) is the same as that subsequently used for a
religious war, but it had not yet probably acquired its fixed
application. It was applied in its _general_ sense before the Hejira,
and probably up to the battle of Badr."--_Ibid_, p. 74, footnote.]

[Footnote 329: This Sura is generally said to have been revealed at
Mecca, but this is probably only the case as regards verses 1, 24, 43,
56, 60, 65, 67, 75. Mr. Muir places it at the close of the Meccan Suras
of the fifth period. See Nold, p. 158; Rev. Rodwell, p. 500.]

[Footnote 330: _Vide_ Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, 74.]

[Footnote 331: _Ibid, footnote._]

[Footnote 332: _Vide_ Sura LXXII, 9; XVII, 69.]

[Footnote 333: _i.e._, from Mecca when driven out of it by the Meccans
in your persecution.]

[Footnote 334: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 114.]

[Footnote 335: _Kitabul Jihad_, _Maghazi_ and _Tafseer_.]




APPENDIX B.

SLAVERY AND CONCUBINE-SLAVES AS CONCOMITANT EVILS OF WAR.


[Sidenote: Slavery and concubinage not allowed by the Koran.]

1. It is a false accusation against the Koran, that it allows
enslavement of the captives of war, and sanctions female captives to the
conquerors' embrace, or, in other words, female captives are made
concubines on the field of battle. There is not a single sentence in the
Koran allowing either of the above allegations. Sir W. Muir, in his
"Life of Mahomet," could neither quote any verse of the Koran
sanctioning the enslavement of the captives of war or servile
concubinage, nor was he able to relate any instance of them during the
several battles described therein. Yet, in a recent work,[336] he refers
boldly, but vaguely, to the Koran; and regarding the battle of Walaja
fought by Khalid against the Persians in A.H. 12 writes, after quoting
Khalid's oration on gaining the victory:--

     "Now, also, the cunning device of the Coran, with respect to the
     other sex, began to tell. Persian ladies, both maids and matrons,
     'taken captive by the right hand,' were forthwith, without stint of
     number, lawful to the conquerors' embrace; and, in the enjoyment of
     this privilege, they were nothing loth to execute upon the heathen
     'the judgment written.'"

I do not understand why, if such was the case, Khalid did not refer the
believers to the so-called "cunning device" of the Koran? By referring
to this imaginary device of the Koran to the lawfulness of female
captives "to the conquerors' embrace," he might have struck a chord, at
which every Bedouin heart would have leapt with joy, instead of
referring, as he did, merely to the riches of the land and fair fields.
In fact there is no such inducement in the Koran.

[Sidenote: Measures taken by the Koran to abolish slavery.]

2. Slaves are mentioned in the Koran _defacto_, but not _dejure_. The
Koran took several measures to abolish future slavery. Its steps for its
abolition were taken in every moral, legal, religious, and political
departments. The liberation of slaves was morally declared to be a work
of piety and righteousness--(Sura XC, 13; II, 172).[337] Legally the
slaves were to be emancipated on their agreeing to pay a ransom--(Sura
XXIV, 33).[338] They were to be set at liberty as a penalty for culpable
homicide--(Sura IV, 94);[339] or in expiation for using an objectionable
form of divorce--(Sura LVIII, 4);[340] and also they were to be
manumitted from the Public Funds out of the poor-taxes--(Sura IX,
60).[341] They were religiously to be freed in expiation of a false oath
taken in mistake--(Sura V, 91).[342] These were the measures for the
abolition of existing slavery. The future slavery was abolished by the
Koran by putting hammer deep unto its root and by annihilating its real
source. The captives of war were, according to the clear injunctions of
the Koran contained in the 5th verse of the 47th Sura, to be dismissed
either by a free grant or by exacting a ransom. They were neither to be
enslaved nor killed.

     4. "When ye encounter the unbelievers strike off their heads, till
     ye have made a great slaughter among them, and of _the rest_ make
     fast the fetters."

     5. "And afterwards let there either be free dismissals or
     ransoming, till the war hath laid down its burdens. Thus do...."

     _Sura_ XLVII.

These verses convey very clearly the decree of the abolition of future
slavery, and do not require any further remarks. Moreover they were
acted upon accordingly even in the lifetime of the Prophet.

[Sidenote: None of the prisoners of war were enslaved.]

3. None of the prisoners of Badr A.H. 2, of Karkart-al-Kadr A.H. 3, of
Katan in Najd A.H. 4, of Zat-al Riqa[343] A.H. 5, of Bani Mustalik A.H.
5, of Koreiza A.H. 5, of Batan Makka A.H. 6,[344] or of Honain (Hawazin)
A.H. 8,[345] was enslaved. All, without an exception, were set free
either by way of free dismissal, or by exacting ransom (in cash or in
exchange of Moslem prisoners) in strict conformity with the dictates of
Sura XLVII, 5. There were no prisoners in the battles of Ohad A.H. 3,
Ahzab A.H. 5, and Khyber A.H. 7.[346]

[Sidenote: Bani Koreiza not enslaved.]

4. Some will contend regarding the Bani Koreiza that their women and
children were made slaves, and as such sold in Najd. Sir W. Muir quotes
the judgment of Sad in the case of the Bani Koreiza,--"That the female
captives and the children shall be sold into slavery," and that it was
approved of by Mohammad. He writes further:--

     "A fifth of the booty was, as usual, reserved for the Prophet, and
     the rest divided. From the fifth Mahomet made certain presents to
     his friends of female slaves and servants; and then sent the rest
     of the women and children to be sold among the Bedouin tribes of
     Najd in exchange for horses and arms."[347]

I have shown in para. 30 of this book (pages 37 and 38) that Mohammad
never appreciated the judgment of Sad. And I have further to add that
the said judgment, according to true reports, did not contain the
illegal verdict of enslaving the women and children of the Bani Koreiza,
as this might have gone directly against the Koran and the precedents of
the Prophet. In the collections of Bokhari, Book of Campaigns, Chapter
on Bani Koreiza, there are two traditions cited on the subject. Both of
them quote the words of Sad to the effect that "the women and children
be imprisoned." The same is the case in Bokhari's other chapters (Book
of _Jihad_, Chapter on the Surrender of Enemy, Book of _Manakib_,
Chapter on the Merits of Sad).

It is not a fact that Mohammad made certain presents to his friends of
the female slaves out of the captives of Bani Koreiza. The captives were
not made slaves, therefore it is wrong to confound captives with slaves.
There is no proof to the effect that they were enslaved. The Koran
distinctly says that they were prisoners (Sura XXXIII, 26).

In fact, the women and children were not guilty of treason, and
deserved no punishment. Sad's judgment must be either wrong regarding
them, or applied only to those who were guilty. "One woman alone,"
according to Sir W. Muir, "was put to death; it was she who threw the
millstone from the battlements" (Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 277). I
conclude, therefore, that all the women and children were released
afterwards; some ransomed themselves, others went off with their
freedom. But nobody was ever sold in slavery. The assertion of Hishamee,
quoted by Sir W. Muir, that the women and children were sent to be sold
among the Bedouin tribes of Najd in exchange for horses and arms (Vol.
III, page 279), is void of all authority, and is in direct contradiction
of what Abul Mo'tamar Soleiman bin Tarkhan (died 143 A.H. and was prior
to Hishamee) says, and whose account seems to be more probable. His
version is that the horses of Bani Koreiza were sent by Mohammad to
Syria and Najd for the purpose of breeding, and that they got big
horses. _Vide_ Wakidi Campaigns of Mohammad, page 374, Calcutta, 1855.
This shows that only horses, and not women and children, were sent to
Najd. The words of Hishamee (page 693) are "_sabaya min sabaya Bani
Koreiza_." _Sabaya_, plural of _sabi_, applies to both person and
property, as they say _sabal aduvva vaghairohu_, he made captive,
captured or took prisoner the enemy, and other than an enemy. (_Vide_
Lane's Arabic Dictionary, page 1303, col. 1.) So probably Hishamee had
in view only the horses captured of the Bani Koreiza and sent to Najd,
but not the women and children of the captives of Koreiza.

[Sidenote: Rihana.]

5. Rihana, a woman of the captives of Koreiza, is said by Sir W. Muir to
have been taken by Mohammad "for his concubine." He always confounds
prisoners with slaves, and female captives as well as slaves with
concubines. There are several conflicting and contradictory traditions
regarding Rihana. Mohammad bin Sad Katib Wakidi has related various
traditions from Omar-bin-al Hakam, Mohammad bin Kab, and from other
various sources that Mohammad had married Rihana. The Katib says "this
tradition is held by learned men. But he has also heard some one
relating that she was his concubine."[348] But Sir W. Muir chooses the
latter uncertain and unauthentic traditions. He writes in a footnote:--

     "She is represented as saying, when he offered her marriage and the
     same privileges as his other wives: 'Nay, O Prophet! But let me
     remain as thy slave; this will be easier both for me and for
     thee.'"[349]

Even if this tradition be a genuine one, he is not authorized in his
remarks in the text, where he says--

     "He invited her to be his wife, but she declined; and chose to
     remain (as indeed, having refused marriage, she had no alternative)
     his slave or concubine."

She was neither enslaved, nor made a concubine. It is to be regretted
that the writer of the "Life of Mahomet" most absurdly confounds slavery
and concubinage.

[Sidenote: Omar, the second Khalif, liberated all the Arab slaves.]

6. During the sovereignty of Omar, the second Khalif, in accordance with
the injunctions of Mohammad to abolish slavery, all the existing Arab
slaves were set free. It will appear that the wishes of Mohammad to that
effect were but partially carried out. In ages that succeeded the death
of Mohammad, they were altogether lost sight of, and even Arabs were
allowed to be enslaved by the later jurists. Sir W. Muir, in his latest
work, entitled "The Annals of the Early Caliphate," says:--

     "Yet great numbers of the Arabs themselves were slaves, taken
     prisoner during the apostasy, or in the previous intertribal
     warfare, and held in captivity by their fellow-countrymen. Omar
     felt the inconsistency. It was not fit that any of the noble race
     should remain in bondage. When, therefore, he succeeded to the
     Caliphate, he decreed: 'The Lord,' he said, 'hath given to us of
     Arab blood the victory, and great conquests without. It is not meet
     that any one of us, taken in the days of Ignorance,[350] or in the
     wars against the apostate tribes, should be holden in slavery.' All
     slaves of the Arab descent were accordingly ransomed, excepting
     only such bondmaids as had borne their masters' children. Men who
     had lost wives or children now set out in search, if haply they
     might find and claim them. Strange tales are told of some of the
     disconsolate journeys. Ashath recovered two of his wives taken
     captive in Nojeir. But some of the women who had been carried
     prisoners to Medina preferred remaining with their captors."[351]

Even this speech of Omar shows that no one was enslaved during the wars
of Mohammad, as he only refers to the captives of the days of Ignorance
before the Prophet, and those taken in wars against the apostate tribes
after him having been enslaved.

[Sidenote: Concubinage.]

7. The Koran has never allowed concubinage with female captives. And
after the abolition of future slavery enjoined in the Koran, there is no
good in discussing the subject of concubinage, which depends on the
legality or otherwise of slavery. The Koran had taken early measures for
preventing the evil directly and indirectly, positively and negatively.
In the first place, it recognizes marriage as the only legal condition
of the union of both sexes. Marriage was also enjoined with the existing
female slaves. (_Vide_ Sura IV, 3, 29; and XXIV, 32, 33.) The prevention
of concubinage is set forth in plain terms in Sura V, 7. The verses run
thus:--

     3. "And if ye are apprehensive that ye shall not deal fairly with
     orphans, then of _other_ women who seem good in your eyes marry,
     _but_ two or three or four, and if ye _still_ fear that ye shall
     not act equitably, then (marry) one only; or (marry) the slaves
     whom ye have acquired. This will be more proper that ye may not
     have numerous families or households. And give women their dowry as
     a free gift; but if of their own free will they kindly give up
     aught thereof to you, then enjoy it as convenient _and_
     profitable."

     29. "And whoever of you is not rich enough to marry free-believing
     women, then let him marry such of your believing maidens as have
     fallen into your hands as slaves. God well knoweth your faith. Ye
     are sprung, the one from the other. Marry them then with the leave
     of their masters, and give them a fair dower; but let them be
     chaste and free from fornication, and not entertainers of
     lovers."--Sura IV.

     32. "And marry those among you who are single, and your good
     servants and your handmaidens. If they are poor, God of his bounty
     will enrich them. And God is all-bounteous, knowing. And let those
     who cannot find a match live in continence till God of his bounty
     shall enrich them."

     33. "And to those of your slaves who desire a deed of
     _manumission_, execute it for them, if ye know good in them, and
     give them a portion of the wealth of God which He hath given
     you."--Sura XXIV. "And _you are permitted to marry_ virtuous women,
     who are believers, and virtuous women of those who have been given
     the Scriptures before you, when you have provided them their
     portions, living _chastely with them_ without fornication, and not
     taking concubines."--Sura V.

The 28th verse of the fourth Sura does by no means sanction concubinage.
It has nothing to do with it. It only treats of marriage. It, together
with its preceding verse, points out whom we can marry and whom not. Its
next verse interdicts concubinage when it enjoins marriage with the then
existing slaves.

[Sidenote: Maria the Coptic.]

8. I will here take the opportunity of noticing Maria the Coptic, who is
alleged to have been a concubine-slave of Mohammad, although she does
not come under the category of prisoners made slaves. According to Sir
W. Muir, the Roman Governor of Egypt had written to Mohammad:--"I send
for thine acceptance two damsels, highly esteemed among the Copts."[352]
The writer converts them at once into "two slave-girls," and remarks, "a
strange present, however, for a Christian Governor to make."[353] She
was neither a captive, nor a slave, nor was she described as such in the
Governor's letter. I am at a loss to know why or how she has been
treated by the biographers of the Prophet as a slave or a concubine.

(1) I have great doubts regarding the truth of the story that Mokowkas
the Governor had sent two maids to Mohammad, and taking it for granted
they were so sent, that one of them was the alleged Maria; (2) it is not
a fact that she was a slave; (3) nor a concubine-slave of the Prophet;
(4) nor she as such bore a son to him; (5) and lastly, the notorious
scandal about her much talked of by European writers is a mere calumny
and a false story.

It will be a very tedious and irksome task to copy the various
traditions bearing on the above subjects and to discuss their
authenticity, and criticise their genuineness, on the principles of the
technicalities peculiar to the Science of Traditions, as well as on the
basis of scientific and rational criticism. Therefore I will notice only
briefly each of the above subjects.

[Sidenote: Dispatch to Mokowkas.]

9. (1) That Mohammad had sent a dispatch to Mokowkas, the Roman Governor
of Egypt, and that in reply he had sent Maria the Coptic maid, together
with other presents, to Mohammad, is not to be found in the traditions
