for the occasion. Sometimes the walls are draped with black cloth, bordered
with texts of the Quran written in a large and elegant style. The place is
brilliantly illuminated. On one side stands the Taziahs or
Tabuts--structures made of bamboos covered with tinsel and profusely
ornamented. They are intended to represent the mausoleum erected on the
plains of Karbala over the remains of Husain. Sometimes the Taziah is
constructed to represent the Prophet's tomb at Madina. Large sums of money
are spent on these Taziahs, which when lighted up have a very elegant
appearance. At the back of the Taziahs are laid the several articles
similar to those supposed to have been used by Husain at Karbala,--a turban
of gold, a rich sword, a shield, a bow and arrow. The Mimbar, or pulpit is
so placed that the speaker can face Mecca. The 'Alams, or standards, which
are commonly made of copper and brass, though occasionally of gold or of
silver, are placed against the walls. The usual standard is that of a hand
placed on a pole. This is emblematic of the five members who compose the
family of the Prophet, and is the special standard of the Shia'hs. These
standards have many different names, such as--the standard of the palm of
'Ali, the Lady Fatima's standard, the standard of the Horse-shoe, to
represent the shoe of Husain's swift horse, and others too numerous to
mention. Mirrors, chandeliers and coloured lanterns add lustre to the
scene.

Every evening large crowds of people assemble in these 'Ashur Khanas. In
the centre, on a slightly raised platform a band of singers chant the
Marsiya, an elegiac poem in honour of the martyred Husain. It is a
monotonous performance lasting about an hour; but it has a wonderful effect
on the audience, who, seated on the ground, listen patiently and
attentively. At each pause the hearers beat their breasts, and say Husain!
Husain! Real or stimulated grief often finds expression in groans and
tears, though the more violent expression of the anguish felt is reserved
for a later ceremony.

{239}

This over, the Waqi'a Khan (literally, narrator of events) ascends the
Mimbar, or pulpit, and seats himself on the top, or on a lower step. He
proceeds to relate the historical facts, adding many curious stories
gathered from the vast heap of Traditions which have cast such a halo of
glory around the martyr. Sometimes he becomes very excited, and the
audience is stirred up to great enthusiasm. The following account is that
of an eye-witness who passed an evening in an 'Ashur Khana. "The first
Waqi'a Khan was a Persian who delivered a very eloquent oration in his own
tongue. It was calm but effective. He was succeeded by an eloquent old
gentleman who spoke rapidly in Hindustani at the top of his voice, then
rose up, ran down the steps, and casting off his turban rushed in and out
amongst the audience, vociferating vigorously all the while. The effect was
marvellous, old and venerable men wept like little children, whilst from
the adjoining Zanana was heard the bitter weeping of the women who, though
not exposed to view, could hear all that was said. After a while, the
assembly rose and formed two lines facing each other. A boy then chanted a
few words and the whole assembly began, slowly at first, to sway their
bodies to and fro, calling out 'Ali! 'Ali! Husain! Husain! Each one then
began to beat his breast vigorously. The excitement at last became intense
and the men in the rows looked like so many wild creatures."

In some cases blood has been known to flow from the breast, so severe is
the self-inflicted beating. This continues till they are well-nigh
exhausted, when the whole company goes away to repeat the performance over
again in some other 'Ashur Khana. A devout person will visit several each
evening. During the day some pious Shia'hs recite the Quran.

During this season women who can read, visit the Zananas and chant Marsiyas
to the ladies of the Harem, by whom this season of Muharram is celebrated
with great earnestness.

For the first six days, nothing else takes place, but on the {240} seventh
day the 'Alam-i-Qasim is taken out in public procession. This is to
represent the marriage of Qasim, the son of Hasan, to the favourite
daughter of Husain, just before the death of the latter. The event is now
commemorated by the bearing of Qasim's standard in procession. It is
usually borne by a man on horseback. If it is carried by a man on foot, he
reels about like a drunken man to show his grief. The crowd shout out:
Bridegroom! Bridegroom! After perambulating the principal thoroughfares,
the people bring the standard back to its own 'Ashur Khana. As the standard
which represents Qasim is supposed to be a martyr, it is then laid down,
covered over, and treated as a corpse. Lamentation is made over it as for
one dead. Sherbet is then produced, and a Fatiha is said, after which the
standard is again set up in its own place.

The Neza, a lance or spear, with a lime on the top, to recall to
remembrance the fact that Yezid caused Husain's head to be thus carried
about, is taken in procession from one place to another. The Na'l Sahib
(literally, Mr. Horse-shoe) is the representation of a horse shoe, and is
meant to remind the people of the swift horse of Husain. Vows are
frequently made to this standard. Thus a woman may say to it: "Should I
through your favour be blessed with offspring, I shall make it run in your
procession." If she attains her wish, the child when seven or eight years
old has a small parasol placed in its hand and is made to run after the
Na'l Sahib.

If two 'Alams, or standards, meet, they embrace each other, that is they
are made to touch. Fatiha is then said and the respective processions pass
on their way. The Buraq, supposed to be a fac-simile of the horse sent by
Gabriel for Muhammad to make the night ascent to heaven (Ante. p. 159) is
also taken out.

On the evening before the tenth day, which according to the Muslim mode of
computing time is the tenth night, the whole of the Tazias and the 'Alams
are taken out in {241} procession. It is a scene of great confusion, for
men and boys disguised in all sorts of quaint devices run about. It is the
carnival of the Musalman year.

On the following day, the 'Ashura, they kindle the fires in the Allawas,
and say a Fatiha in each 'Ashur Khana. After this the 'Alams and the Tazias
are taken away to a large open spot near water, which represents the plain
of Karbala. Another Fatiha is said, the ornaments and decorations are taken
off the Tazias, the frameworks of which are then cast into the water.[249]
Sometimes they are reserved for use the following year. The water reminds
the people of the parching thirst which Husain felt before his death. Only
the 'Alams, not the Buraqs nor the Na'l Sahibs, are immersed. The people
then burn incense, recite the Marsiyas, return home and say Fatiha over the
'Alams, Buraqs, &c. On the evening of the 12th, they sit up all night
reading the Quran, reciting Marsiyas and verses in the praise of Husain. On
the 13th day, a quantity of food is cooked which, when a Fatiha has been
said over it, is distributed to the poor. Some very pious Shia'hs celebrate
the fortieth day after the first of Muharram. It is on this day, according
to some accounts, that the head and body of Husain were reunited. It is
known as the 'Id-i-sar wa tan (head and body feast).

The Sunnis do not, except as spectators, take any part in the Muharram
ceremonies. Indeed, where the ruling power is not strong, there is often
much ill-feeling aroused by the enthusiasm excited for all that concerns
'Ali and his family. The three first Khalifs are often well abused, and
that no Sunni can bear with patience. The breach between the Sunni and the
Shia'h is very wide, and the annual recurrence of the Muharram feast tends
to keep alive the distinction.

{242}

The tenth day--the 'Ashura is, however, a Sunnat feast and, as such, is
observed by all Sunnis. It is considered to be a most excellent day, for on
it God is said to have created Adam and Eve, His throne, heaven, hell, the
seat of judgment, the tablet of decree, the pen, fate, life and death.

The Sunnis about three o'clock in the afternoon of this day prepare sherbet
and khichri--a dish composed of boiled rice and pulse mixed with clarified
butter and spices. A Fatiha in the name of Husain and of those who were
martyred with him is then said. The food is disposed of as usual in such
cases. A Namaz of some nafl rak'ats is said and sometimes a Du'a is added.
On this day also they go to the burial grounds and place flowers on, and
say Fatiha over the graves of their friends.

Indian Musalmans have copied in their feast many Hindu ceremonies. The
procession of the Tazias, and the casting of them into the water is very
similar to the procession at the Hindu feast of the Durga Puja,[250] when
on the tenth day the Hindus cast the idol Durga, the wife of Siva, into the
Ganges. The oblations offered at different shrines are similar to those
offered by the Hindus, such as rice, clarified butter and flowers.

The Muhammadan form of worship was too simple for a country, in which an
allegorical and idolatrous religion predominated, addressing itself to the
senses and the imaginations rather than to the understanding and the heart;
consequently the Musalman festivals have borrowed from it a variety of
pagan rites, and a pompous and splendid ceremonial. While this has done
much to add to the superstition of the Musalmans in India, it has no doubt
softened their intolerant spirit. Though the Sunnis consider the Shia'h
observances as impious, they look on with the contempt of indifference. The
fact that the British Government punishes all who break {243} the peace may
have something to do with this. Still the Sunni and the Shia'h in India
live on much better terms, and have more respect for each other than the
Turk has for the Persian, or the Persian for the Turk. Some Musalman poets,
indeed, are both Sunnis and Shia'hs. Thus Wali, begins his poem with a
brief encomium on the four first Khalifs, and then bestows an eulogy on
'Ali and his sons Hasan and Husain whom he calls "Imams of the world."

The following is a prayer used in a Fatiha for 'Ali:--

    I pray, "That God may deign for the sake of that pure soul, the
    ornament of the book of nature, the first of mortals after the Prophet,
    the star of mortals, the most precious jewel of the jewel-box of
    virtue, the lord of the high and the low, he who occupies a
    distinguished place on the bridge of eternity, the mihrab[251] of the
    faith, he who sits upon the throne of the palace of the law, the ship
    of the sea of religion, the sun of the firmament of glory, the power of
    the arm of the Prophet, he who has merited access to the tabernacle of
    the Divine Unity, the most profound of all religious people, the
    resplendent brightness of the marvels of God, the father of victory,
    the Imam of the gate of heaven, the cup-bearer of the water of Kausar,
    he who has merited the praise of Muhammad, he who is the best of men,
    the holy martyr, the chief of Believers, the Imam of the Faithful,
    'Ali, son of Abu Talib, 'Ali the victorious lion of the Most High. I
    pray that God for the sake of this holy Khalif may favourably hear the
    vows which I offer to Him."

The following prayer occurs in a Fatiha said for Hasan and Husain:--

    I pray, "That the eternal God may deign to accept the vows which I make
    for the repose of the glorious souls of the two brave Imams, the
    martyrs well-beloved by God, the innocent victims of wickedness, the
    blessed Abu Muhammad Al-Hasan and Abu 'Abd-Allah Al-Husain, and for the
    twelve Imams, and the fourteen[252] pure ones, and for the seventy-two
    martyrs of the plain of Karbala."

{244}

2. AKHIR-I-CHAR SHAMBA.--This feast is held on the last Wednesday of the
month Safar. It is kept in commemoration of the fact, that, as on this day,
the Prophet experienced some mitigation of the disorder which in the next
month terminated his life. Sweet cakes are prepared, and Fatihas in the
name of the Prophet are said over them; but the most extraordinary custom
is the drinking of the seven Salams. A plantain, or a mango tree leaf, or a
piece of paper is taken to a Mulla, or a religious teacher, who writes
seven short sentences from the Quran upon it. The writing whilst still wet
is washed off, and the mixture drunk by the person for whom it was written.
Peace and happiness are thus ensured for the future. The seven Salams are:
(1) "Peace! shall be the word on the part of a merciful Lord." (Sura xxxvi.
58). (2) "Peace be on Noah throughout the worlds." (Sura xxxvii. 77). (3)
"Peace be on Abraham." (Sura xxxvii. 109). (4) "Peace be on Moses and
Aaron." (Sura xxxvii. 120). (5) "Peace be on Elias." (Sura xxxvii. 130).
(6) "Peace be on you, ye have been good; enter into Paradise." (Sura xxxix.
73). (7) "It is peace till the breaking of the morn." (Sura xcvii. 5). The
Shia'hs consider this an unlucky day. They call it "Char
Shamba-i-Suri."--The "Wednesday of the Trumpet;" that is, of the trumpet of
the last day. The Sunnis, on the other hand, rejoice in the day, and esteem
it an excellent and auspicious season.

3. BARA WAFAT.--This feast is held on the twelfth day of the month
Rabi'-ul-Awwal. The name is derived from bara, twelve and wafat, death,
because many suppose that on this day the Prophet died. According to a
well-known Muslim writer "the terrific intelligence, circulating throughout
the world, produced universal consternation, and all hastened to offer to
God their vows and prayers for the repose of the Prophet's soul." Others,
however, maintain that he died on the second of the month and, as there is
some doubt on the subject, many persons make a Fatiha {245} every day, from
the first to the twelfth of the month inclusive. Those who keep the feast
as Bara Wafat observe the ceremony called Sandal on the previous evening,
and the 'Urs, that is, the prayers and the oblations, on the twelfth. The
Sandal consists in making a perfumed embrocation from sandal wood. This is
then placed into a vessel and carried in procession to the 'Id-gah,[253] or
to the place where Fatiha will be said. It is then distributed to the
people. It is a sort of public notice on the eve of a Feast day, or of a
Saint's day, that on the morrow the usual prayers and offerings will be
made in such and such a place. On the morning of the twelfth, the Quran is
read in the Mosque, or in private houses: then food is cooked and Fatihas
are said.

Some persons possess a Qadam-i-Rasul, or footstep of the Prophet. This is a
stone with the impression of a footstep on it. It is a sacred thing and on
this day the place in which it is kept is elegantly decorated. When a
company has assembled, some persons appointed for the purpose, repeat the
story of the birth, miracles and death of the Prophet. Portions of the
Quran are read and the Darud is said.[254]

In Madras, and in some other parts, it is more customary to keep this day,
not as the anniversary of the death of the Prophet, but as the
"'Jashn-i-milad-i-Sharif," the "Feast of the noble birth." The practical
duties are the same. Instead of the Qadam-i-Rasul, the Asar-i-Sharif is
exhibited. This is supposed to be a real portion of the hair of the
Prophet's beard and moustache. It is said to possess {246} the miraculous
property of growing again when a portion is broken off. On this day it is
put into rose water which those present then drink and rub on their eyes.
Great virtue is attached to this proceeding. In the Asar Khana, or house in
which this hair is kept Fatihas, Daruds, &c., are repeated.

The observance of this festival is neither wajib nor sunnat, but mustahab.
It is generally kept, and it is a very rare thing to meet a person who does
not believe in the miraculous growth of the Asar-i-Sharif.

4. SHAB BARAT.--This feast, the name of which signifies the "night of the
record," is held on the fourteenth day of the month Sh'aban. The 'Arfa, or
vigil is kept on the preceding day.[255] It is commonly but erroneously
called Shab-i-Barat.

The word Barat signifies a book or record. It is said that God on this
night registers in the Barat all the actions men are to perform during the
ensuing year. On the thirteenth day food is prepared for the poor and a
Fatiha for the benefit of deceased ancestors and relatives is said over it.
When all in the house are assembled, the Surat-ul-Fatiha is read once, the
Surat-ul-Iklas (112) three times, the Ayat-ul-Kursi once, and then the
Darud. After this a prayer is offered, in which God is asked to transfer
the reward of this Service, and of the charity shown in the gift of food to
the poor, to the souls of deceased relatives and friends of this family.
This petition is offered in the name of the Prophet. The men then go to the
Mosque and after the Namaz-i-'Isha they repeat a number of nafl rak'ats.
This over, the Surat-ul-Ya Sin is read three times. It must be done with
the niyyat, intention. The first time, the intention is that the worshipper
may have a long life; the second time, that his means of subsistence may be
increased; the third time, that he may be protected from evil. {247} The
Sura-i-Dukhan (144) is then read with the same intentions. Any other
portions may then be read. After this those present rise, and go to the
various cemeteries. On the way they purchase flowers which are afterwards
strewn on the graves. A Fatiha is then said. If the worshipper has no
relatives or friends buried there, prayer is offered for the benefit of the
Arwah-i-Qubur, the souls of those there buried. The very pious spend the
whole night in going from one cemetery to another.

These observances are neither farz, nor sunnat, but nawafil, (sing. nafl),
works of supererogation. Still though they are bid'at, yet they are
esteemed good and so are called bid'at-i-Hasana, or "excellent innovation."
The general merry-making of the fourteenth day has no religious
signification. The night of the fifteenth is the Guy Fawkes night of Islam.
Large sums of money are spent on fireworks, of which more are let off on
this feast than at any other.

The following prayer occurs in the Fatiha: "O our God, by the merits of the
Apostleship of Muhammad, grant that the lamps which are lit up on this holy
night may be for the dead a pledge of the light eternal, which we pray Thee
to shed on them. O God, admit them, we beseech Thee, unto the abode of
eternal felicity."

5. RAMAZAN AND 'ID-UL-FITR--It is one of the five pillars of the practical
religious duties to fast during the thirty days of the month Ramazan. The
subject of fasting has been fully treated of in the preceding chapter; and
so it is only necessary now to describe the other ceremonies connected with
the religious observance of this month.

From the earliest days of Islam this month has been held in the greatest
esteem by Muslims, for it was in this month that Muhammad used to retire
for meditation, year after year, to the cave of Hira, situated on a low
hill some few miles distant from Mecca. In the second year of the Hijra, or
flight from Mecca, it was ordained that the month of Ramazan should be kept
as a fast. "As to the month {248} Ramazan, in which the Quran was sent down
to be man's guidance, and an explanation of that guidance, and of that
illumination, as soon as any one of you observeth the moon, let him set
about the fast." (Sura ii. 181).

The Muslims had hitherto observed as the principal fast the 'Ashura, the
tenth of Muharram. This fast was probably connected with the Jewish fast on
the tenth day of the seventh month. "Also on the tenth day of this seventh
month there shall be a day of atonement: it shall be an holy convocation
unto you; and ye shall afflict your souls, &c." (Leviticus xxiii. 27). Now,
when Muhammad first went to Madina he had great hopes of winning over the
Jews to his side; but when he failed he took every opportunity of making
Islam differ as much as possible from Judaism. This was the reason why the
Qibla was changed (Ante. p. 60), and that in the second year of his
residence at Madina the fast of Ramazan was appointed. The reasons assigned
by learned Muslims for the selection of this month, are that in Ramazan God
gave to the previous prophets the revelations connected with their names,
and that in this month the Quran was sent down from the Secret Tablet in
the seventh heaven to the first or lowest, and that on the Laylut-ul-Qadr,
or 'night of power' the first revelation was made to Muhammad. "Verily we
have caused it (Quran) to descend on the 'night of power.' And who shall
teach thee what the night of power is? The night of power excelleth a
thousand nights." (Sura xcvii. 1-3). To illustrate the sacredness of this
month the Prophet used to say that in it "the gates of Paradise are open,
and the gates of hell are shut, and the devils are chained by the leg."
"Only those who observe it will be allowed to enter by the gate of heaven
called Rayyan." Those who keep the fast "will be pardoned all their past
venial sins."[256]

