ecclesiastics which finally took the form of a tax. The Bishop of
Utrecht in 1347 issued an order prohibiting the admittance of men to
nunneries. In Spain, conditions became so intolerable that the
communities forced their priests to select concubines so that the wives
and daughters would be safe from the ravages of the clergy.

"The torture, the maiming, and the murder of Elgira by Dunstan
illustrates further, amongst thousands and thousands of similar bloody
deeds, the diabolical brutality of superstition perpetuated in the name
of Christianity upon women in the earlier centuries of our epoch.
Indeed, religious superstition always has contrived to rob, to pester,
to deceive, and to degrade women." (_Bell: "Women from Bondage to
Freedom."_)

During the Middle Ages, the ages in which the Church was in complete
domination of all forms of endeavor, the status of woman was no better
than the general conditions of the time. This Age of Faith is
characterized by "the violence and knavery that covered the whole
country, the plagues and famines that decimated towns and villages every
few years, the flood of spurious and indecent relics, the degradation of
the clergy and monks, the slavery of the serfs, the daily brutalities of
the ordeal and the torture, the course and bloody pastimes, the
insecurity of life, the triumphant ravages of disease, the check of
scientific inquiry and a hundred other features of medieval life."
(_Joseph McCabe: "Religion of Woman."_)

The Church was chiefly responsible for the terrible persecutions
inflicted on women on the ground of witchcraft and this must be taken
into calculation when one considers what woman owes to religion. The
Reformation reduced woman to the position of a mere breeder of children.
During the sway of Puritanism woman was a poor, benighted being, a human
toad under the harrow of a pious imbecility.

The pioneers in the Modern Woman Movement in this country were, of
course, Mrs. Stanton, Mrs. Gage, and Miss Susan B. Anthony. In their
"History of Woman Suffrage" they comment on the vicious opposition which
the early workers encountered in New York. "Throughout this protracted
and disgraceful assault on American womanhood the clergy baptised every
new insult and act of injustice in the name of the Christian religion,
and uniformly asked God's blessing on proceedings that would have put to
shame an assembly of Hottentots."

And while the clergy either remained silent or heaped abuse on this
early movement, such freethinkers as Robert Owen, Jeremy Bentham, George
Jacob Holyoake, and John Stuart Mill in England entered the fray
wholeheartedly in behalf of the emancipation of woman. In France it was
Michelet and George Sand that came to their aid. In Germany it was Max
Sterner, Buechner, Marx, Engels, and Liebknecht. In Scandinavia it was
Ibsen and Bjoernson.

The battle was begun by freethinkers in defiance of the clergy and it
was only when the inevitable conquest of this movement was manifest that
any considerable number of clergy came to the aid of this progressive
movement. The righting of the wrongs imposed on womankind therefore had
been started not only without the aid of the churches but in face of
their determined opposition. It was not the clergy that discovered the
injustice that had been done to women throughout the centuries, and when
it was finally pointed out to them by sceptics, it was the rare
ecclesiastic that could see it so and attempt to right the wrong.

R. H. Bell, in tracing this struggle of woman in her publication, "Woman
from Bondage to Freedom," has this pertinent remark to make. "If there
are any personal rights in this world over which Church and State should
have no control, it is the sexual right of a woman to say, 'Yes' or
'No.' These and similar rights are so deeply imbedded in natural
morality that no clear-headed, clean-hearted person would wish to
controvert them.... Enforced motherhood, through marriage or otherwise,
is a mixed form of slavery, voluntary motherhood is the glory of a free
soul."

In the age-long struggle for freedom, woman's most rigorous antagonist
has always been the Church.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE PHILOSOPHERS AND THE GREAT ILLUSION

    _But the powers of man, so far as experience and analogy can guide
    us, are unlimited; nor are we possessed of any evidence which
    authorizes us to assign even an imaginary boundary at which the
    human intellect will, of necessity, be brought to a stand._

    BUCKLE.


There has been an effort made in certain religious publications to imply
that there is a dearth of thought and thinkers beyond the pale of
theism. The subsequent examination of the theological beliefs of great
minds will show that there has never been a lack of brilliant thinkers
who have not sought truth apart from the dominant faith of their age. It
was Socrates, I believe, who first asked if it was not a base
superstition that mere numbers will give wisdom. Granting this truth, it
certainly cannot be claimed that the philosophers of any time
constituted a majority of any population, nor that the philosopher, as
such, was not greatly in advance of the mental status of the populace of
his particular age. It would seem appropriate to briefly comment on the
opinions of the philosophers, both ancient and modern, concerning their
views on "man's giant shadow, hailed divine."

In former ages, philosophy was the handmaiden of theology. From the time
of Socrates and Plato, and throughout the medieval ages, the foremost
task of the philosopher seemed to be to attempt the proof of the
existence and nature of God, and the immortality of the soul. The
leading thinkers of the seventeenth century, Hobbes, Descartes, Spinoza,
Leibnitz, and Malebranche, liberated philosophy from its bondage to
theology. The criticism of Kant of the philosophical foundations of
belief destroyed the "theological proofs," and modern thinkers now spend
little time on the question of the existence and nature of God and the
soul.

Modern philosophy has been completely secularized, and it is a rare
occasion to find a philosopher dwelling on the problems of God and
immortality. This question in philosophy, as in all other branches of
thought, is utterly irrelevant and at present there is less insistence
on God and more on the world, man, morals, and the conditions of social
life.

It cannot be denied that we are under a heavy obligation intellectually
to the Greek philosophers. And it may be that the fruitful efforts of
those minds were largely due to their unhampered intellectual freedom.
They had no "holy books" and few authorities to check their free
speculation and hence these Greek thinkers furnish the first instance of
intellectual freedom, from which arose their intelligent criticism and
speculation. "They discovered skepticism in the higher and proper
significance of the word, and this was their supreme contribution to
human thought." (_James Harvey Robinson: "The Mind In The Making."_)

We know the teachings of Socrates only through his disciple Plato, as
Socrates wrote nothing himself. From this source we gather that Socrates
firmly upheld the right and necessity of free thought. He was mainly a
moralist and reformer, and attempted to prove the existence of God by
finding evidence of design in nature. He rejected the crude religious
ideas of his nation, was opposed to anthropomorphism, but considered it
his duty to conform publicly to this belief. In his old age, he was
charged with rejecting the gods of the state, and was sentenced to
death.

The philosophy of Plato has given rise to diverse interpretations and
there are those who, on reading the Dialogues, believe that it is not
amiss to state that in certain utterances there is ground to hold that
Plato argued for the pragmatic value of a belief in God and personal
immortality; that he does not stress the truth of the matter, but argues
mainly for the benefit which the State derives from the belief; that
such theistic beliefs cannot be demonstrated, and may well be but a
craving and a hope, yet it will be of no harm to believe. He inferred
the existence of God from what he considered the intelligence and design
manifested in natural objects. Mainly, however, Plato's theism was
founded upon his doctrine of a universe of ideas, and as no one today
holds that ideas are self-existing realities, the foundation of his
theism is destroyed. James Harvey Robinson, in his "Mind in The Making,"
discusses the influence of Plato, and remarks, "Plato made terms with
the welter of things, but sought relief in the conception of supernal
models, eternal in the heavens, after which all things were imperfectly
fashioned. He confessed that he could not bear to accept a world which
was like a leaky pot or a man running at the nose. In short, he ascribed
the highest form of existence to ideals and abstractions. This was a new
and sophisticated republication of savage animism. It invited lesser
minds than his to indulge in all sorts of noble vagueness and
impertinent jargon which continue to curse our popular discussions of
human affairs. He consecrated one of the chief foibles of the human
mind, and elevated it to a religion."

The philosophy of Aristotle is commonly known to be the reverse of
Plato's. Plato started with universals, the very existence of which was
a matter of faith, and from these he descended to particulars.
Aristotle, on the other hand, argued from particulars to universals, and
this inductive method was the true beginning of science. The accumulated
knowledge of his age did not furnish him facts enough upon which to
build and he had to resort to speculation. It does not detract from the
stupendous achievement of this man that the clergy of the Middle Ages,
in control of the few isolated centers of learning, looked upon the
philosophy of Aristotle as final and considered his works as
semi-sacred, and in their immersion in un-reason and unreality, exalted
as immutable and infallible the absurdities in the speculations of a
mind limited to the knowledge of centuries before theirs.

In the attempt to explain plant and animal life, Aristotle formulated
the theory that a special form of animating principle was involved. The
"elan vital" of Bergson and the theory of Joad are modern reiterations
of this conception. Aristotle is not quite consistent when he attempts
to give us his theistic beliefs. At times God is, for him, a mysterious
spirit that never does anything and has not any desire or will.
Elsewhere, he conceives God as pure energy; a prime mover unmoved.
Certain modern physicists still cling to this Aristotelian god. This
conception of a deity was far from the beliefs of his age, and it is not
strange that Aristotle was charged with impiety and with having taught
that prayer and sacrifice were of no avail. He fled from Athens and
shortly afterwards died in exile.

These three supreme Greek thinkers, Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, have
not contributed a single argument for the existence of a supreme being
which is now not discredited. Socrates relied on the now outmoded
argument from design; and only in a greatly modified form are the
arguments of Plato and Aristotle accepted by modern theists. Holding
such heretical views in an age when history was a frail fabric of
legends, and the scientific explanation of nature in its extreme
infancy, what would their views be today?

In the consideration of the Greek thinkers of lesser importance one
finds that they were continually storming against the religious
conceptions of the populace. The philosophers were ever unpopular with
the credulous. "Damon and Anaxagoras were banished; Aspasia was
impeached for blasphemy and the tears of Pericles alone saved her;
Socrates was put to death; Plato was obliged to reserve pure reason for
a chosen few, and to adulterate it with revelation for the generality of
his disciples; Aristotle fled from Athens for his life, and became the
tutor of Alexander." (_Winwood Reade: "The Martyrdom of Man."_)

Anaxagoras, the friend and master of Pericles, Euripides, and Socrates,
was accused by the superstitious Athenians of atheism and impiety to the
gods. He was condemned to death and barely escaped this fate through the
influence of Pericles; which resulted in the accusation of atheism
against Pericles. Euripides was accused of heresy, and Aeschylus was
condemned to be stoned to death for blasphemy and was saved from this
fate by his brother Aminias. The philosophy of Parmenides was distinctly
pantheistic, and Pythagoras, who attempted to purify the religion of the
Greeks and free it from its absurdities and superstitions, was exiled
for his scepticism.

Democritus, a materialist and atheist of 2500 years ago, formulated a
mechanical view of phenomena in accordance with which everything that
happens is due to physical impacts. "Such a materialism was a great
liberation from superstition; and had it survived in its integrity, the
path of European wisdom would have been vastly different from what it
was. What the path would have been, we are beginning to see to-day, for
since the nineteenth century we have been treading it more or less
consistently but by no means so gallantly and courageously as
Democritus." (_G. Boas: "The Adventures of Human Thought."_)

Democritus and the Epicureans strove to deliver men from their two chief
apprehensions: the fear of the gods, and the fear of death; and in so
doing rejected the religious beliefs and substituted a rational and
scientific conception of the universe.

It was Xenophanes, the Voltaire of Greece, who brought to the attention
of his countrymen the discovery that man created the gods in his own
image. He attacked the conceptions of the Greek deities with these
words, "Mortals deem that the gods are begotten as they are, and have
clothes like theirs, and voice and form ... Yes, and if oxen and horses
or lions had hands, and could paint with their hands, and produce works
of art as men do, horses would paint the forms of the gods like horses,
and oxen like oxen, and make their bodies in the image of their several
kinds.... The Ethiopians make their gods black and snub-nosed; the
Thracians say theirs have blue eyes and red hair."

Considering Greek philosophy in its entirety, we see that it was
naturalistic rather than supernaturalistic, and rationalistic rather
than mystical. These gifted men saw no clear indication for the
existence of a supreme being; very few of them speak of the deity in the
role of Providence and fewer still believed in personal immortality.

Professor Boas, in contrasting Asiatic mythology with Greek philosophy,
remarks: "The Asiatic myths assumed the existence of beings beyond the
world, not subject to mundane laws, who made and controlled the course
of events. There was no reason why they should have made a world. They
seemed to be living as divine a life without it as with it. The question
was one which persisted in Asiatic thought, and when Christianity became
dominant in Europe, much of its theologians' time was spent in answering
it. The only plausible answer then was that God made the world because
He felt like it. For no reason could be given sufficiently compelling to
sway the will of the Omnipotent. But such an answer was unsatisfactory
to the Greek. In his philosophy all this is changed. No god steps out of
the machine to initiate cosmic history. The First Cause is a physical
substance, some material thing, which operates by the laws of its own
nature. Its every movement is theoretically open to the scrutiny of
reason. And hence, a scientific rather than a religious answer can be
given to every question."

At the beginning of the Christian era, the cultured Romans were stoics
or epicureans. The poet Lucretius was an epicurean who regarded the
belief in the gods as a product of the terrors of primitive man and
recommended that the mind should be emancipated from the fear of the
gods and argued against the immortality of the soul. Seneca, Epictetus,
and Marcus Aurelius were stoics. Cicero insinuates that the gods are
only poetical creations, that the popular doctrine of punishment in a
world to come is only an idle fable, and is uncertain whether the soul
is immortal. Seneca wrote against the religion of his country, and the
philosophy of cultured Romans of the time of the physician Galen tended
towards atheism.

The prime factor of Greek philosophy was the insistence on intelligence
and knowledge, and by these means it reached its pinnacle of reasoning.
The blight that exterminated all scientific progress, with the fall of
the Roman Empire, carried with it the neglect of the Greek thinkers.
Similar to the retrogression of scientific thought, traced in former
chapters, is the corresponding retrogression in philosophic thought. In
place of the free inquiry of the Greeks we see arising the theology of
Clement of Alexandria, Origen, St. Augustine, and finally that of St.
Thomas Aquinas. At the time of St. Augustine most of the cultural Greek
writings had disappeared in western Europe. The greatest store of Greek
thought was in the hands of the Arab scholars and led to a marked
scepticism, as we see manifested in the writings of the Spanish Moors.

It is significant that during the "age of faith" in Europe no
philosopher of merit arose, and the only philosophy permitted was the
puerile Scholastic-Aristotelic. This scholastic philosophy, hemmed in
between metaphysics and theology, sought to reconcile Plato, Plotinus,
and Aristotle with the needs of orthodoxy, and split hairs over subtle
essences and entities. Francis Bacon impeaches, in this manner, the
medieval philosophers: "Having sharp and strong wits, and abundance of
leisure, and small variety of reading, but their wits being shut up in
the cells of a few authors, as their persons were shut up in the cells
of monasteries and colleges, and knowing little history, either of
nature or time, did out of no great quantity of matter and infinite
agitation of wit spin out unto us those laborious webs of learning which
are extant in their books."

The sole preoccupation of medieval philosophy seemed to be conjectures
as to what would happen to man after death, and the entire system of
thought was based on authority. The medieval philosopher turned in
disdain from the arduous path of investigation of actual phenomena and
confidently believed that he could find truth by easy reliance upon
revelation and the elaboration of dogmas. A few brave minds rebelled
against this unnatural imprisonment of the intellect, with the usual
consequences. Peter Abelard was condemned for his scepticism at a
council at Sens in 1140; the philosophy of John Scotus Erigena was
condemned for its pantheistic ideas by a council at Sens in 1225; and
the pantheistic views of Bruno had much to do with his martyrdom in the
year 1600.

Montaigne, the pioneer of modern scepticism, gave voice to his
repugnance for dogmas in his brilliant Essays, in which he stated that
all religious opinions are the result of custom; and that he doubted if,
