
Paul's graceful way of enjoining it here is no mere pretty compliment.
The Thessalonians did not need to be bidden to love the brethren, for
such love was a part of their new life, and breathed into their hearts
by God Himself. They were drawn together by common relation to Jesus,
and driven together by common alienation from the world. Occasions of
divergence had not yet risen. The world had not yet taken on a varnish
of Christianity. The new bond was still strong in its newness. So, short
as had been the time since Paul landed at Neapolis, the golden chain of
love bound all the Macedonian Christians together, and all that Paul had
to exhort was the strengthening of its links and their tightening.

That fair picture faded soon, but it still remains true that the deeper
our love to Jesus, the warmer will be our love to all His lovers. The
morning glow may not come back to the prosaic noonday, but love to the
brethren remains as an indispensable token of the Christian life. Let us
try ourselves thereby.

II. What have exhortations to steady work to do with exhortations to
increasing love? Not much, apparently; but may not the link be, 'Do not
suppose that your Christianity is to show itself only in emotions,
however sweet; the plain humdrum tasks of a working man's life are quite
as noble a field as the exalted heights of brotherly love.' A loving
heart is good, but a pair of diligent hands are as good. The
juxtaposition of these two commands preaches a lesson which we need
quite as much as the Thessalonians did. Possibly, too, as we see more
fully in the second Epistle, the new truths, which had cut them from
their old anchorage, had set some of them afloat on a sea of unquiet
expectation. So much of their old selves had been swept away, that it
would be hard for some to settle down to the old routine. That is a
common enough experience in all 'revivals,' and at Thessalonica it was
intensified by speculations about Christ's coming.

The 'quiet' which Paul would have us cultivate is not only external, but
the inward tranquillity of a spirit calm because fixed on God and filled
with love. The secret place of the Most High is ever still, and, if we
dwell there, our hearts will not be disturbed by any tumults without. To
'do our own business' is quite a different thing from selfish 'looking
on our own things,' for a great part of our business is to care for
others, and nothing dries up sympathy and practical help more surely
than a gossiping temper, which is perpetually buzzing about other
people's concerns, and knows everybody's circumstances and duties
better than its own. This restless generation, whose mental food is so
largely the newspaper, with its floods of small-talk about people, be
they politicians, ministers, or murderers, sorely needs these precepts.
We are all so busy that we have no time for quiet meditation, and so
much occupied with trivialities about others that we are strangers to
ourselves. Therefore religious life is low in many hearts.

The dignity of manual labour was a new doctrine to preach to Greeks, but
Paul lays stress on it repeatedly in his letters to Thessalonica.
Apparently most of the converts there were of the labouring class, and
some of them needed the lesson of Paul's example as well as his precept.
A Christian workman wielding chisel or trowel for Christ's sake will
impress 'them that are without.' Dignity depends, not on the nature, but
on the motive, of our work. 'A servant with this clause makes drudgery
divine.' It is permissible to take the opinion of those who are not
Christians into account, and to try to show them what good workmen
Christ can turn out. It is right, too, to cultivate a spirit of
independence, and to prefer a little earned to abundance given as a gift
or alms. Perhaps some of the Thessalonians were trying to turn brotherly
love to profit, and to live on their richer brethren. Such people infest
the Church at all times.

III. With what ease, like a soaring song-bird, the letter rises to the
lofty height of the next verses, and how the note becomes more musical,
and the style richer, more sonorous and majestic, with the changed
subject! From the workshop to the descending Lord and the voice of the
trumpet and the rising saints, what a leap, and yet how easily it is
made! Happy we if we keep the future glory and the present duty thus
side by side, and pass without jar from the one to the other!

The special point which Paul has in view must be kept well in mind. Some
of the Thessalonians seem to have been troubled, not by questions about
the Resurrection, as the Corinthians afterwards were, but by a curious
difficulty, namely, whether the dead saints would not be worse off at
Christ's coming than the living, and to that one point Paul addresses
himself. These verses are not a general revelation of the course of
events at that coming, or of the final condition of the glorified
saints, but an answer to the question, What is the relation between the
two halves of the Church, the dead and the living, in regard to their
participation in Christ's glory when He comes again? The question is
answered negatively in verse 15, positively in verses 16 and 17.

But, before considering them, note some other precious lessons taught
here. That sweet and consoling designation for the dead, 'them who sleep
in Jesus,' is Christ's gift to sorrowing hearts. No doubt, the idea is
found in pagan thinkers, but always with the sad addition, 'an eternal
sleep.' Men called death by that name in despair. The Christian calls it
so because he knows that sleep implies continuous existence, repose,
consciousness, and awaking. The sleepers are not dead, they will be
roused to refreshed activity one day.

We note how emphatically verse 14 brings out the thought that Jesus
died, since He suffered all the bitterness of death, not only in
physical torments, but in that awful sense of separation from God which
is the true death in death, and that, because He did, the ugly thing
wears a softened aspect to believers, and is but sleep. He died that we
might never know what the worst sting of death is.

We note further that, in order to bring out the truth of the gracious
change which has passed on death physical for His servants, the
remarkable expression is used, in verse 14, 'fallen asleep through
Jesus'; His mediatorial work being the reason for their death becoming
sleep. Similarly, it is only in verse 16 that the bare word 'dead' is
used about them, and there it is needed for emphasis and clearness. When
we are thinking of Resurrection we can afford to look death in the face.

We note that Paul here claims to be giving a new revelation made to him
directly by Christ. 'By (or, "in") the word of the Lord' cannot mean
less than that. The question arises, in regard to verse 15, whether Paul
expected that the advent would come in his lifetime. It need not startle
any if he were proved to have cherished such a mistaken expectation; for
Christ Himself taught the disciples that the time of His second coming
was a truth reserved, and not included in His gifts to them. But two
things may be noted. First, that in the second Epistle, written very
soon after this, Paul sets himself to damp down the expectation of the
nearness of the advent, and points to a long course of historical
development of incipient tendencies which must precede it; and, second,
that his language here does not compel the conclusion that he expected
to be alive at the second coming. For he is distinguishing between the
two classes of the living and the dead, and he naturally puts himself in
the class to which, at that time, he and his hearers belonged, without
thereby necessarily deciding, or even thinking about, the question
whether he and they would or would not belong to that class at the
actual time of the advent.

The revelation here reveals much, and leaves much unrevealed. It is
perfectly clear on the main point. Negatively, it declares that the
sleeping saints lose nothing, and are not anticipated or hindered in any
blessedness by the living. Positively, it declares that they precede the
living, inasmuch as they 'rise first'; that is, before the living
saints, who do not sleep, but are changed (1 Cor. xv. 51), are thus
transfigured. Then the two great companies shall unitedly rise to meet
the descending Lord; and their unity in Him, and, therefore, their
fellowship with one another, shall be eternal.

That great hope helps us to bridge the dark gorge of present separation.
It leaves unanswered a host of questions which our lonely hearts would
fain have cleared up; but it is enough for hope to hold by, and for
sorrow to be changed into submission and anticipation. As to the many
obscurities that still cling to the future, the meaning and the nature
of the accompaniments, the shout, the trumpet, and the like, the way of
harmonising the thought that the departed saints attend the descending
Lord, with whom they dwell now, with the declaration here that they rise
from the earth to meet Him, the question whether these who are thus
caught up from earth to meet the Lord in the air come back again with
Him to earth,--all these points of curious speculation we may leave. We
know enough for comfort, for assurance of the perfect reunion of the
saints who sleep in Jesus and of the living, and of the perfect
blessedness of both wings of the great army. We may be content with what
is clearly revealed, and be sure that, if what is unrevealed would have
been helpful to us, He would have told us. We are to use the revelation
for comfort and for stimulus, and we are to remember that 'times and
seasons' are not told us, nor would the knowledge of them profit us.

Paul took for granted that the Thessalonians remembered the Lord's word,
which he had, no doubt, told them, that He would come 'as a thief in the
night.' So he discourages a profitless curiosity, and exhorts to a
continual vigilance. When He comes, it will be suddenly, and will wake
some who live from a sinful sleep with a shock of terror, and the dead
from a sweet sleep in Him with a rush of gladness, as in body and spirit
they are filled with His life, and raised to share in His triumph.




SLEEPING THROUGH JESUS

          ' . . . Them also which sleep in Jesus . . .'--1
          THESS. iv. 14.


That expression is not unusual, in various forms, in the Apostle's
writings. It suggests a very tender and wonderful thought of closeness
and union between our Lord and the living dead, so close as that He is,
as it were, the atmosphere in which they move, or the house in which
they dwell. But, tender and wonderful as the thought is, it is not
exactly the Apostle's idea here. For, accurately rendered--and accuracy
in regard to Scripture language is not pedantry--the words run, 'Them
which sleep _through_ Jesus.'

Now, that is a strange phrase, and, I suppose, its strangeness is the
reason why our translators have softened it down to the more familiar
and obvious 'in Jesus.' We can understand living through Christ, on
being sacred through Christ, but what can _sleeping_ through Christ
mean? I shall hope to answer the question presently, but, in the
meantime, I only wish to point out what the Apostle does say, and to
plead for letting him say it, strange though it sounds. For the strange
and the difficult phrases of Scripture are like the hard quartz reefs in
which gold is, and if we slur them over we are likely to loose the
treasure. Let us try if we can find what the gold here may be.

Now, there are only two thoughts that I wish to dwell upon as suggested
by these words. One is the softened aspect of death, and of the state of
the Christian dead; and the other is the ground or cause of that
softened aspect.

I. First, then, the softened aspect of death, and of the state of the
Christian dead.

It is to Jesus primarily that the New Testament writers owe their use of
this gracious emblem of sleep. For, as you remember, the word was twice
upon our Lord's lips; once when, over the twelve-years-old maid from
whom life had barely ebbed away, He said, 'She is not dead, but
sleepeth'; and once when in regard of the man Lazarus, from whom life
had removed further, He said, 'Our friend sleepeth, but I go that I may
awake him out of sleep.' But Jesus was not the originator of the
expression. You find it in the Old Testament, where the prophet Daniel,
speaking of the end of the days and the bodily Resurrection, designates
those who share in it as 'them that sleep in the dust of the earth.' And
the Old Testament was not the sole origin of the phrase. For it is too
natural, too much in accordance with the visibilities of death, not to
have suggested itself to many hearts, and been shrined in many
languages. Many an inscription of Greek and Roman date speaks of death
under this figure; but almost always it is with the added, deepened note
of despair, that it is a sleep which knows no waking, but lasts through
eternal night.

Now, the Christian thought associated with this emblem is the precise
opposite of the pagan one. The pagan heart shrank from naming the ugly
thing because it was so ugly. So dark and deep a dread coiled round the
man, as he contemplated it, that he sought to drape the dreadfulness in
some kind of thin, transparent veil, and to put the buffer of a word
between him and its hideousness. But the Christian's motive for the use
of the word is the precise opposite. He uses the gentler expression
because the thing has become gentler.

It is profoundly significant that throughout the whole of the New
Testament the plain, naked word 'death' is usually applied, not to the
physical fact which we ordinarily designate by the name, but to the grim
thing of which that physical fact is only the emblem and the parable,
viz., the true death which lies in the separation of the soul from God;
whilst predominately the New Testament usage calls the physical fact by
some other gentler form of expression, because, as I say, the gentleness
has enfolded the thing to be designated.

For instance, you find one class of representations which speak of death
as being a departing and a being with Christ; or which call it, as one
of the apostles does, an 'exodus,' where it is softened down to be
merely a change of environment, a change of locality. Then another class
of representations speak of it as 'putting off this my tabernacle,' or,
the dissolution of the 'earthly house'--where there is a broad, firm
line of demarcation drawn between the inhabitant and the habitation, and
the thing is softened down to be a mere change of dwelling. Again,
another class of expressions speak of it as being an 'offering,' where
the main idea is that of a voluntary surrender, a sacrifice or libation
of myself, and my life poured out upon the altar of God. But sweetest,
deepest, most appealing to all our hearts, is that emblem of my text,
'them that sleep.' It is used, if I count rightly, some fourteen times
in the New Testament, and it carries with it large and plain lessons, on
which I touch but for a moment. What, then, does this metaphor say to
us?

Well, it speaks first of rest. That is not altogether an attractive
conception to some of us. If it be taken exclusively it is by no means
wholesome. I suppose that the young, and the strong, and the eager, and
the ambitious, and the prosperous rather shrink from the notion of their
activities being stiffened into slumber. But, dear friends, there are
some of us like tired children in a fair, who would fain have done with
the weariness, who have made experience of the distractions and
bewildering changes, whose backs are stiffened with toil, whose hearts
are heavy with loss. And to all of us, in some moods, the prospect of
shuffling off this weary coil of responsibilities and duties and tasks
and sorrows, and of passing into indisturbance and repose, appeals. I
believe, for my part, that, after all, the deepest longing of
men--though they search for it through toil and effort--is for repose.
As the poet has taught us, 'there is no joy but calm.' Every heart is
weary enough, and heavy laden, and labouring enough, to feel the
sweetness of a promise of rest:--

          'Sleep, full of rest from head to foot,
             Lie still, dry dust, secure of change.'

Yes! but the rest of which our emblem speaks is, as I believe, only
applicable to the bodily frame. The word 'sleep' is a transcript of what
sense enlightened by faith sees in that still form, with the folded
hands and the quiet face and the closed eyes. But let us remember that
this repose, deep and blessed as it is, is not, as some would say, the
repose of unconsciousness. I do not believe, and I would have you not
believe, that this emblem refers to the vigorous, spiritual life, or
that the passage from out of the toil and moil of earth into the calm of
the darkness beyond has any power in limiting or suspending the vital
force of the man.

Why, the very metaphor itself tells us that the sleeper is not
unconscious. He is parted from the outer world, he is unaware of
externals. When Stephen knelt below the old wall, and was surrounded by
howling fanatics that slew him, one moment he was gashed with stones and
tortured, and the next 'he fell on sleep.' They might howl, and the
stones fly as they would, and he was all unaware of it. Like Jonah
sleeping in the hold, what mattered the roaring of the storm to him? But
separation from externals does not mean suspense of life or of
consciousness, and the slumberer often dreams, and is aware of himself
persistently throughout his slumber. Nay! some of his faculties are set
at liberty to work more energetically, because his connection with the
outer world is for the time suspended.

And so I say that what on the hither side is sleep, on the further side
is awaking, and that the complex whole of the condition of the sainted
dead may be described with equal truth by either metaphor; 'they sleep
in Jesus'; or, 'when I awake I shall be satisfied with Thy likeness.'

Scripture, as it seems to me, distinctly carries this limitation of the
emblem. For what does it mean when the Apostle says that to depart and
to be with Christ is far better? Surely he who thus spoke conceived that
these two things were contemporaneous, the departing and the being with
Him. And surely he who thus spoke could not have conceived that a
millennium-long parenthesis of slumberous unconsciousness was to
intervene between the moment of his decease and the moment of his
fellowship with Jesus. How could a man prefer that dormant state to the
state here, of working for and living with the Lord? Surely, being with
Him must mean that we know where we are, and who is our companion.

And what does that text mean: 'Ye are come unto the spirits of just men
made perfect,' unless it means that of these two classes of persons who
are thus regarded as brought into living fellowship, each is aware of
the other? Does perfecting of the spirit mean the smiting of the spirit
into unconsciousness? Surely not, and surely in view of such words as
these, we must recognise the fact that, however limited and imperfect
may be the present connection of the disembodied dead, who sleep in
Christ, with external things, they know themselves, they know their home
and their companion, and they know the blessedness in which they are
lapped.

But another thought which is suggested by this emblem is, as I have
already said, most certainly the idea of awaking. The pagans said, as
indeed one of their poets has it, 'Suns can sink and return, but for us,
when our brief light sinks, there is but one perpetual night of
slumber.' The Christian idea of death is, that it is transitory as a
sleep in the morning, and sure to end. As St. Augustine says somewhere,
'Wherefore are they called sleepers, but because in the day of the Lord
they will be reawakened?'

And so these are the thoughts, very imperfectly spoken, I know, which
spring like flowers from this gracious metaphor 'them that sleep'--rest
and awaking; rest and consciousness.

II. Note the ground of this softened aspect.

They 'sleep through Him.' It is by reason of Christ and His work, and by
reason of that alone, that death's darkness is made beautiful, and
death's grimness is softened down to this. Now, in order to grasp the
full meaning of such words as these of the Apostle, we must draw a broad
distinction between the physical fact of the ending of corporeal life
and the mental condition which is associated with it by us. What we call
death, if I may so say, is a complex thing--a bodily phenomenon _plus_
conscience, the sense of sin, the certainty of retribution in the dim
beyond. And you have to take these elements apart. The former remains,
but if the others are removed, the whole has changed its character and
is become another thing, and a very little thing.

The mere physical fact is a trifle. Look at it as you see it in the
animals; look at it as you see it in men when they actually come to it.
In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred it is painless and easy, and men
sink into slumber. Strange, is it not, that so small a reality should
have power to cast over human life so immense and obscuring a shadow!
Why? Because, as the Apostle says, 'the sting of death is sin,' and if
you can take the sting out of it, then there is very little to fear, and
it comes down to be an insignificant and transient element in our
experience.

Now, the death of Jesus Christ takes away, if I may so say, the _nimbus_
of apprehension and dread arising from conscience and sin, and the
forecast of retribution. There is nothing left for us to face except the
physical fact, and any rough soldier, with a coarse, red coat upon him,
will face that for eighteenpence a day, and think himself well paid.
Jesus Christ has abolished death, leaving the mere shell, but taking all
the substance out of it. It has become a different thing to men, because
in that death of His He has exhausted the bitterness, and has made it
possible that we should pass into the shadow, and not fear either
conscience or sin or judgment.

In this connection I cannot but notice with what a profound meaning the
Apostle, in this very verse, uses the bare, naked word in reference to
Him, and the softened one in reference to us. 'If we believe that Jesus
Christ _died_ and rose again, even so them also which sleep.' Ah! yes!
He died indeed, bearing all that terror with which men's consciences
have invested death. He died indeed, bearing on Himself the sins of the
world. He died that no man henceforward need ever die in that same
fashion. His death makes our deaths sleep, and His Resurrection makes
our sleep calmly certain of a waking.

So, dear 'brethren, I would not have you ignorant concerning them which
are asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope.' And I
would have you to remember that, whilst Christ by His work has made it
possible that the terror may pass away, and death may be softened and
minimised into slumber, it will not be so with you--unless you are
joined to Him, and by trust in the power of His death and the
overflowing might of His Resurrection, have made sure that what He has
passed through, you will pass through, and where He is, and what He is,
you will be also.

Two men die by one railway accident, sitting side by side upon one seat,
smashed in one collision. But though the outward fact is the same about
each, the reality of their deaths is infinitely different. The one falls
asleep through Jesus, in Jesus; the other dies indeed, and the death of
his body is only a feeble shadow of the death of his spirit. Do you knit
yourself to the Life, which is Christ, and then 'he that believeth on Me
shall never die.'




THE WORK AND ARMOUR OF THE CHILDREN OF THE DAY

          'Let us, who are of the day, be sober, putting on
          the breastplate of faith and love; and for a
          helmet the hope of salvation.'--1 THESS. v. 8.


This letter to the Thessalonians is the oldest book of the New
Testament. It was probably written within something like twenty years of
the Crucifixion; long, therefore, before any of the Gospels were in
existence. It is, therefore, exceedingly interesting and instructive to
notice how this whole context is saturated with allusions to our Lord's
teaching, as it is preserved in these Gospels; and how it takes for
granted that the Thessalonian Christians were familiar with the very
words.

For instance: 'Yourselves know perfectly that the day of the Lord so
cometh as a thief in the night' (ver. 2). How did these people in
Thessalonica know that? They had been Christians for a year or so only;
they had been taught by Paul for a few weeks only, or a month or two at
the most. How did they know it? Because they had been told what the
Master had said: 'If the goodman of the house had known at what hour the
thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his
house to be broken up.'

And there are other allusions in the context almost as obvious: 'The
children of the light.' Who said that? Christ, in His words: 'The
children of this world are wiser than the children of light.' 'They that
sleep, sleep in the night, and if they be drunken, are drunken in the
night.' Where does that metaphor come from? 'Take heed lest at any time
ye be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the cares of this
life, and so that day come upon you unawares.' 'Watch, lest coming
suddenly He find you sleeping!'

So you see all the context reposes upon, and presupposes the very words,
which you find in our present existing Gospels, as the words of the Lord
Jesus. And this is all but contemporaneous, and quite independent,
evidence of the existence in the Church, from the beginning, of a
traditional teaching which is now preserved for us in that fourfold
record of His life.

Take that remark for what it is worth; and now turn to the text itself
with which I have to deal in this sermon. The whole of the context may
be said to be a little dissertation upon the moral and religious uses of
the doctrine of our Lord's second coming. In my text these are summed
up in one central injunction which has preceding it a motive that
enforces it, and following it a method that ensures it. 'Let us be
sober'; that is the centre thought; and it is buttressed upon either
side by a motive and a means. 'Let us who are of the day,' or 'since we
are of the day,--be sober.' And let us _be_ it by 'putting on the
breastplate and helmet of faith, love, and hope.' These, then, are the
three points which we have to consider.

I. First, this central injunction, into which all the moral teaching
drawn from the second coming of Christ is gathered--'Let us be sober.'
Now, I do not suppose we are altogether to omit any reference to the
literal meaning of this word. The context seems to show that, by its
reference to night as the season for drunken orgies. Temperance is
moderation in regard not only to the evil and swinish sin of
drunkenness, which is so manifestly contrary to all Christian integrity
and nobility of character, but in regard to the far more subtle
temptation of another form of sensual indulgence--gluttony. The
Christian Church needed to be warned of that, and if these people in
Thessalonica needed the warning I am quite sure that we need it. There
is not a nation on earth which needs it more than Englishmen. I am no
ascetic, I do not want to glorify any outward observance, but any doctor
in England will tell you that the average Englishman eats and drinks a
great deal more than is good for him. It is melancholy to think how many
professing Christians have the edge and keenness of their intellectual
and spiritual life blunted by the luxurious and senseless
table-abundance in which they habitually indulge. I am quite sure that
water from the spring and barley-bread would be a great deal better for
their souls, and for their bodies too, in the case of many people who
call themselves Christians. Suffer a word of exhortation, and do not let
it be neglected because it is brief and general. Sparta, after all, is
the best place for a man to live in, next to Jerusalem.

But, passing from that, let us turn to the higher subject with which the
Apostle is here evidently mainly concerned. What is the meaning of the
exhortation 'Be sober'? Well, first let me tell you what I think is not
the meaning of it. It does not mean an unemotional absence of fervour in
your Christian character.

There is a kind of religious teachers who are always preaching down
enthusiasm, and preaching up what they call a 'sober standard of
feeling' in matters of religion. By which, in nine cases out of ten,
they mean precisely such a tepid condition as is described in much less
polite language, when the voice from heaven says, 'Because thou art
neither cold nor hot I will spue thee out of My mouth.' That is the real
meaning of the 'sobriety' that some people are always desiring you to
cultivate. I should have thought that the last piece of furniture which
any Christian Church in the twentieth century needed was a refrigerator!
A poker and a pair of bellows would be very much more needful for them.
For, dear brethren, the truths that you and I profess to believe are of
such a nature, so tremendous either in their joyfulness and beauty, or
in their solemnity and awfulness, that one would think that if they once
got into a man's head and heart, nothing but the most fervid and
continuous glow of a radiant enthusiasm would correspond to their
majesty and overwhelming importance. I venture to say that the only
consistent Christian is the enthusiastic Christian; and that the only
man who will ever do anything in this world for God or man worth doing
is the man who is not _sober_, according to that cold-blooded definition
which I have been speaking about, but who is all ablaze with an
enkindled earnestness that knows no diminution and no cessation.

Paul, the very man that is exhorting here to sobriety, was the very type
of an enthusiast all his life. So Festus thought him mad, and even in
the Church at Corinth there were some to whom in his fervour, he seemed
to be 'beside himself' (2 Cor. v. 13).

Oh! for more of that insanity! You may make up your minds to this; that
any men or women that are in thorough earnest, either about Christianity
or about any other great, noble, lofty, self-forgetting purpose, will
have to be content to have the old Pentecostal charge flung at
them:--'These men are full of new wine!' Well for the Church, and well
for the men who deserve the taunt; for it means that they have learned
something of the emotion that corresponds to such magnificent and awful
verities as Christian faith converses with.

I did not intend to say so much about that; I turn now for a moment to
the consideration of what this exhortation really means. It means, as I
take it, mainly this: the prime Christian duty of self-restraint in the
use and the love of all earthly treasures and pleasures.

I need not do more than remind you how, in the very make of a man's
soul, it is clear that unless there be exercised rigid self-control he
will go all to pieces. The make of human nature, if I may say so, shows
that it is not meant for a democracy but a monarchy.

Here are within us many passions, tastes, desires, most of them rooted
in the flesh, which are as blind as hunger and thirst are. If a man is
hungry, the bread will satisfy him all the same whether he steals it or
not; and it will not necessarily be distasteful even if it be poisoned.
And there are other blind impulses and appetites in our nature which ask
nothing except this:--'Give me my appropriate gratification, though all
the laws of God and man be broken in order to get it!'

And so there has to be something like an eye given to these blind
beasts, and something like a directing hand laid upon these instinctive
impulses. The true temple of the human spirit must be built in stages,
the broad base laid in these animal instincts; above them, and
controlling them, the directing and restraining will; above it the
understanding which enlightens it and them; and supreme over all the
conscience with nothing between it and heaven. Where that is not the
order of the inner man you get wild work. You have set 'beggars on
horseback,' and we all know where they go! The man who lets passion and
inclination guide is like a steam-boat with all the furnaces banked up,
with the engines going full speed, and nobody at the wheel. It will
drive on to the rocks, or wherever the bow happens to point, no matter
though death and destruction lie beyond the next turn of the screw. That
is what you will come to unless you live in the habitual exercise of
rigid self-control.

And that self-control is to be exercised mainly, or at least as one very
important form of it, in regard to our use and estimate of the pleasures
of this present life. Yes! it is not only from the study of a man's make
that the necessity for a very rigid self-government appears, but the
observation of the conditions and circumstances in which he is placed
points the same lesson. All round about him are hands reaching out to
him drugged cups. The world with all its fading sweet comes tempting
him, and the old fable fulfils itself--Whoever takes that Circe's cup
and puts it to his lips and quaffs deep, turns into a swine, and sits
there imprisoned at the feet of the sorceress for evermore!

There is only one thing that will deliver you from that fate, my
brother. 'Be sober,' and in regard to the world and all that it offers
to us--all joy, possession, gratification--'set a knife to thy throat if
thou be a man given to appetite.' There is no noble life possible on any
other terms--not to say there is no Christian life possible on any other
terms--but suppression and mortification of the desires of the flesh and
of the spirit. You cannot look upwards and downwards at the same moment.
Your heart is only a tiny room after all, and if you cram it full of the
world, you relegate your Master to the stable outside. 'Ye cannot serve
God and Mammon.' 'Be sober,' says Paul, then, and cultivate the habit of
rigid self-control in regard to this present. Oh! what a melancholy,
solemn thought it is that hundreds of professing Christians in England,
like vultures after a full meal, have so gorged themselves with the
garbage of this present life that they cannot fly, and have to be
content with moving along the ground, heavy and languid. Christian men
and women, are you keeping yourselves in spiritual health by a very
sparing use of the dainties and delights of earth? Answer the question
to your own souls and to your Judge.

II. And now let me turn to the other thoughts that lie here. There is,
secondly, a motive which backs up and buttresses this exhortation. 'Let
us who are of the day'--or as the Revised Version has it a little more
emphatically and correctly, 'Let us, since we are of the day, be sober.'
'The day'; what day? The temptation is to answer the question by
saying--'of course the specific day which was spoken about in the
beginning of the section, "the day of the Lord," that coming judgment by
the coming Christ.' But I think that although, perhaps, there may be
some allusion here to that specific day, still, if you will look at the
verses which immediately precede my text, you will see that in them the
Apostle has passed from the thought of 'the day of the Lord' to that of
day in general. That is obvious, I think, from the contrast he draws
between the 'day' and the 'night,' the darkness and the light. If so,
then, when he says 'the children of the day' he does not so much
mean--though that is quite true--that we are, as it were, akin to that
day of judgment, and may therefore look forward to it without fear, and
in quiet confidence, lifting up our heads because our redemption draws
nigh; but rather he means that Christians are the children of that which
expresses knowledge, and joy, and activity. Of these things the day is
the emblem, in every language and in every poetry. The day is the time
when men see and hear, the symbol of gladness and cheer all the world
over.

And so, says Paul, you Christian men and women belong to a joyous realm,
a realm of light and knowledge, a realm of purity and righteousness. You
are children of the light; a glad condition which involves many glad and
noble issues. Children of the light should be brave, children of the
light should not be afraid of the light, children of the light should be
cheerful, children of the light should be buoyant, children of the
light should be transparent, children of the light should be hopeful,
children of the light should be pure, and children of the light should
walk in this darkened world, bearing their radiance with them; and
making things, else unseen, visible to many a dim eye.

But while these emblems of cheerfulness, hope, purity, and illumination
are gathered together in that grand name--'Ye are the children of the
day,' there is one direction especially in which the Apostle thinks that
that consideration ought to tell, and that is the direction of
self-restraint. '_Noblesse oblige!_'--the aristocracy are bound to do
nothing low or dishonourable. The children of the light are not to stain
their hands with anything foul. Chambering and wantonness, slumber and
drunkenness, the indulgence in the appetites of the flesh,--all that may
be fitting for the night, it is clean incongruous with the day.

Well, if you want that turned into pedestrian prose--which is no more
clear, but a little less emotional--it is just this: You Christian men
and women belong--if you are Christians--to another state of things from
that which is lying round about you; and, therefore, you ought to live
in rigid abstinence from these things that are round about you.

That is plain enough surely, nor do I suppose that I need to dwell on
that thought at any length. We belong to another order of things, says
Paul; we carry a day with us in the midst of the night. What follows
from that? Do not let us pursue the wandering lights and treacherous
will-o'-the-wisps that lure men into bottomless bogs where they are
lost. If we have light in our dwellings whilst Egypt lies in darkness,
let it teach us to eat our meat with our loins girded, and our staves
in our hands, not without bitter herbs, and ready to go forth into the
wilderness. You do not belong to the world in which you live, if you are
Christian men and women; you are only camped here. Your purposes,
thoughts, hopes, aspirations, treasures, desires, delights, go up
higher. And so, if you are children of the day, be self-restrained in
your dealings with the darkness.

III. And, last of all, my text points out for us a method by which this
great precept may be fulfilled:--'Putting on the breastplate of faith
and love, and for an helmet the hope of salvation.'

That, of course, is the first rough draft occurring in Paul's earliest
Epistle, of an image which recurs at intervals, and in more or less
expanded form in other of his letters, and is so splendidly worked out
in detail in the grand picture of the Christian armour in the Epistle to
the Ephesians.

I need not do more than just remind you of the difference between that
finished picture and this outline sketch. Here we have only defensive
and not offensive armour, here the Christian graces are somewhat
differently allocated to the different parts of the armour. Here we have
only the great triad of Christian graces, so familiar on our
lips--faith, hope, charity. Here we have faith and love in the closest
possible juxtaposition, and hope somewhat more apart. The breastplate,
like some of the ancient hauberks, made of steel and gold, is framed and
forged out of faith and love blended together, and faith and love are
more closely identified in fact than faith and hope, or than love and
hope. For faith and love have the same object--and are all but
contemporaneous. Wherever a man lays hold of Jesus Christ by faith,
there cannot but spring up in his heart love to Christ; and there is no
love without faith. So that we may almost say that faith and love are
but the two throws of the shuttle, the one in the one direction and the
other in the other; whereas hope comes somewhat later in a somewhat
remoter connection with faith, and has a somewhat different object from
these other two. Therefore it is here slightly separated from its sister
graces. Faith, love, hope--these three form the defensive armour that
guard the soul; and these three make self-control possible. Like a diver
in his dress, who is let down to the bottom of the wild, far-weltering
ocean, a man whose heart is girt by faith and charity, and whose head is
covered with the helmet of hope, may be dropped down into the wildest
sea of temptation and of worldliness, and yet will walk dry and unharmed
through the midst of its depths, and breathe air that comes from a world
above the restless surges.

And in like manner the cultivation of faith, charity, and hope is the
best means for securing the exercise of sober self-control.

It is an easy thing to say to a man, 'Govern yourself!' It is a very
hard thing with the powers that any man has at his disposal to do it. As
somebody said about an army joining the rebels, 'It's a bad job when the
extinguisher catches fire!' And that is exactly the condition of things
in regard to our power of self-government. The powers that should
control are largely gone over to the enemy, and become traitors.

'Who shall keep the very keepers?' is the old question, and here is the
answer:--You cannot execute the gymnastic feat of 'erecting yourself
above yourself' any more than a man can take himself by his own coat
collar and lift himself up from the ground with his own arms. But you
can cultivate faith, hope, and charity, and these three, well cultivated
and brought to bear upon your daily life, will do the governing for you.
Faith will bring you into communication with all the power of God. Love
will lead you into a region where all the temptations round you will be
touched as by an Ithuriel spear, and will show their foulness. And hope
will turn away your eyes from looking at the tempting splendours around,
and fix them upon the glories that are above.

And so the reins will come into your hands in an altogether new manner,
and you will be able to be king over your own nature in a fashion that
you did not dream of before, if only you will trust in Christ, and love
Him, and fix your desires on the things above.

Then you will be able to govern yourself when you let Christ govern you.
The glories that are to be done away, that gleam round you like foul,
flaring tallow-candles, will lose all their fascination and brightness,
by reason of the glory that excelleth, the pure starlike splendour of
the white inextinguishable lights of heaven.

And when by faith, charity, and hope you have drunk of the new wine of
the kingdom, the drugged and opiate cup which a sorceress world
presents, jewelled though it be, will lose its charms, and it will not
be hard to turn from it and dash it to the ground.

God help you, brother, to be 'sober,' for unless you are 'you cannot see
the kingdom of God!'




WAKING AND SLEEPING

          'Jesus Christ, who died for us, that, whether we
          wake or sleep, we should live together with
          Him.'--1 THESS. v. 10.


In these words the Apostle concludes a section of this, his earliest
letter, in which he has been dealing with the aspect of death in
reference to the Christian. There are two very significant usages of
language in the context which serve to elucidate the meaning of the
words of our text, and to which I refer for a moment by way of
introduction.

The one is that throughout this portion of his letter the Apostle
emphatically reserves the word 'died' for Jesus Christ, and applies to
Christ's followers only the word 'sleep.' Christ's death makes the
deaths of those who trust Him a quiet slumber. The other is that the
antithesis of waking and sleep is employed in two different directions
in this section, being first used to express, by the one term, simply
physical life, and by the other, physical death; and secondly, to
designate respectively the moral attitude of Christian watchfulness and
that of worldly apathy to things unseen and drowsy engrossment with the
present.

So in the words immediately preceding my text, we read, 'let us not
sleep, as do others, but let us watch and be sober.' The use of the
antithesis in our text is chiefly the former, but there cannot be
discharged from one of the expressions, 'wake,' the ideas which have
just been associated with it, especially as the word which is translated
'wake' is the same as that just translated in the sixth verse, 'let us
watch.' So that here there is meant by it, not merely the condition of
life but that of Christian life--sober-minded vigilance and
wide-awakeness to the realities of being. With this explanation of the
meanings of the words before us, we may now proceed to consider them a
little more minutely.

I. Note the death which is the foundation of life.

Recalling what I have said as to the precision and carefulness with
which the Apostle varies his expressions in this context; speaking of
Christ's death only by that grim name, and of the death of His servants
as being merely a slumber, we have for the first thought suggested in
reference to Christ's death, that it exhausted all the bitterness of
death. Physically, the sufferings of our Lord were not greater, they
were even less, than that of many a man. His voluntary acceptance of
them was peculiar to Himself. But His death stands alone in this, that
on His head was concentrated the whole awfulness of the thing. So far as
the mere external facts go, there is nothing special about it. But I
know not how the shrinking of Jesus Christ from the Cross can be
