controversialist, but as a theologian he was brilliant rather than
solid. His strong leaning towards novelties brought him into conflict
with Cajetan and in fact with the whole Dominican Order, the most
cherished opinions of which he loved to attack. /Dominic Soto/ (1494-
1560) was a student of Alcala and Paris, joined the Dominicans in
1524, taught theology at Salamanca from 1532 till 1545, when he went
to the Council of Trent, where his services were invaluable especially
on the question of Grace and Justification, acted for a time as
confessor to Charles V., and returned finally to his chair at
Salamanca. He was the last of the great commentators on the
/Sentences/ of Peter Lombard. His principal works were /De Natura et
Gratia/, written for the information of the Fathers of Trent and /De
Justitia et Jure/ (1556). Another of the distinguished Spanish
Dominicans of this period was /Melchior Cano/ (1509-60), who had as
his professor at Salamanca Francis of Vittoria. He taught at Alcala
and Salamanca, accompanied Soto to the Council of Trent, was appointed
bishop but resigned almost immediately, and served for some time as
provincial of the Dominicans. His greatest work was the /De Locis
Theologicis/ (1563), in which as a kind of introduction to theology he
endeavoured to establish scientifically the foundations of theological
science. He discusses the ten /loci/ or sources which he enumerates,
namely, Scripture, Tradition, the Catholic Church, the Councils, the
Fathers, the Roman Church, the Scholastics, Reason, the authority of
philosophers, and the authority of historians. His style is simple,
concise, and elegant.

/Robert Bellarmine/[3] (1542-1621) was born in Tuscany, joined the
Society of Jesus (1560), studied at the /Collegium Romanum/ and at
Louvain, where he taught for some time, was recalled to Rome to assume
charge of the new chair of controversy in the /Collegium Romanum/,
took a prominent part in the preparation of the Clementine edition of
the Vulgate, in the /Congregatio de Auxiliis/, and in the trial of
Galileo, engaged in controversy with James I. of England in regard to
the Catholic Oath, was created cardinal (1599), and appointed
Archbishop of Capua (1602). Cardinal Bellarmine was a deeply religious
man, severe only with himself, an indefatigable student always anxious
to be just to his opponents, and specially gifted as a lecturer and
writer. His greatest work was undoubtedly the /Disputationes de
controversis Christianae fidei articulis/, in which he displayed a
most minute and accurate knowledge of the religious tenets of all the
sects of the Reformers. The book created such an enormous sensation in
Europe at the time that special lecturers were employed at some of the
Protestant universities to undertake its refutation. His commentary on
the Psalms, and the Catechism prepared by him at the request of
Clement VIII. also deserve special notice. The last complete edition
of his writings was published at Paris in 1870. /Francis Suarez/[4]
(1548-1617) was born at Granada, joined the Society of Jesus in
Salamanca (1564) and taught at Valladolid, Rome, Alcala, Salamanca,
and Coimbra. Like Bellarmine Suarez was a man of great personal piety,
well versed in the writings of the Fathers and in the literature of
the Reformers. His works are clear and well arranged but somewhat too
diffuse. The last edition (Vives) of his works was published at Paris
(1856-61). /John de Lugo/ (1583-1660) was born at Madrid, went to
Salamanca to study law, and there joined the Jesuits. He lectured
first at Valladolid, and later on at Rome where he attracted crowds of
students, and he was created cardinal in 1643. In his works he has
covered practically the entire field of dogmatic and moral theology.
The best known are perhaps /De Justitia et Jure/ and his treatises on
the Incarnation, the Sacraments, the Eucharist, and the Sacrifice of
the Mass. The last edition of his published works was issued at Paris
(1868-9). /Dionysius Petavius/[5] (Petau, 1583-1652) was born at
Orleans, studied arts and theology at Paris, entered the Society of
Jesus (1605), and taught theology at Paris for twenty-two years. He
was one of the best known and most respected scholars of his age.
Quite apart from his merits as a theologian, his works on chronology,
notably the /De doctrina temporum/ and the /Tabulae Chronologicae/
would have been sufficient to place him in the first rank of the
scholars of his period. In theology he is chiefly remarkable for the
introduction and application of the historical method in his
discussion of dogma, and hence he is referred to rightly as the
"Father of the History of Dogma." His principal theological work is
the /Dogmata Theologica/ (1644-50).

The splendid example of a scientific treatment of moral theology set
by St. Thomas produced very little effect during the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries, for the simple reason that the /Sentences/, and
not the /Summa/, was the text-book used generally in the schools.
Following along the lines marked out by Raymond of Penafort in his
/Summa de poenitentia et matrimonio/ (1235) a large number of /Summae/
or manuals for the use of confessors were published during the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the last of them being that of
Silvester Prierias, one of the earliest opponents of Luther. One of
the few writers of this period who undertook to give a scientific
explanation of moral principles is St. Antoninus (1389-1459), the
Dominican Archbishop of Florence, in his /Summa Theologica Moralis/.

The rejection of the /Sentences/ in favour of the /Summa/, and the
reform decrees of the Council of Trent gave a new impetus to the study
of moral theology during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Most
of the great writers of this period, Gregory of Valencia (1550-1603),
Vasquez (1549-1604), Lessius (1554-1623), Banez (1528-1604), Medina
(1527-81), Sanchez (1550-1610), Saurez, and De Logo devoted special
attention to the underlying principles of moral theology, and in some
cases to their practical application. The /De Poenitentia/ and the
/Responsa Moralia/ of De Lugo served as models of what might be called
mixed treatment, partly scientific and partly casuistical. The
/Theologia Moralis/ of the Jesuit writer, Paul Laymann (1574-1635),
the /Instructio Sacerdotum/ of Cardinal Toledo and the /Medulla
Theologiae Moralis/ of Hermann Busenbaum (1600-68), which went through
forty editions in his own lifetime, may be cited as examples of this
method.

The controversy regarding Probabilism did not assume a serious aspect
till the rise and condemnation of Jansenism. During this period the
enemies of the Jesuits pointed to the approval given to Probabilism by
the Fathers of the Society as a proof of the laxity of view introduced
by Jesuit theologians. Whatever may be said of the system, one thing
is certain, namely, that the Jesuit theologians were not the first to
put it forward. It was followed in practice long before the
institution of the Society of Jesus, was enunciated clearly enough as
a theory by the Spanish Dominican Bartholomew Medina (1527-81) and was
adopted, at least in their solutions of particular cases, by most of
the great writers during the latter half of the sixteenth and the
first half of the seventeenth centuries.

Amongst the most notable writers on ascetical theology of this period
were St. Ignatius of Loyola, the author of the /Spiritual Exercises/,
St. Teresa (1515-82) the zealous reformer of the Carmelites, St. John
of God (1495-1550) the founder of the Brothers of St. John of God, the
Dominican Louis of Granada (1504-88), St. Francis de Sales (1567-
1622), the two Jesuit writers Alphonsus Rodriguez (1526-1616) and
Louis de Ponte (1554-1624), and Jean Jacques Olier (1608-57) the
founder of the Sulpicians.

Many causes combined to bring about a great revival in Scriptural
studies. The Humanist movement ensured that commentators would bring
to their task a ready knowledge of Greek and a critical appreciation
of the age and value of manuscripts. The study of Hebrew was taken up
enthusiastically by scholars like Reuchlin, and was rendered
comparatively easy by the grammars and dictionaries published by
Reuchlin, Santez, Pagnino, Pelikan, and Cardinal Bellarmine. The
contention of the early Reformers that the Bible was the sole source
of divine revelation, though never accepted by Catholic scholars,
necessitated a close study of the words and literal meaning of the
sacred text. In opposition to the private interpretation of the
Reformers Catholics contended that the teaching authority of the
Church and the interpretation of the Fathers were the only sure
guides. The distinction between deutero-canonical and proto-canonical
books was ended for Catholics by the decision of the Council of Trent
attributing to both equal authority. The question of the extent of
inspiration was left by the Council of Trent practically in the
position in which it stood when the Council of Florence defined that
God was the author of the sacred books. Many writers were inclined to
hold the view that the divine assistance extended to the style and the
words, while others rejected verbal inspiration. A few Catholic
scholars, for example Lessius and Hamel, seemed to maintain that a
book composed by human industry and without the assistance of the Holy
Ghost might be regarded as inspired if afterwards the Holy Ghost
testified that it contained no error. Since the Vatican Council such a
view is no longer tenable.

The activity in the field of Scriptural studies is witnessed to by the
edition of the Greek and Latin text of the New Testament prepared by
Erasmus, by the Complutensian Polyglot published under the direction
of Cardinal Ximenes (1514-17) to be followed by similar publications
at Antwerp (1569-72) and at Paris (1628-45), by the edition of the
Septuagint at the command of Sixtus V. and the edition of the Vulgate
under Clement VIII. Amongst the great Catholic commentators of the age
may be mentioned Cardinal Cajetan (+1534), the Dominican Santez
Pagnino (+1541), Cornelius Jansen (1576), the Jesuit, John Maldonatus
(+1583), whose commentary on the four Gospels is still unrivalled,
William Estius (+1613), professor at Douay, whose views on Grace were
not unaffected by the controversies then raging at Louvain, and
Cornelius a Lapide, S.J. (+1673), professor at Louvain and Rome, who
published an excellent commentary on the entire Scriptures.

Ecclesiastical History profited largely from the Humanist movement
which brought to light many new documents, and tended to awaken a
spirit of scholarly criticism. The contention put forward by the
Reformers, that primitive Christianity had been completely corrupted
by semi-Pagan novelties during the Middle Ages, made it imperative on
Catholic scholars to direct their attention to the practices and
teaching of the early centuries. New editions of the writings of the
Fathers were prepared by the Dominicans, Jesuits, and by the
Benedictines of St. Maur. The attempt made by the Magdeburg
Centuriators to justify Lutheranism at the bar of history called forth
the /Annales Ecclesiastici/ of Cardinal Baronius (1538-1607). These
Annals dealt with the history of the Church from the beginning till
the year 1198. The work was continued by the Oratorians Raynaldus and
Laderchi, by de Sponde, Bzovius and Augustine Theiner. The History of
the Popes was written by the Augustinian Panvinio (+1568) and by the
Dominican, Ciacconius (+1599). Hagiographical studies were pursued by
Surius (+1578) and by the Jesuit Heribert Rosweyde (1569-1629). It was
the latter who first conceived the plan of publishing the Lives of the
Saints in one series. He died without having done much except to
collect an immense mass of materials. The scheme was, however, taken
up by other members of the society, notably, John Van Bolland
(Bollandus, 1596-1665), Godfrey Henschen (1601-81) and Daniel von
Papenbroeck (Papebroch, 1628-1714). These were the first of the
Bollandists, and the first volume of the /Acta Sanctorum/ appeared in
1643.
                              ----------

[1] Quetif-Echard, /Scriptores Ordinis Praedicatorum/, ii. 14.

[2] Id., ii. 144-51.

[3] Couderc, /Robert Bellarmin/, 2 vols., 1893.

[4] Werner, /Franz Suarez und die Scholastik der letzten
    jahrhunderte/, 1861.

[5] Chatellain, /Viz du Pere D. Petavius/, 1884.



                             CHAPTER VII

                  THE AGE OF ABSOLUTISM AND UNBELIEF


                     NEW CONTROVERSIES AND ERRORS

The centralisation movement, that began in the fifteenth century, and
that tended to increase the power of the sovereign at the expense of
the lesser nobles and of the people, was strengthened and developed by
the religious revolt. The Protestant reformers appealed to the civil
rulers for assistance against the ecclesiastical authorities, and in
return for the aid given to them so generously they were willing to
concede to the king all power in civil and ecclesiastical matters.
Thenceforth the princes were to be so supreme in spirituals as well as
in temporals that their right to determine the religion of their
subjects was recognised as a first principle of government. During the
days of the Counter-Reformation, when religious enthusiasm was aroused
to its highest pitch, the Catholic sovereigns of Europe fought not so
much for the aggrandisement of their own power as for the unity of
their kingdoms and the defence of the religion of their fathers,
threatened as it was with complete overthrow.

But once the first fervour had passed away, and once it was recognised
that religious harmony could not be secured by the sword, Catholic
sovereigns began to understand that the Protestant theory of state
supremacy meant an increase of power to the crown, and might be
utilised to reduce the only partially independent institution in their
kingdoms to a state of slavery. Hence they increased their demands,
interfered more and more in ecclesiastical matters, set themselves to
diminish the jurisdiction of the Pope by means of the /Royal Placet/
and other such legal contrivances, and asserted for themselves as much
authority as could be reconciled with Catholic principles interpreted
in their most liberal sense. They urged the bishops to assert their
independence against the Holy See, and the bishops, forgetful of the
fact that freedom from Rome meant enslavement by the State,
co-operated willingly in carrying out the programme of their royal
masters. Men like Bossuet, carried away by the new theories of the
divine right of kings, aimed at reducing the power of Rome to a
shadow. They were more anxious to be considered national patriots than
good Catholics. They understood only when it was too late that in
their close union with the Holy See lay their only hope of resisting
state aggression, and that by weakening the authority of the Pope they
were weakening the one power that could defend their own rights and
the rights of the Church. Their whole policy tended to the realisation
of the system of national churches, and were it not for the divine
protection guaranteed by Christ to the society that He Himself had
founded, their policy might have been crowned with success.

The principle, too, of individual judgment introduced by the Reformers
was soon pushed to its logical conclusions. If by means of this
principle Luther and his disciples could reject certain doctrines and
practices that had been followed for centuries by the whole Catholic
Church, why could not others, imitating the example that had been
given to them, set aside many of the dogmas retained by Luther as
being only the inventions of men, and why could their successors not
go further still, and question the very foundation of Christianity
itself? The results of this unbridled liberty of thought made
themselves felt in religion, in philosophy, in politics, in
literature, and in art. Rationalism became fashionable in educated
circles, at the courts, and at the universities. Even Catholics who
still remained loyal to the Church were not uninfluenced by the spirit
of religious indifference. It seemed to them that many of the dogmas
and devotions of the Church were too old-fashioned, and required to be
modernised. The courts in many cases favoured the spread of these
anti-religious views because they meant the weakening of the power of
the Church. They joined with the apostles of rationalism in attacking
the Society of Jesus, because the rationalists realised that the
Jesuits were their strongest opponents, while the politicians believed
them to be the most strenuous supporters of the jurisdiction of Rome.
It was only when the storm of revolution was about to burst over
Europe that the civil rulers understood fully the dangerous tendency
of the movement which they had encouraged. They began to open their
eyes to the fact that war against Christianity meant war against
established authority, and that the unbridled liberty of thought and
speech which had been tolerated was likely to prove more dangerous to
the cause of monarchy than to the cause of religion.


                           (a) Gallicanism.

  Richer, /De ecclesiastica et politica potestate/, 1611. Puyol,
  /Edm. Richer, Etude sur la renovation du gallicanisme au XVIIe
  siecle/, 2 vols., 1877. Lavisse, /Histoire de France/ (vii.),
  1905. Bossuet, /Defensio declarationis cleri gallicani/ (ed.
  1885). Gerin, /Recherches historiques sur l'assemblee de 1682/,
  1878. De Maistre, /De L'Eglise gallicane/, 1821. Gerin, /Louis
  XIV. et le Saint-Siege/, 1894. Mention, /Documents relatifs au
  rapport du clerge avec la royaute de 1682 a 1705/, 1893. Picot,
  /Memoires pour servir a l'histoire ecclesiastique pendan le XVIIIe
  siecle/, 7 vols., 1853-57.

For centuries France had been the zealous defender of the Church and
of the Holy See. From the days of Clovis the French nation had never
wavered in its allegiance to the successors of Saint Peter, many of
whom had been obliged to seek refuge on the soil of France. In return
for this support given ungrudgingly in many a dangerous crisis,
several important privileges were conferred by the Popes on the French
rulers, in which privileges moderate supporters of Gallicanism were
inclined to seek the origin and best explanation of the so-called
Gallican Liberties. But the extreme Gallicans, realising that such a
defence could avail but little against the Pope, who could recall what
his predecessors had granted, maintained that the Gallican Liberties
were but the survival of the liberty possessed by individual churches
in the early centuries, that these liberties had been restricted
gradually by the Holy See, which succeeded in reducing the national
churches to servitude, and that the French Church alone had withstood
these assaults, and had maintained intact the discipline and
constitution of the apostolic age. The rulers of France, well aware
that every restriction upon the authority of the Church meant an
increase of the power of the Crown, gladly fostered this movement,
while the French bishops, unconscious of the fact that independence of
Rome meant servitude to the king, allowed themselves to be used as
tools in carrying out the programme of state absolutism.

The Pragmatic Sanction of Louis IX., referred to by many writers as
the first indication of Gallicanism, is admitted by all scholars to be
a forgery. The exorbitant demands formulated by Philip the Fair during
his quarrel with Boniface VIII. are the first clear indication of the
Gallican theory that confronts the historian. The principles laid down
by the rulers of France during this quarrel were amplified
considerably in the writings of William of Occam, Jean of Jandun, and
Marsilius of Padua, and were reduced to definite form in the time of
the Great Western Schism. At that time, mainly owing to the influence
of Gerson, D'Ailly, and other French leaders, the doctrine of the
superiority of a General Council over the Pope was accepted, and
received official confirmation in the decrees of the fourth and fifth
sessions of the Council of Constance (1414-17), and in the Council of
Basle (1431-6). The decrees passed by the Synod of Bourges (1438) were
strongly anti-papal, and despite of the efforts of Nicholas V. and his
successors to procure their withdrawal most of them remained in force
till the Concordat of 1516. Partly owing to this Concordat, by which
the right of nomination to all bishoprics and abbacies in France was
secured to the Crown, and partly to the strong feeling aroused in
France during the conflict with Calvinism, little was heard of
Gallicanism during the sixteenth century. It was mainly, however, as a
result of the opposition of the French bishops that the decree of the
Council of Florence regarding papal supremacy was not renewed at the
Council of Trent, and it was in great measure due to the influence of
Gallican principles that the decrees of the Council of Trent were not
received in France for years.

Gallicanism was renewed in the beginning of the seventeenth century by
Edmund Richer (1559-1631), syndic of the Paris University and editor
of the works of Gerson. He was a man who held novel views about the
constitution both of Church and State, and who professed his sincere
admiration for Gerson's exposition of the relations that should exist
between a General Council and the Pope. In 1610 one of the Dominican
students undertook to defend publicly the supremacy and infallibility
of the Pope, whereupon a violent controversy broke out, but it was
settled for a time by the prudent intervention of Cardinal Du Perron.
The Parliament of Paris, however, undertook the defence of Richer and
of the work that he published in explanation of his theories. In this
book, /De Ecclesiastica et Politica Potestate/ (1611) he laid it down
that the Church was a limited not an absolute monarchy; that the whole
legislative power rested in the hands of the hierarchy, composed
according to him of both bishops and parish priests; that this
legislative power should be exercised in a General Council, which as
representing the entire hierarchy was the repository of infallibility,
and was not subject to the Pope; that the power of executing the
decrees of General Councils and of carrying on the administration of
the Church rested in the hands of the Pope, who could not act contrary
to the canons; that neither Pope nor hierarchy could undertake to
enforce ecclesiastical decrees by any other means except persuasion;
and that if force were required it could be exercised only by the head
of the State, who was the natural protector of the Church, and
responsible to God for the due observance of the canons.

This book was condemned by the provincial Synod of Sens, held under
the presidency of Cardinal Du Perron in 1612, by the provincial Synod
of Aix, by the Bishop of Paris, and by the Pope. The Parliament of
Paris, however, supported Richer, who lodged an appeal with the civil
authorities against the action of the bishops, and sought to secure
for his theories the support of the Sorbonne. Though forced by the
king to resign his office at the University he continued to defend his
views stubbornly till 1629, when for political rather than for
religious reasons he was called upon by Cardinal Richelieu to sign a
complete recantation. Shortly before his death in 1631 he declared in
the presence of several witnesses that this submission was made freely
and from conviction, but some papers written by him and discovered
after his death make it very difficult to believe that these
protestations were sincere.

The writings of Pithou, Richer, and Dupuy, and above all the rising
influence of the Jansenist party helped to spread the Gallican
teaching among the French clergy, and to make them more willing to
yield obedience to the king than to the Pope. The Abbot of St. Cyran
attacked the authority of the Holy See, but fortunately the extreme
nature of his views, and the need felt by both the priests and the
bishops of France for the intervention of the Holy See against the
Jansenists, served to restrain the anti-papal feeling, and to keep the
leading theological writers, like Duval, Du Perron, Ysambert and
Abelly, free from any Gallican bias. The accession of Louis XIV.
(1661) marked a new era in the history of the Gallican Liberties. He
was young, headstrong, anxious to extend the territories of France,
and determined to assert his own supreme authority at all costs. With
Louis XIV. firmly seated on the French throne, and with the Jansenist
party intriguing in the Parliament of Paris, which had shown itself
hostile to papal claims, it was not difficult to predict that the
relations with the Holy See were likely to become unfriendly. The Duke
of Crequi,[1] Louis XIV.'s ambassador at Rome, set himself
deliberately to bring about a complete rupture. Owing to an attack
made by some Corsicans of the papal guard on the French embassy, the
ambassador refused to accept any apology and left Rome, while Louis
XIV. dismissed the nuncio at Paris, occupied the papal territories of
Avignon and Venaissin, and despatched an army against the Papal
States. Alexander VII. was obliged to yield to force, and to accept
the very humiliating terms imposed upon him by the Peace of Pisa
(1664).

The Jansenist party and the enemies of the Holy See took advantage of
the policy of Louis XIV. to push forward their designs. A violent
clamour was raised in 1661 against a thesis defended in the Jesuit
schools (/Thesis Claromontana/) in favour of papal infallibility, and
a still more violent clamour ensued when it was maintained in a public
defence at the Sorbonne (1663) that the Pope has supreme jurisdiction
over the Church, and that General Councils, though useful for the
suppression of heresy, are not necessary. The Jansenist party appealed
to the Parliament of Paris, which issued a prohibition against
teaching or defending the doctrine of papal infallibility, but the
majority of the doctors of the Sorbonne stood by their opinion, and
refused to register the decree of Parliament. The opponents of the
Sorbonne, hastening to avenge this first defeat, denounced the defence
of a somewhat similar thesis by a Cistercian student as a violation of
the prohibition. The syndic of the university was suspended from his
office for six months, and the university itself was threatened with
very serious reforms unless it consented to accept the Gallican
theories. As a result of the interference of intermediaries a
declaration satisfactory to the Parliament was issued by the doctors
of the faculty (1663). In this document they announced that it was not
the teaching of the university that the Pope had any authority over
the king in temporal matters, that he was superior to a General
Council, or that he was infallible in matters of faith without the
consent of a General Council. On the contrary, they asserted that it
was the teaching of the university that in temporal affairs the king
was subject only to God, that his subjects could not be dispensed from
their allegiance to him by any power on earth, and that the rights and
liberties of the Gallican Church must be respected. This decree was
signed by seventy-seven doctors, and was published by the Parliament
as the teaching of the entire theological faculty and as a guide that
should be followed in all theological schools. A violent agitation was
begun against all who attempted to uphold the rights of the Holy See
either in public disputations or in published works, an agitation that
was all the more inexplicable, owing to the fact that at this time
both the king and Parliament were endeavouring to persuade the
Jansenists to accept as infallible the decrees by which the Pope had
condemned their teaching.

Before this agitation had died away a new cause of dissension had come
to the front in the shape of the /Regalia/. By the term /Regalia/ was
meant the right of the King of France to hold the revenues of vacant
Sees and abbacies, and to appoint to benefices during the vacancy, and
until the oath of allegiance had been taken by the new bishops and had
been registered. Such a privilege was undoubtedly bad for religion,
and though it was tolerated for certain grave reasons by the second
General Council of Lyons (1274), a decree of excommunication was
levelled against anyone, prince or subject, cleric or layman, who
would endeavour to introduce it or to abet its introduction into those
places where it did not already exist. Many of the provinces of France
had not been subject to the /Regalia/ hitherto, but in defiance of the
law of the Church Louis XIV. issued a royal mandate (1673-75),
claiming for himself the /Regalia/ in all dioceses of France, and
commanding bishops who had not taken the oath of allegiance to take it
immediately and to have it registered.

The bishops of France submitted to this decree with two exceptions.
These were Pavillon, bishop of Alet, and Caulet, bishop of Pamiers,
both of whom though attached to the Jansenist party were determined to
maintain the rights of the Church. The king, regardless of their
