
The night will be gone. The day has come. The shadows flee. He has come,
whose presence puts the new day at dawn, with the East all aflame, and
the fragrant dew glistening gladly on every tender green blade. This
time of expectancy is over;[30] the time of making real has _come_. Then
comes the restoration of the old original love plan to earth and beast
and man.[31]

 "Thou art coming, O my Saviour!
   Thou art coming, O my King!
 In thy glory all-transcendent;
 In thy beauty all resplendent;
   Well may we rejoice and sing!
 Coming! In the opening east,
   Herald brightness slowly swells;
 Coming, O my glorious Priest,
   Hear we not thy golden bells?

 "Thou art coming, Thou art coming!
   We shall meet Thee on Thy way,
 We shall see Thee, we shall know Thee,
 We shall bless Thee, we shall show Thee
   All our hearts could never say!
 What an anthem that will be,
 Ringing out our love to Thee;
 Pouring out our rapture sweet
 At Thine own all-glorious feet!

 "Thou art coming! Rays of glory,
   Through the veil Thy death has rent,
 Touch the mountain and the river
 With a golden glowing quiver,
   Thrill of light and music blent.
 Earth is brightened when this gleam
 Falls on flower, rock, and stream;
 Life is brightened when this ray
 Falls upon its darkest day.

 "Not a cloud and not a shadow,
   Not a mist and not a tear,
 Not a sin and not a sorrow,
 Not a dim and veiled to-morrow,
   For that sunrise grand and clear!
 Jesus, Saviour, once with Thee,
   Nothing else seems worth a thought!
 Oh, how marvellous will be
   All the bliss Thy pain hath bought!

 "Thou art coming! At Thy table,
   We are witnesses of this,
 While remembering hearts Thou meetest,
 In communion clearest, sweetest,
   Earnest of our coming bliss.
 Showing not Thy death alone,
   And Thy love exceeding great,
 But Thy coming and Thy throne,
   All for which we long and wait.

 "Thou art coming! We are waiting
   With a hope that cannot fail;
 Asking not the day or hour,
 Resting on Thy word of power
   Anchored safe within the veil,
 Time appointed may be long,
   But the vision must be sure;
 Certainty shall make us strong,
   Joyful patience can endure!

 "O the joy to see Thee reigning,
   Thee, my own beloved Lord!
 Every tongue Thy name confessing,
 Worship, honor, glory, blessing,
   Brought to Thee with glad accord!
 Thee, my Master and my Friend,
   Vindicated and enthroned!
 Unto earth's remotest end
   Glorified, adored, and owned!"[32]


Working by the Light of the Throne.

But we are still in the "not-yet" interval. We see not yet all things
subject to Him. This is still the waiting time. It is the pleading time
for Him. He pleads for the _personal crowning_ of Himself in our lives,
that He may reign there and He alone. This is our great opportunity. We
shall never see its like again, nor anywhere else than on this earth.

In the reigning time that's coming this peculiar opportunity of crowning
Christ while He still is absent and despised, this will be gone. In the
upper world they have no such opportunity. There is no opposition there.
Now and here is the rarest opportunity to put this great waiting patient
Man on the throne of heart and life, with possessions and ambitions and
plans all in subjection under His feet.

Every woman knows the name of Brussels lace. The old capital of the low
countries of Europe has long been famous for its lace. It is of great
interest to note the conditions under which it is sometimes made. They
are conditions studiously prepared after long experience. In one of the
famous lace factories in Brussels there are a number of small rooms
devoted to the making of some of the most delicate patterns.

Each room is just large enough for a single worker, and is quite dark
except for one narrow window. The worker sits so that the stream of
light falls from above directly upon the threads, while he himself sits
in the darkness. The darkness aids the workman's eyes to see better, and
to work more skilfully in the narrow line of clear light centred on the
delicate task. He weaves in the upper light intensified by the
surrounding gloom, and does exquisite work.

There is a clear line of light _from a throne_ shining down into the
darkness in which we sit and move. It shines from the face of a crowned
Man. In the light of that light we can see clearly to do a difficult bit
of crowning work,--to crown the Christ in our lives and to keep Him
crowned.

As our eyes follow that line of upper light we may catch glimpses of His
wondrous Face up there in the glory. So we shall be steadied and cheered
in the darkness as we stick to our glad crowning work. And so we shall
move forward on the calendar the day when that thin line of light seen
now only by watching eyes shall become a burst of glory light seen by
all eyes.

And this is the thing the crowned Christ is asking of us during this
waiting time, this "not-yet" interval. He is counting on each of us
being faithful to Him, our absent Lord, in this.

 "He is counting on you.
   He has need of your life
   In the thick of the strife:
   For that weak one may fall
   If you fail at His call.
 He is counting on you,
 If you fail Him--
     What then?

 "He is counting on you.
   On your silver and gold,
   On that treasure you hold;
   On that treasure still kept,
   Though the doubt o'er you swept
   'Is this gold not _all_ mine?
   (Lord, I knew it was _Thine_.')
 He is counting on you,
 If you fail Him--
     What then?

 "He is counting on you.
   On a love that will share
   In His burden of prayer,
   For the souls He has bought
   With His life-blood; and sought
   Through His sorrow and pain
   To win 'Home' yet again.
 He is counting on you,
 If you fail Him--
     What then?

 "He is counting on you.
   On life, money, and prayer;
   And 'the day shall declare'
   If you let Him have _all_
   In response to His call;
   Or if He in that day
   To your sorrow must say,
 'I had counted on you,
 But you failed me'--
     What then?

 "He is counting on you.
   Oh! the wonder and grace,
   To look Christ in the face
   And not be ashamed;
   For you gave what He claimed,
   And you laid down your all
   For His sake--at His call.
 He had counted on you,
 And you failed not.
     What then?"[33]

Ah! Please God, by His grace, we shall not fail in _the ruling purpose_
of our lives. We may crown Him Lord of all. We _can_. He asks it. We
surely _will_.

 "With all my powers Him I greet,
   All subject to His call;
 And bowing low at His pierced feet
     _Now_ crown him Lord of all."



FOOTNOTES:

[1] Joseph Addison Richards.

[2] Mark xvi. 19.

[3] Matthew xxvi. 64.

[4] Acts ii. 33; iii. 13-16; v. 31-32; vii. 55, 56.

[5] Psalm lxviii. 18; Ephesians iv. 8; Acts ii. 33.

[6] Romans viii. 34; Ephesians i. 20-22; Philippians ii. 9-11;
Colossians iii. 1.

[7] I Peter iii. 22.

[8] Hebrews i. 3; ii. 8-9; viii. 1; x. 12; xii. 2.

[9] Revelation iii. 21.

[10] Acts ii. 36.

[11] Romans x. 9.

[12] I Samuel xvi. 6; xxiv. 6, 10; II Samuel i. 14-16; xix. 21, and
elsewhere; Psalm xviii. 50, and frequently in Psalms.

[13] John i. 20, 25; Luke iii. 15.

[14] Philippians ii. 10; I Corinthians xv. 24-26.

[15] John xvii. 5; i. 1-3; Colossians i. 15-17.

[16] Matthew xxvi. 64; Acts ii. 22-24, 32-36; Philippians ii. 9-11;
Hebrews ii. 9.

[17] Hebrews ii. 5-18.

[18] Romans vii. 19-22; Jeremiah ix. 10; xii. 4, 11; xxiii. 10; Genesis
iii. 17-19; Acts iii. 21.

[19] Ephesians i. 20-22; Hebrews ii. 6-8.

[20] Philippians ii. 9-11.

[21] Ephesians vi. 12; Colossians ii. 15.

[22] Colossians ii. 10; Ephesians iii. 10; iv. 8-10; I Corinthians xv.
24.

[23] Hebrews ii. 8.

[24] II Peter iii. 8-9; Romans ii. 4; ix. 22; Revelation ii. 21; I Peter
iii. 20; II Peter iii. 15; Exodus xxxiv. 6-7.

[25] James v. 7.

[26] F. M. N.

[27] Ephesians i. 20-22.

[28] Ephesians iii. 20.

[29] John xiv. 12-14.

[30] Hebrews x. 13.

[31] Acts iii. 21.

[32] Frances Ridley Havergal.

[33] Mrs. Bessie Porter Head.




II.--THE CROWN BOOK


 "All hail the power of Jesus' Name!
   Let angels prostrate fall:
 Bring forth the royal diadem,
   And crown Him Lord of all.

 "O that with yonder sacred throng
   We at His feet may fall,
 Join in the everlasting song
   And crown Him Lord of all!

 "With all my powers Him I greet,
   All subject to His call;
 And bowing low at His pierced feet,
   _Now_ crown Him Lord of all.

 "I hail the power of Jesus' Name,
   Before Him gladly fall,
 Bring Him my own heart's diadem
   And crown Him Lord of all!"


The Crowning Book.

There is a _crown book_ in this old Book of God,--the Revelation of
John. It is _the_ crown book, the only one. It is the crown book of the
sixty-six in two senses. It is the capping climax of the whole
revelation of God's Word. It gathers up into itself in a peculiar way
the dominant characteristics of both the Hebrew Old and the Greek New
Testaments.

And it is the book of the Crown. The King is in action. He Himself gives
the message of the book to John. He is seen stepping forward to take
possession of His realm. Then He takes possession. He dispossesses the
pretender. He reigns over the earth. The Revelation of John is the Crown
book.

This is the peculiarity of the Revelation in comparison with all the
other books. Only here is Christ seen exercising His crown rights. From
end to end of the Old Testament pages, His coming is looked forward to,
with an eager longing that grows in intensity as the national failure
grows ever worse.

In the Gospels He comes, but not as He was expected. He is heralded as
King, and claims to be King. He has all the graciousness of a King in
ministering to the needs of the people, and all the power of a King in
His personal touch. But He is rejected by the nation, and goes to the
Cross, yet still as a King,--a humiliated, crucified King.

In the Acts He is the risen, glorified King seated at the Father's right
hand in glory, and at work through His followers among men on the earth.
But it is always in the midst of sharp, bitter opposition. In the
Epistles He is seen crowned at the Father's right hand, guiding and
teaching His followers who are still suffering persecution.

But in the Revelation of John all this is changed. There's a sharp,
decided, advance step. Here He is not only crowned, but stepping
directly and decisively into the action of the earth in the full
exercise of His crowned rights and power. It is peculiarly the book of
the Crown, the royal book, the enthroned Christ exercising fully and
freely at will His crown rights.


Jesus' Bosom Friend.

The book was written by John the disciple and apostle. This is our same
old friend John, whom we met first that ever-memorable afternoon, down
by the Jordan River road, when he was introduced to Jesus by the John of
the deserts, and had his first long, quiet talk with Him.[34] The
friendship began that day, grew steadily, and never flagged. It was one
of the few friendships that Jesus had that never knew any lapse nor
eclipse.

He became, in an outstanding sense, the bosom friend of Jesus. Probably
it was not because of any special gentleness or amiability on John's
part, though he may have had something of these traits. It was more
likely because of the deep, intelligent sympathy between the two, a
sympathy not only of personality, but deeper and stronger because of a
mental and spirit likeness growing up between them. It would seem likely
that John developed a mental grasp, a spirit insight, a student
thoughtfulness, a steadiness of temperament, and with these, a growing
understanding of much--at the least--much of Jesus' spirit and ideals
and vision.
