brain. In the process of memory there must be first of all a thing to be
remembered; second, a record of that thing to be remembered; and third,
something to remember that thing. The thing remembered is the result of
a conscious experience, the record of it the result of its impress at
the time it was experienced, but the rememberer is neither.

That invisible power, which we have called the real man, animates the
body, it places food in it as fuel to produce animal heat, animal
vitality and force, and tries to keep it in good working order as long
as possible. If the body is imperfect at birth or becomes so later, that
invisible power is forced to act through it imperfectly; if the brain is
diseased, there is insanity, if undeveloped, idiocy; and when the body
ceases to respond either perfectly or imperfectly, the invisible power
must surrender it entirely, and there is what we call death.

Now what is this invisible power or force which has entirely vanished,
leaving the physical body and brain cold and motionless? Let us see if
there is an answer. Chemical analysis proves that the visible parts of
the body of man are merely transformed gases; but in a complete analysis
of a living body such as man's there are certain elements to be
considered which are always invisible.[609] Thus at death there is
instantly a cessation of all bodily consciousness--of all willing,
thinking, movement. The power which has made the body conscious, and
which cannot be compared to any known form of matter, is entirely gone.
But there is left in the body a moment after its departure everything
which we know to be material--the animal heat, the animal magnetism, the
animal vitality. When these are gone, the body is cold and stiff, and in
no essential way unlike any other mass of inert matter. If heat be
applied to the body, or magnetism, or vital forces, there is nothing in
it to retain them any more than there would be in a stone. The real man
is gone. Then the body begins to disintegrate. The law of the
conservation of energy and the indestructibility of matter makes it
certain that in the process of death nothing has been lost, certainly
nothing material. The animal heat has gone off somewhere in the
atmosphere or in some other matter; the animal magnetism and vitality
are momentarily lost sight of, but soon they will be attached to other
organic beings such as plants or animals to begin a new cycle of
embodiment. The physical constituents of the body will go to their
appropriate places, into the air as gases, into the water as fluids,
into the earth as salts and minerals, and in a short time may form the
parts of a flower, or fruit, or animal. But where or what is the
willing, the thinking, the remembering, the directing force which once
controlled all these and held them together in unity? Ultra-violet rays
are invisible, but they show their existence through their chemical
action; similarly a soul or Ego may exist invisibly and show its
existence through the vital and physical unity manifested by a living
human being. As we have already seen in the preceding chapter, there are
a number of the first men of science who feel that when all the data of
the latest scientific discoveries in the realm of psychology and of
psychical research are impartially examined there is no escape from some
such hypothesis as the ancient hypothesis of a soul.

If we accept the soul hypothesis, as it seems we must, and regard a soul
as an indestructible unit of invisible power possessing consciousness
and volition, and normally able to exist independently of a human body,
then it becomes a logical and a scientific necessity to postulate its
pre-existence, because as such a unit it is indestructible, in
accordance with the law of the conservation of energy and
indestructibility of matter. We speak here not of the ordinary soul or
human personal consciousness, but of that Ego which Celtic mystics
conceive as the permanent principle (though probably itself relative to
some still higher power) behind the personality--which, in turn, they
believe is a temporary combination wholly dependent upon the Ego.
Accordingly, it is scientifically possible for such a soul as a
homogeneous unit of force or conscious energy to pass from one mass of
matter or physical body to another without disintegration, diminution,
or loss of its own identity. It is scientifically certain, also, from
experiments performed to test the power of resistance to decomposition
exhibited by the force which we call life in an organic body, that such
a force is capable of outwearing many physical embodiments.[610] Recent
demonstrations tend to show that the heredity hypothesis cannot be held
to account fully for such widely varied character or soul individuality
as may be exhibited by members of one family. We must therefore account
for mental, moral, and certainly psychical inequalities among our race
by some other hypothesis; and no hypothesis is more scientific, more in
line with known physiological and psychical processes, or more in accord
with the law of evolution, than that of re-birth.

The theory of the mechanical transmission of acquired characteristics
in a purely physical manner through the germ-plasm is no longer tenable
when all the data of physiology and psychology are admitted. A
vitalistic view of evolution is rapidly developing in the scientific
world, and the weight of evidence is decidedly in favour of regarding
all evolutionary processes, reaching from the lowest to the highest
organisms, as illustrating a gradual unfolding in the sensuous world of
a pre-existing psychical power through an ever-increasing complexity of
specialized structures, this complexity being brought about by natural
selection. Such a view is also strongly supported if not confirmed by
the general scientific belief that spontaneous generation of life is and
always has been impossible on our planet or on any planet: there must
have been life before its physical manifestation or its physical
evolution began.

We may regard this psychical power as like a vast reservoir of
consciousness ever trying to force itself through matter, the walls of
the reservoir. Through the microscopic body of an amoeba there has
percolated a very minute drop from the reservoir. As evolution advances,
the walls of the reservoir become more and more porous, and little by
little the drop increases to a tiny rivulet. Through the higher animals,
the tiny rivulet flows as a brook. Through man as he is, the brook flows
as a deep and broad river. Throughout the completely evolved man of the
far distant future, the deep and broad river will have overflowed all
its banks, it will have inundated and completely overwhelmed the
animal-human nature of the individual through whom it flows, as the
whole volume of the vast reservoir pours itself out. The ordinary
consciousness of man will then have been transmuted into the
subconsciousness, of which it had always been a pale reflection. In
other words, if the theory of the mechanical transmission of acquired
characteristics has failed, as seems to be the case, then we must assume
that there is, as the bearer of all gains made from generation to
generation, some sort of psychical or vitalistic principle. This, making
use of the germ-plasm merely as a physical basis for its manifestation,
begins to build up a body suited to its further evolutionary needs.

The brilliant discoveries of Dr. Jacques Loeb and of M. Yves Delage have
demolished absolutely the old idea that each organ and each tissue
contained in embryo in the normal egg-germ must develop in a particular
and co-ordinate way into a normal organism and after the parental type:
it is possible to make a head grow where there ought to be feet; and at
Zuerich, Standfuss, solely through changing the temperature of his
laboratory, was able to obtain from the same species of butterfly forms
which were tropical and forms which were arctic.[611] All this helps to
establish the hypothesis, which amounts to certainty, that the
conformation of a physical body, or even the kind of species to be born,
is directly determined by physical environment and not by heredity, and
that the chief factor to consider in organisms is the life animating the
body. Physical environment affects only the physical organism; it does
not affect the invisible and unknown life-principle resident within the
physical organism.

The process of fertilization is a physical process. As such it is simply
initiatory to embryonic evolution which also is physical. Once the
proper physical conditions are set up by the parents, life pursues its
marvellous progress in the womb of the human mother, from the
amoeba-like initial embryo to man. That is to say, parents set in motion
the laws governing the reproduction of physical bodies. They create such
conditions as enable the invisible life-force to begin its physical
manifestation.[612] In the two fused germs from the parents resides the
physical inheritance of the offspring, to be outwardly shaped by
environment; but the physical inheritance is a thing distinct from the
psychical part of the living being, just as much as the dead human body
is a thing apart from the life which has left it. Though the old
heredity theory is overthrown by late discoveries, the question as to
what life is in human bodies under all possible environmental conditions
remains unsolved; and so do the questions why there should be sports in
nature, which among man are called geniuses, and why every human being
has a distinct and highly developed individual character, essentially
unlike that of his immediate ancestors.

Embryology proves conclusively that the human embryo retraces in its
growth the evolution of lower life-forms. At first consisting of two
single cells fused into one, it is like the amoeba. By cell-division it
grows and progresses step by step through each lower realm of being
until it comes to be a water-creature with gills; and science teaches
that all organic life on this planet once dwelt in the seas. It grows
progressively out of the water-world stage of organic life into the
world of air-breathing creatures. Nature at last achieves her highest
product, and a human being is born out of the Womb of Time. The initial
microscopic bit of germ-plasm is endowed with power of motion, thought,
and human consciousness, with dominion over all the lower kingdoms
through which by right of ancient conquests it passed in the brief
period of nine months. On every side the problem of life is full of
poetry and wonder; it is the greatest mystery.

Not only can we thus study the age-long evolution of the physical man,
but we have recently acquired sufficient scientific data to lay
foundations for a study of the evolution of the psychical man. Thus, for
example, instincts seem to be nothing more than habits which through
unknown periods of time have become so ingrained in the constitution of
man, and of all animals, that now they have become second nature and
usually are exercised without the need of reasoning processes. The
influence from innate sensuous experiences rises into consciousness as
the life of every normal child and youth unfolds itself; and these
experiences in their full expansion, when the age of maturity has been
reached, constitute in their unity what we call character, which, in one
sense, may be defined as the sum total of instincts of every kind. From
such a point of view, the psychical or invisible power in man is merely
a bundle of acquired habits which make use of the bodily organism in
order to express themselves--in the same way, as we have pointed out,
that electrical forces manifest their presence through a conductor. If
these habits be good, we call their possessor a good man; if evil, we
call him an evil man.

The theory of Charles Darwin suggests that all evolutionary progress is
directed to the acquirement of newer and ever higher instincts. And if
this process be the true one, that is to say, if all instincts, which in
their finer distinctions mark off species from species in all animal
kingdoms, be as Darwin thought--and as is to-day more clearly
evident--the result of a long and gradual evolution through experience
in a sensuous realm of existence, then it would seem to follow that
there must be some kind of a monad (probably a non-sensuous one) to
which such acquired instincts can attach themselves. Such a monad, too,
must have been a percipient and hence a recorder of such
ever-accumulating experiences throughout an inconceivably long chain of
lives, and it of itself must, while so perceiving and recording, not be
subject to the transitoriness of the sensuous realm wherein it gathers
together these instincts, which in their unified expression form its
personality or human character.

In harmony with the vitalistic view of evolution, which implies a
pre-existent psychical power continually striving to express itself
completely through matter, yet normally able to exist independently of a
physical means of expression, we should regard such high mental
processes as judgement, reasoning, analysis and synthesis, and spatial
perception, along with memory, as resultants of very great experience in
a sensuous world, on which in our present psycho-physical constitution
such processes appear to have direct bearing. In other words, for man to
be able to exercise such high mental processes there is need to
postulate incalculable ages of specialization in the nervous apparatus,
and in psycho-physical adjustment, of a kind which has thus enabled the
psychical power to express itself to such a supreme degree in the realm
of mind and matter. The same vitalistic argument is applicable to the
lower mental processes and to the instinctual powers in man, because we
cannot at any time, in viewing the complete evolution of man as a
twofold being composed of a physical and a psychical part, force aside
Fechner's conviction that the problem is a psycho-physical one. A study
of sexual instincts in children seems to confirm this.[613]

Such a psychical and vitalistic hypothesis is, as we have seen, strongly
supported by embryology; and embryology proves conclusively the need of
long ages of physical evolution for the development of each tissue and
highly specialized organ in the human body. Certain French and German
and other scientists of the vitalistic school have demonstrated
physiologically the need of a pre-existent power as the unifying
principle which attracts and compels material atoms to group themselves
into the pattern of the human body[614]--or, as we may add, of any
organic body. Psychical researchers at the outset of their science seem
apparently to have demonstrated psychologically the post-existence of
the personal consciousness-unity; and it is very likely when further
progress has been made in psychics that there will arise a logical need
to postulate, in addition to the personal consciousness-unity, a
hypothetical pre-existent soul-monad as the unifying principle which
attracts and compels psychical atoms of experience (if such an
expression may be used) to group themselves into the personal
consciousness-unity which appears to survive the death of the gross
physical body--for a long or short time, as future research may
show.[615] Such a soul-monad, to follow the view held by Celtic mystics,
led by acquired instincts which were transmitted to it through the
personality (held by the Celtic esoteric doctrine to be a temporary
combination), apparently weaves out of matter the body-unit adapted to
its further evolution, in a way analogous to that in which a silkworm is
led by acquired instincts to weave a cocoon. This body-unit is twofold:
(1) the visible body derived from the visible elements of matter; and
(2) the invisible or ghost-body derived from the invisible or ethereal
elements of matter.

Strictly speaking, for the Celtic mystic this soul-monad is something
upon which the personal consciousness depends for its psychical unity in
precisely the same way as the physical body depends upon the personal
consciousness for its physical unity. The Celtic mystic holds that just
as the body-unity falls back again into its primal elements of matter,
so the personal consciousness-unity (apparently able to survive in the
ghost-body for a long period after its separation from the grosser
physical envelope or human body) also in due time is discarded by the
soul-monad or individuality, and then falls back into its primal
psychical constituents. In other words, the Celtic Esoteric Doctrine of
Re-birth correctly interpreted does not conceive personal immortality,
but it conceives a greater kind of immortality--the immortality of the
unknown principle which gives unity to each temporary personality it
makes use of, and which we prefer to designate as the individuality, the
impersonator. And this individuality is the bearer of all evolutionary
gains made in each temporary personality through which it reflects
itself: it is the permanent evolving principle.

Perhaps an analogy drawn from nature will make the Celtic position
clearer: we may say that the personality occupies a position between the
human body and the soul-monad, just as the moon occupies a position
between the earth and the sun. Personal consciousness is to the human
body what the moonlight is to the earth, merely a pale reflection from a
third thing, the soul-monad or individuality, which is the ultimate
source of both sets of unities, the material or body-unity in its
twofold aspect and the psychical or personal consciousness-unity. Each
personality is temporary, while the individuality, like the sun in
relation to the earth and moon, is capable of at least a relative
immortality: the sun's light, as science holds, existed before there was
any moon to reflect it on to the earth, and may continue to exist when
both the moon and earth are disintegrated. The essential nature of the
sun's energy or life remains unknown to science; so does the essential
nature of the energy or life manifesting itself as the individuality.
Though all such analogies are more or less weak, this one adequately
fits in with the theories concerning the Celtic Esoteric Doctrine of
Re-birth which the most learned of contemporary Celts, chiefly mystics,
have favoured us with; and it is our rare privilege to put these
theories on record for whatever they may be worth. The best hypothesis
is always the one which best explains all available data, and, to our
mind, when very minutely examined, in a way which (chiefly for reasons
of space) cannot be attempted here, this Celtic hypothesis concerning
the nature and destiny of man is the best hitherto adduced.[616]

Objectors to the Re-birth Doctrine as held by the Celts and other
peoples anciently and now, naturally ask why, if we have lived before
here on earth in physical bodies, we do not remember it. But the
shallowness and unscientific nature of this question is at once apparent
to psychologists who know that there exists in man a subconscious mind
which in the great mass of people is almost totally dormant. 'The
subconscious self,' wrote William James, 'is nowadays a well-accredited
psychological entity.... Apart from all religious considerations, there
is actually and literally more life in our total soul than we are at any
time aware of.' And he added:--'It thus is "scientific" to interpret all
otherwise unaccountable invasive alternations of consciousness as
results of the tension of subliminal memories reaching a bursting
point.'[617] Intuition, which all men have experienced, would seem to be
the result of a momentary contact by the physical brain with its
psychical counterpart--the subconscious self, the individuality as
distinguished from the personality.

Certain observed psychological processes in ordinary men and women, who
never really know that they have a subconsciousness or Transcendental
Self, prove that it exists even for them, and any part of man which
exists and functions of itself can be developed so as to be consciously
perceived. This is incontestable. Let us point out a few of these
observed and recorded psychological processes. There may be an unsolved
problem in the mind, or inability to recall a certain name or fact, and
then a sudden, unexpected intuitional solving of the problem and an
instantaneous recollecting of the desired facts, at a time when the
ordinary mind may be entirely absorbed in altogether foreign thoughts.
Again, many persons through accident or disease have lost their memory
to such an extent as to require complete re-education, and then in time,
gradually or instantaneously, as the case may be, have completely
recovered it.[618] And we noticed in our study of supernatural lapse of
time (p. 469) that at the moment of accidental loss of consciousness, as
in drowning for example, all forgotten details of life are
instantaneously reproduced in a complete panorama. These psychological
processes support what we have said above with respect to a psychical
organ being behind the sense-consciousness, and seem thus to prove that
the subconscious mind is the place for recording permanently all
experiences.[619] Under hypnosis, a subject may be requested to perform
a certain act, let us say 11,999 minutes after the moment of making the
request. When the hypnotic condition is removed, the subject has no
personal consciousness of the suggestion, but, as different experiments
have proved conclusively, he invariably performs the act exactly at the
expiration of the 11,999 minutes without knowing why he does so. This
proves that there is a subconsciousness in man which can take full
cognizance of such a suggestion, which can keep count of the passing of
time and then cause the unconscious personality to act in response to
its will.[620] Again, in extreme old age people who have come to have an
imperfect memory or none at all in their normal consciousness, under
abnormal conditions (which seemingly are due to a temporary influx of a
latent psychical power into the physical body and brain, or else to an
awakening of a dormant force within the physical body and brain
themselves) often regain, for a time, complete and clear memory of their
childhood. This proves that the memory is somewhere still perfect, and
that it does not reside in the consciousness of the age-exhausted
physical brain and memory. Albert Moll, in his treatise on hypnotism,
says that events in the normal life which have dropped out of memory can
be remembered in hypnosis:--'An English officer in Africa was hypnotized
by Hansen, and suddenly began to speak a strange language. This turned
out to be Welsh, which he had learnt as a child, but had
forgotten.'[621] And even memory of acts done in hypnotic somnambulism
can be awakened in the normal state.[622] Furthermore, through
psycho-analysis, as Professor Freud has shown, forgotten dreams and
dreams which were never complete in the ordinary consciousness can be
recovered in their entirety out of the subconsciousness.[623] How many
of us can recall without some mental stimulus certain acts performed ten
years ago? A good deal of our present life is no longer vivid, much of
it is forgotten, and in old age many of the memories of youth and of
mature life will be subconscious. If this brain, whose total existence
is comprised between birth and death, cannot remember in a normal way
all its own experiences, how could it be expected to know anything at
all of hypothetical past lives where there were various physical brains
long ago disintegrated--unless the hypothetically ever-existing
transcendental individuality, whose consciousness is the
subconsciousness, be made by some unusual psychical stimuli to transmit
its memory of the past lives to each new brain it creates? In other
words, to have memory of pre-existent conditions there must be
continuity of association with present conditions. If such continuity
exists, it exists in the subconsciousness. And if it exists therein,
then in order to recall in the present personal or ordinary
consciousness, which began at birth, memory of an anterior state of
consciousness, it would be necessary to hold impressed upon the present
physical brain and body a clear and unremittent consciousness of the
subconsciousness. In relation to our personal consciousness, apparently
our greatest powers lie in the subconsciousness which is sleeping and in
embryo, awaiting to be born into the consciousness of this world through
the slow process of evolutionary gestation. In the case of a Buddha, who
on good historical authority is said to have been able to recall all
past existences from the lowest to the highest, this evolutionary
process seems to have reached completion.[624]

Under ordinary conditions, individuals have been known to see a place
which they have never seen before, or to do a thing which they have
never done before in this life nor in any conscious dream-state, and yet
feel that they have seen the place before and done the thing before. M.
Th. Ribot, in his _Diseases of Memory_ (chapter iv), has brought
together many cases of this kind. Some are undoubtedly explicable as
forgotten experiences of the present life. Others, to our mind, strongly
support the theory of pre-existent experiences preserved in memory in
the subconsciousness.

Under chloroform, or other anaesthetics, patients often recover for the
time being forgotten facts of experience, and sometimes appear to make
momentary contact with their subconsciousness and to exhibit therein
another personality. In certain well-defined types of double
personality, which are not the kind due to demon-possession nor to
spirit-possession as in 'mediumship', there are two memories, 'each
complete and absolutely independent of the other.'[625] And in similar
cases, where the subject exhibits alternately numerous personalities, we
see the individuality, that is to say the subconscious man, exhibiting,
as a dramatist might, various characters or personalities of probable
past existences according as each is most active at the moment.
Similarly, crystal-gazing sometimes seems not only to revive lost
memories of this life, but also to call up subconscious memories of some
unknown state of consciousness which may be from a previous life.[626]

M. Ribot has made it clear from his careful study of numerous cases of
amnesia (loss of memory) that 'recollections return in an inverse order
to that in which they disappear'. For example, a celebrated Russian
astronomer lost all memory save that of his childhood, and in recovering
it there appeared first the recollections of youth, then those of middle
age, then the experiences of later years, and, finally, the most recent
events. Many even more marked examples of the law of regression in
amnesia are given by M. Ribot. We conclude from them that all strange
and apparently long-forgotten facts of experience arising in
consciousness out of the subconsciousness, as in the different cases
which have been cited above, would necessarily be those which have been
the longest lost to memory; and hence if they cannot be attached to this
present life then they can only be derived from a former life, because
every primary detail of memory must always originate from an experience
at some past period of time. M. Ribot himself, in his conclusion to
_The Diseases of Memory_, makes this significant observation with
respect to the law of regression in amnesia:--'This law of regression
provides us with an explanation for extraordinary revivification of
certain recollections when the mind turns backward to conditions of
existence that had apparently disappeared for ever.'

In dreams there is a great wealth of latent memory; sometimes memory of
the present waking life, but often not capable, apparently, of being
attached to it, nor explicable as due to the soul wandering from the
body during sleep: the hypothesis of re-birth seems to be the only
adequate one here. Certain dreams suggest that man possesses innate
memories extending backwards to prehistoric times (cf. p. 5 above). This
fits in with Professor Freud's theory in his _Die Traumdeutung_, that
'the dream is nothing else than the concealed fulfilment of a repressed
wish.' Some dreams are 'in the form of frightful, cruel, horrible
scenes, which seem frightful to us, but in a certain depth of the
unconscious satisfy wishes which, in the "prehistoric" ages of our own
mental development, were actually recognized as desires.'[627] This also
supports our vitalistic view of the evolution of human instincts. Again,
in somnambulism there is a much more exalted memory, and clear cases are
on record of facts being then consciously present which cannot be
accounted for save through the same hypothesis.[628]

If we keep in mind the psychology of the dream state, we shall probably
get the clearest intellectual theory as to why, if pre-existence be
true, we do not remember various previous states of existence. In our
present state of consciousness we may enter a dream state, in that dream
state by dreaming we enter a second dream state, and theoretically,
though not by common experience, there may be no limit to superimposed
dream states, each one in itself a state of consciousness distinct from
the waking consciousness. Accordingly, if, as Wordsworth put it, 'our
birth is but a sleep and a forgetting' of another state of
consciousness, and death the abrupt ending of that sleep of dreams and a
waking up, or if the direct opposite be true, and death is the entrance
to a sleep and dream state of consciousness, it becomes very clear how
difficult it would be for us here now either to recall what we may have
dreamt or have actually done in another state of conscious existence
corresponding to our present one. The subtle thinkers of modern India,
who completely accept the doctrine of re-birth as a universal law, have
summed up this abstruse aspect of the dream psychology as follows:--'The
first or spiritual state was ecstasy; from ecstasy it (the Ego) forgot
itself into deep sleep; from deep sleep it awoke out of unconsciousness,
but still within itself, into the internal world of dreams; from
dreaming it passed finally into the thoroughly waking state, and the
outer world of sense.'[629] But our own psychologists are not yet far
enough advanced to accept this; much more work in psychical research
must first be done before it will be possible for them to announce to
the West that pre-existence is a necessary condition for post-existence
which they now hypothetically accept. If for the present our standpoint
be that of our own psychologists, we may then think of the human
consciousness as a spectrum whose central parts alone are visible to us.
Beyond at either end lies an unseen and to us unknown region, awaiting
its explorer from the West. 'Each one of us is in reality an abiding
psychical entity far more extensive than he knows--an individuality
which can never express itself completely through any corporeal
manifestation. The Self manifests through the organism; but there is
always some part of the Self unmanifested; and always, as it seems, some
power of organic expression in abeyance or reserve.'[630] William James
stated the position thus:--'The B. region' (another name for the region
of subconsciousness), 'then, is obviously the larger part of each of us,
for it is the abode of everything that is latent, and the reservoir of
everything that passes unrecorded and unobserved.'[631]

Men of science see no way of accepting the doctrine of the resurrection
of the physical body as at present interpreted by Christian theology;
but the late Professor Th. Henri Martin, Dean of the Faculty of Letters
of the University of Rennes, has suggested in his _La Vie future_ that
the doctrine may be the exoteric interpretation of a long-forgotten
esoteric truth; namely, that the soul may be resurrected in a new
physical body, and this is scientifically possible.[632]

The ancient scientists called Life a Circle. In the upper half of this
Circle, or here on the visible plane, we know that in the physiological
history of man and of all living things there is first the embryonic or
prenatal state, then birth; and as life, like a sun, rises in its
new-born power toward the zenith, there is childhood, youth, and
maturity; and then, as it passes the zenith on its way to the horizon,
there is decline, old age, and, finally, death; and as a scientific
possibility we have in the lower half of the Circle, in Hades or the
Otherworld of the Celts and of all peoples, corresponding processes
between death and a hypothetical but logically necessary re-birth.[633]

The logical corollary to the re-birth doctrine, and an integral part of
the Celtic esoteric theory of evolution, is that there have been human
races like the present human race who in past aeons of time have evolved
completely out of the human plane of conscious existence into the divine
plane of conscious existence. Hence the gods are beings which once were
men, and the actual race of men will in time become gods. Man now stands
related to the divine and invisible world in precisely the same manner
that the brute stands related to the human race. To the gods, man is a
being in a lower kingdom of evolution. According to the complete Celtic
belief, the gods can and do enter the human world for the specific
purposes of teaching men how to advance most rapidly toward the higher
kingdom. In other words, all the Great Teachers, e. g. Jesus, Buddha,
Zoroaster, and many others, in different ages and among various races,
whose teachings are extant, are, according to a belief yet held by
educated and mystical Celts, divine beings who in inconceivably past
ages were men but who are now gods, able at will to incarnate into our
world, in order to emphasize the need which exists in nature, by virtue
of the working of evolutionary laws (to which they themselves are still
subject), for man to look forward, and so strive to reach divinity
rather than to look backward in evolution and thereby fall into mere
animalism. The stating of this mystical corollary makes the exposition
of the Fairy-Faith complete, at least in outline.

As shown by the Barddas MSS. in our chapter vii, the Celtic Doctrine of
Re-birth is the scientific extension of Darwin's law as corrected,[634]
that alone through traversing the Circle of Life man reaches that
destined perfection which natural analogies, life's processes as
exhibited by living things, and evolution, suggest, and from which at
present man is so far removed. There seems to emerge this postulate: the
world is the object of normal consciousness, the Ego or Soul-Monad the
object of subconsciousness; and the subconsciousness cannot be realized
in the world until through the normal consciousness of man the Ego is
able to function completely, and so endow man with full
self-consciousness in matter, which endowment seems to be the goal of
all planetary evolution.

We conclude that the Otherworld of the Celts and their Doctrine of
Re-birth accord thoroughly in their essentials with modern science; and,
accordingly, with other essential elements in the complete Celtic
Fairy-Faith which we have in the preceding chapter found to be equally
scientific, establish our Psychological Theory of the Nature and Origin
of that Fairy-Faith upon a logical and solid foundation; and we now
submit this study to the judgement of our readers. With more complete
evidence in the future, both from folk-lore and from science, there will
be, we trust, a better vindication of the Theory, and perhaps finally
there will come about its transformation into what it but seems to us to
be now--a Fact.

Some beliefs which a century ago were regarded as absurdities are now
regarded as fundamentally scientific. In the same way, what in this
generation is heretical alike to the Christian theologian and to the man
of science may in coming generations be accepted as orthodox.





INDEX


  _Adamnan's Vision_, 356.

  Aeneas, Journey of, 336-7, 343, 382, 445.

  Aengus, 62, 292, 301, 376, 397, 413-4.

  ---- Cult of, 415 ff., 450.

  ---- Dun, 2, 41, 416-8.

  _Agallamh_, 28, 283 n., 286, 290, 292, 295, 402, 412.

  ---- _an da Shuadh_, 344.

  Ailill, 288-9, 301, 374-5, 440.

  Aine, 79, 80 n., 83, 301.

  Alchemists, 240, 244, 261, 276, 296 n.

  Alignements, xv, 199 n., 393, 399, 419 ff.:
    _see_ Archaeology.

  All Saints (_La Toussaint_), 439, 453:
    _see_ _Samain_, and November Day.

  Angel, 7, 12, 85, 238, 240-1, 263-4, 267, 272, 374:
    _see_ Fallen Angels, and St. Michael.

  Angels and Science, 481.

  Anglesey, 10, 138-9, 141-2.

  Animism, 55, 226 ff., 282, 457 ff.:
    _see_ Dead, and Death.

  ---- Pre-, 253, 401.

  ---- Science and, 459 ff.

  _Ankou_, 16, 29, 218, 220.

  ---- Science and, 484.

  _Annwn_, 319, 353.

  Anthropology, 226-82.

  Antrim, 73, 371.

  Apollo, 403, 405-6, 421.

  Apparitions, Science and, 480, 484 ff.

  Aranmore, 2, 4, 40, 416.

  Archaeology, xv, 2, 9, 10, 12-5, 31, 52, 78, 81, 118-9, 137 n., 148,
        154, 157 n., 163, 165 ff., 172, 179, 210, 221, 234 n., 393,
        397-426, 450 n.

  Armagh, 74-5, 443.

  ---- _Book of_, 283 n., 291.

  _Art, Voyage of_, 351-2.

  Arthur, 9, 10, 12-3, 82 n., 163, 183, 238, 304, 308 ff., 333-4, 353,
        381, 429, 437, 441, 447:
    _see_ Re-birth.

  Arthur, Bird, as, 183, 185.

  Arthurian Legend, 9, 260, 308 ff.:
    _see_ Arthur.

  Astral Body, 29.

  ---- Light, 133.

  ---- Milk, 164.

  ---- Plane, 167, 171.

  ---- Spirits, 167, 171.

  Avalon, 252, 311, 314-5, 321-4, 330, 347-8, 379, 386.


  Bacchus, 28, 80 n.

  _Badb_, 302-7, 309 n.

  _Ballymote, Book of_, 340 n., 410.

  Banshee, 25-6, 81, 99, 220, 304-5, 437-8.

  ---- Science and, 484.

  Baranton, Fountain of, 429.

  Bard, 11, 98, 138, 163, 283, 317 n., 365-6, 378.

  ---- Irish, 344.

  _Barddas_, 365-7, 378-9, 515.

  Barra, 85, 100 ff.

  _Beltene_ (Baaltine), 100 n., 439:
    _see_ May Day.

  Ben Bulbin, 3, 44, 56, 58, 237, 242, 284, 293, 300.

  Beroul, 325.

  Boron, Robt. de, 325.

  Boyne, 2, 34, 292, 410, 412, 415.

  Bran, 259, 334.

  ---- _Voyage of_, 329, 338-40, 373.

  Broceliande, 15, 188, 327, 435.

  Brownie, 164-5, 207, 220, 229.

  _Bucca_, 164, 175:
    _see_ Puck.


  Caedmon, 240, 243.

  Cambrensis, Giraldus, 149 n., 324.

  Cardigan, 146, 155, 334, 389.

  Ca(e)ridwen, 157 n., 378.

  Carmarthen, 147, 149 ff., 390.

  ---- _Black Book of_, 329.

  ---- Fall of, 435.

  Carnac, xiii, 199 n., 271, 398-9, 407, 418-9, 428.

  ---- Etymology of, xv.

  ---- Mystic Centre, as, 13-5, 221.

  Carnarvon, 143-4.

  _Ceilidh_, Description of, 6.

  Changelings, 34, 78, 87, 91, 96, 98, 101, 104, 110, 128, 132, 136-7,
        143, 146, 148, 150, 154, 156, 170-1, 177, 179, 182, 198, 204,
        210-2, 230, 265, 280-1:
    _see_ Charms, Fairy.

  ---- Anthropology and, 244-53.

  ---- Explanation of, 491.

  ---- Science and, 487.

  Channel Islands, 403, 406-7.

  Charms, 42, 49, 171, 176, 258-9:
    _see_ Exorcism.

  ---- Fairy, against, 37-8, 49, 58, 87, 91, 95, 97, 112, 124-5, 132,
        146, 177, 179, 199, 204, 210, 212, 250, 253, 265, 268, 314.

  ---- Witchcraft, against, 122.

  Chaucer, 326.

  Chretien, 311, 325, 430.

  Christabel, 202.

  Christian Science and Witchcraft, 261-2.

  Christianity, Esoteric, 360 n., 361-2.

  ---- Fairies and, xvi, 42, 70, 91, 115, 152 n., 153, 168-9, 201, 216,
        245, 253, 257, 259, 266-74, 268, 284-5, 293, 296 n., 320, 349-50,
        354-7, 370, 373, 407, 410 n., 427 ff., 434 ff., 439, 441, 444 ff.,
        452 ff.:
    _see_ Changelings, Cult, Exorcism, Fairy-Faith, and Purgatory.

  Clairvoyance, 55, 73, 140 n., 175, 182, 205, 285, 311:
    _see_ Second-sight, Seers, and Vision.

  ---- Science and, 473, 478.

  Clontarf, 305 ff.
