the hapless victims of an unmerited poverty. He then, who hath _a
bountiful eye_, will not only be _ready to distribute and willing to
communicate_,[4] but will also industriously look about for proper
objects. He will cheerfully yield a portion of his time as well as of
his wealth to the work of charity. Remembering who hath set him the
example of _going about doing good_, he will not remain inactive upon
his station, and _give_ only _to him that asketh_, he will in person
seek out the habitations of distress, or will at least aid with his
counsels and labors some of those benevolent societies, which are now
established in every christian land.[5] I know that the avocations of
business in a mercantile community are oftentimes urgent, and that time
is more valuable than the small contribution by which exemption from
actual labor in the cause of charity may be procured. Still however,
the truly benevolent man will not refuse his personal exertions when he
is convinced they can be serviceable, and the sacrifices he makes and
the interest he feels in the work in which he is engaged, will afford
him pleasures that the passively generous can never comprehend.

2. But the _bountiful eye_ will not only industriously search for
occupation, it will also exercise a discriminating watchfulness. How
essential is this to a profitable exercise of charitable distribution.
He who is not aware of the deceptions which are constantly practised by
many of the poor, and of the injudicious modes which are often adopted
for relieving their wants, must have had but small experience in this
duty. Sound judgment is required, and without it a liberal and active
charity may produce evil rather than good. Evil to the community, not to
the benevolent individual. If our alms are given with proper motives, we
shall not fail of our reward from our Heavenly Father, though we fail of
doing the good we intended. We are often deceived; but this should not
be made an argument, as is frequently the case, for contracting our
bounties. It should only excite us to greater caution. The common
applicants at our doors and in our streets, are in general, undeserving
of the alms which they entreat. This however, is by no means uniformly
their character, for I have known the most worthy objects, those whom
modesty and a laudable pride had restrained, until acute distress had
fairly driven them forth to seek needful comforts for the destitute
sick, or perhaps, bread for their famishing children. We must not, with
cruel indifference, drive such away in the common herd of undeserving
beggars. We must _consider the cause of the poor_,[6] as respects their
characters and their condition.

Perhaps the most discriminating mode of exercising charity, and one
which, if generally adopted, would almost preclude the necessity for
giving to unknown objects would be this. Let all persons desirous of
performing works of mercy from christian principle, make an estimate of
what they ought to contribute from the stores with which God has favored
them.[7] Let them duly consider the various claims that are presented to
them, and from amongst the many charitable societies with which we are
surrounded, let them select the depositaries of their bounty. Let each
family also, according to their means, select one or more of the poor
whom they can know, and to a certain extent, follow through their good
or ill conduct. These let them regard as a charge peculiarly committed
to them. Let them become acquainted with the wants, the infirmities, the
troubles, the sorrows of these the poorer members of their families,
united to them by the bonds of christian relationship. The intercourse
will be mutually salutary. It will produce a fuller and healthier
developement of the christian character than can be brought out where
the ranks in life are kept in a state of separation by the stern
despotism of artificial distinctions, where there are no opportunities
of passing from one to the other the softening influence of sympathizing
feelings, and where on the one side pride, luxury and selfishness are
nurtured, and on the other, envy, hatred and discontent. Were the custom
I recommend universally adopted amongst a christian people, would not
extreme distress from poverty be almost banished from amongst us? Should
we ever be called to endure the pain of beholding destitute and
miserable persons, except where incurable vice had made them such?

3. Would not this custom also bring into more general practice the other
characteristic I mentioned of him who hath _a bountiful eye_,--giving
his charities with benevolent feelings and kind looks? We should ever
remember, my brethren, that poverty, though it may clothe a person with
rags, does not always kill the sensibilities of the heart. The poor are
of like passions with ourselves, they like ourselves, can feel the sting
of unkind words, and the cruel piercings of an evil eye. If we are
satisfied upon any occasion that duty to the general interests of
society requires of us to reject their petitions, let it never be with a
scornful countenance or angry words. Let our rebukes, if they are
needed, be tempered with mild expressions--they will be felt with
tenfold power. And when we feel called upon to relieve one who asks for
charity, let us not do it as though our alms were extorted. There are
those who in performing an act of kindness, yet do it so ungraciously,
that it is felt to be no kindness. And there are on the other hand
those, who in giving a refusal, yet give it without causing
pain--sometimes even they communicate pleasure by showing sympathy where
they cannot administer relief. The phrase in my text expresses admirably
the influence of such amiable conduct. It is the eye that speaks cruel
sentiments more powerfully than the tongue, and it is the eye also that
reveals the movements of a noble and generous sympathy. The _bountiful
eye_ then, is the evidence of a humane and benevolent heart, prompting
its possessor to thoughts and deeds of charity.


2. Need I state to a christian assembly the necessity laid upon us all
to cultivate the character I have thus attempted briefly to describe? To
feed the hungry, to clothe the naked, to visit and comfort the sick and
the afflicted, is incumbent upon every man endowed with moral
perception, but the obligations of the christian to pursue this course
of conduct, are most weighty and inalienable. He cannot shut out from
his attention the sufferings and misfortunes of his brethren of the
human family without renouncing his name, and without forfeiting his
