
He was only a little shepherd lad with the breath of the hills about
him, his golden hair tossed by the wind, his fair face flushed, and his
sunburned hand holding his shepherd's crook. But there was no doubt that
God had chosen him.

"Arise and anoint him, for this is he," said God's voice in Samuel's
heart.

Slowly, then, the old man rose and held the oil aloft and poured it upon
the boy's bowed head, while the rest of the company looked silently on.

They were puzzled to know what it all meant. Perhaps the elder brothers
were envious, and wondered why this mere child should be singled out for
special favour. But no one dared to question God's messenger.

Nothing further happened just then. Samuel returned as he had come by
the winding white road, and before long his visit was forgotten as the
people settled to their work again.

[Illustration: Saul tries to kill David]

Only David, out in the fields, thought more and more about what had
happened, and grew more and more certain that it had been a call from
God to do some special work for Him. The wonder of it filled his mind,
but it never interfered with his work.

There was little time for idle dreaming in the boy's life. He was as
watchful as ever in his care for his sheep and as courageous as ever in
guarding them from prowling beasts. Even in his leisure time he was busy
too, and there was not one of the sunny hours of daylight that he
wasted.

He loved music, and he taught himself to play on the harp, practising so
carefully and patiently that his fingers grew most wonderfully skilful.
Then he made songs to go to the music, some of the most beautiful songs
that ever have been made in all the world. Almost every child to-day
knows his beautiful song about the Good Shepherd: "The Lord is my
shepherd, I shall not want."

There was another thing, too, that he learned to do with the same care
and patient perseverance, and that was to use his shepherd's sling.
There was no boy in all Bethlehem who could shoot as straight as he
could. He never missed his mark.

It was no great thing, perhaps, to make music and aim straight, but it
was a great thing to do what lay nearest his hand with all his might.
Perhaps some day God would make use of his singing or have some work for
a boy who had a quick eye and a sure aim. Who could tell?

So David learned to do his very best, and before very long God's call
came to him.

[Illustration: Saul sat day after day in his darkened tent.]

Saul, the King of Israel, sat day after day in his darkened tent ill and
full of misery. No one dared to go near him, and his servants whispered
together, "It is an evil spirit from the Lord that troubles him."

Then some one suggested that perhaps music might help to cheer him and
drive the evil spirit from him.

"Let our lord now command thy servants to seek out a man who is a
cunning player on a harp," they said to the king, "and it shall come to
pass that, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, he shall play
with his hand, and thou shalt be well."

[Illustration: David drew magic music from his harp's strings.]

Saul listened to their words, and hope crept into his heart.

"Provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him unto me," he
said eagerly.

Now the fame of David's playing and singing had spread even beyond
Bethlehem. "We must send for David, the son of Jesse," said the king's
servants at once. He was the very person they wanted. Not only could he
sing and play, but he was a good boy, brave and fearless, and best of
all, as the servants said, "The Lord is with him."

So the shepherd boy was brought to the king's darkened tent, ready to do
his bidding. Sitting there in the dim light, he drew such magic music
from his harp's strings, and sang such sweet songs, that the very song
of the birds seemed to be filling the tent. The king, as he listened,
seemed to feel the breath of the mountain fields, to hear the call of
the sheepfold and the murmur of the dancing streams. It acted like a
