First, purgatory. Here they carried their trade into purgatory
by masses for souls, and vigils, and weekly, monthly, and
yearly celebrations of obsequies, and finally by the Common
Week and All Souls Day, by soul-baths so that the Mass is used
almost alone for the dead, although Christ has instituted the
Sacrament alone for the living. Therefore purgatory, and every
solemnity, rite, and commerce connected with it, is to be
regarded as nothing but a specter of the devil. For it
conflicts with the chief article [which teaches] that only
Christ, and not the works of men, are to help [set free]
souls. Not to mention the fact that nothing has been
[divinely] commanded or enjoined upon us concerning the dead.
Therefore all this may be safely omitted, even if it were no
error and idolatry.

The Papists quote here Augustine and some of the Fathers who
are said to have written concerning purgatory, and they think
that we do not understand for what purpose and to what end
they spoke as they did. St. Augustine does not write that
there is a purgatory nor has he a testimony of Scripture to
constrain him thereto, but he leaves it in doubt whether there
is one, and says that his mother asked to be remembered at the
altar or Sacrament. Now, all this is indeed nothing but the
devotion of men, and that, too, of individuals, and does not
establish an article of faith, which is the prerogative of God
alone.

Our Papists, however, cite such statements [opinions] of men
in order that men should believe in their horrible,
blasphemous, and cursed traffic in masses for souls in
purgatory [or in sacrifices for the dead and oblations], etc.
But they will never prove these things from Augustine. Now,
when they have abolished the traffic in masses for purgatory,
of which Augustine never dreamt, we will then discuss with
them whether the expressions of Augustine without Scripture
[being without the warrant of the Word] are to be admitted,
and whether the dead should be remembered at the Eucharist.
For it will not do to frame articles of faith from the works
or words of the holy Fathers; otherwise their kind of fare, of
garments, of house, etc., would have to become an article of
faith, as was done with relies. [We have, however, another
rule, namely] The rule is: The Word of God shall establish
articles of faith, and no one else, not even an angel.

Secondly. From this it has followed that evil spirits have
perpetrated much knavery [exercised their malice] by appearing
as the souls of the departed, and with unspeakable [horrible]
lies and tricks demanded masses, vigils, pilgrimages, and
other alms. All of which we had to receive as articles of
faith, and to live accordingly; and the Pope confirmed these
things, as also the Mass and all other abominations. Here,
too, there is no [cannot and must not be any] yielding or
surrendering.

Thirdly. [Hence arose] the pilgrimages. Here, too, masses, the
remission of sins and the grace of God were sought, for the
Mass controlled everything. Now it is indeed certain that such
pilgrimages, without the Word of God, have not been commanded
us, neither are they necessary, since we can have these things
[the soul can be cared for] in a better way, and can omit
these pilgrimages without any sin and danger. Why therefore do
they leave at home [desert] their own parish [their called
ministers, their parishes], the Word of God, wives, children,
etc., who are ordained and [attention to whom is necessary and
has been] commanded, and run after these unnecessary,
uncertain, pernicious will-o'-the-wisps of the devil [and
errors]? Unless the devil was riding [made insane] the Pope,
causing him to praise and establish these practices, whereby
the people again and again revolted from Christ to their own
works, and became idolaters, which is worst of all; moreover,
it is neither necessary nor commanded, but is senseless and
doubtful, and besides harmful. Hence here, too, there can be
no yielding or surrendering [to yield or concede anything here
is not lawful], etc. And let this be preached, that such
pilgrimages are not necessary, but dangerous; and then see
what will become of them. [For thus they will perish of their
own accord.]

Fourthly. Fraternities [or societies], in which cloisters,
chapters, vicars have assigned and communicated (by a legal
contract and sale) all masses and good works, etc., both for
the living and the dead. This is not only altogether a human
bauble, without the Word of God, entirely unnecessary and not
commanded, but also contrary to the chief article, Of
Redemption. Therefore it is in no way to be tolerated.

Fifthly. The relics, in which there are found so many
falsehoods and tomfooleries concerning the bones of dogs and
horses, that even the devil has laughed at such rascalities,
ought long ago to have been condemned, even though there were
some good in them; and so much the more because they are
without the Word of God; being neither commanded nor
counseled, they are an entirely unnecessary and useless thing.
But the worst is that [they have imagined that] these relics
had to work indulgence and the forgiveness of sins [and have
revered them] as a good work and service of God, like the
Mass, etc.

Sixthly. Here belong the precious indulgences granted (but
only for money) both to the living and the dead, by which the
miserable [sacrilegious and accursed] Judas, or Pope, has sold
the merit of Christ, together with the superfluous merits of
all saints and of the entire Church, etc. All these things
[and every single one of them] are not to be borne, and are
not only without the Word of God, without necessity, not
commanded, but are against the chief article. For the merit of
Christ is [apprehended and] obtained not by our works or
pence, but from grace through faith, without money and merit;
and is offered [and presented] not through the power of the
Pope, but through the preaching of God's Word.


Of the Invocation of Saints.

The invocation of saints is also one of the abuses of
Antichrist conflicting with the chief article, and destroys
the knowledge of Christ. Neither is it commanded nor
counseled, nor has it any example [or testimony] in Scripture,
and even though it were a precious thing, as it is not [while,
on the contrary, it is a most harmful thing], in Christ we
have everything a thousandfold better [and surer, so that we
are not in need of calling upon the saints].

And although the angels in heaven pray for us (as Christ
Himself also does), as also do the saints on earth, and
perhaps also in heaven, yet it does not follow thence that we
should invoke and adore the angels and saints, and fast, hold
festivals, celebrate Mass in their honor, make offerings, and
establish churches, altars, divine worship, and in still other
ways serve them, and regard them as helpers in need [as
patrons and intercessors], and divide among them all kinds of
help, and ascribe to each one a particular form of assistance,
as the Papists teach and do. For this is idolatry, and such
honor belongs alone to God. For as a Christian and saint upon
earth you can pray for me, not only in one, but in many
necessities. But for this reason I am not obliged to adore and
invoke you, and celebrate festivals, fast, make oblations,
hold masses for your honor [and worship], and put my faith in
you for my salvation. I can in other ways indeed honor, love,
and thank you in Christ. If now such idolatrous honor were
withdrawn from angels and departed saints, the remaining honor
would be without harm and would quickly be forgotten. For when
advantage and assistance, both bodily and spiritual, are no
more to be expected, the saints will not be troubled [the
worship of the saints will soon vanish], neither in their
graves nor in heaven. For without a reward or out of pure love
no one will much remember, or esteem, or honor them [bestow on
them divine honor].

In short, the Mass itself and anything that proceeds from it,
and anything that is attached to it, we cannot tolerate, but
must condemn, in order that we may retain the holy Sacrament
pure and certain, according to the institution of Christ,
employed and received through faith.




Article III: Of Chapters and Cloisters.

That chapters and cloisters [colleges of canons and
communistic dwellings], which were formerly founded with the
good intention [of our forefathers] to educate learned men and
chaste [and modest] women, ought again to be turned to such
use, in order that pastors, preachers, and other ministers of
the churches may be had, and likewise other necessary persons
[fitted] for [the political administration of] the secular
government [or for the commonwealth] in cities and countries,
and well-educated, maidens for mothers and housekeepers, etc.

If they will not serve this purpose, it is better that they be
abandoned or razed, rather than [continued and], with their
blasphemous services invented by men, regarded as something
better than the ordinary Christian life and the offices and
callings ordained by God. For all this also is contrary to the
first chief article concerning the redemption made through
Jesus Christ. Add to this that (like all other human
inventions) these have neither been commanded; they are
needless and useless, and, besides, afford occasion for
dangerous and vain labor [dangerous annoyances and fruitless
worship], such services as the prophets call Aven, i.e., pain
and labor.




Article IV: Of the Papacy.

That the Pope is not, according to divine law or according to
the Word of God the head of all Christendom (for this [name]
belongs to One only, whose name is Jesus Christ), but is only
the bishop and pastor of the Church at Rome, and of those who
voluntarily or through a human creature (that is, a political
magistrate) have attached themselves to him, to be Christians,
not under him as a lord, but with him as brethren [colleagues]
and comrades, as the ancient councils and the age of St.
