to our prayers. We cannot widen our desires so far but that His gifts
will stretch beyond them on every side.

But the promise of perpetual dwelling in the Temple is conditional, as
appears in the latter part of God's answer, though no condition is
stated at first. The promises to Solomon individually are all
contingent. The all-important 'if' at the beginning of verse 4 governs
the whole. The divine eulogium on David, which introduces these
promises, suggests how mercifully God regards the imperfect lives of
His servants. That merciful interpretation of conduct is removed by a
whole universe from palliation of sin. It affords no ground for our
thinking little of our inconsistencies. David's crime was sternly
rebuked and sorely punished, but still his life, in its main drift and
outline, could be presented as a pattern, as being marked by integrity
of heart and uprightness. The moon shines like a disc of silver, though
its surface is pitted with extinct volcanoes.

We may note, too, the pregnant description in outline of the elements
of a devout life, as here enjoined on Solomon. The first requisite is
to walk before God; that is, to nourish a continual consciousness of
His presence, and to regulate all actions and thoughts under the
thrilling and purifying sense of being 'ever in the great Taskmaster's
eye.' Only we are not to think of Him as only a Taskmaster, but as a
loving Friend and Helper. A child is happy in its little work or play
when it knows that its father is looking on with sympathy. The sense of
God's eye being on us should 'make a sunshine in a shady place,' should
lighten labour and sweeten care. It is at the root of practical
obedience, as its place in this sequence shows; for there follow it, in
verse 4, 'integrity of heart and uprightness,' on which again follow
obedience to all God's commandments.

First must come the clear recognition of God's relation to us. That
recognition will influence our relation to Him, bending hearts to love
and wills to submit, and the whole inward being to cleave to Him.
Thence, and only thence, will issue in the life the streams of
practical obedience. It is vain to seek to produce righteous deeds
unless our hearts are right, and it is as vain to labour at making our
hearts right unless thoughts of what God is to us have purified them.
Morality is rooted in religion. On the other hand, no knowledge of the
truth about God is worth anything unless it touches the hidden man of
the heart, and then passes outward to mould conduct. 'Faith without
works is dead.' Correct theology and glowing emotions lack their
consummation if they do not impel to holy and God-pleasing living.

The reward promised in verse 5 is for Solomon alone. His throne is to
be 'established for ever.' The duration intended by that expression is
therefore not absolutely unlimited, but equivalent to 'during thy
lifetime.' Solomon could only affect himself by his obedience. The
continuance of the kingdom after him depended on his successors. His
possession of the throne during his life was the beginning of the
fulfilment of the promise to David referred to in verse 5, but it was
only the beginning, and, like all God's promises, it was contingent on
obedience. We receive no outward kingdom if we are servants of God;
but, in deepest truth, the righteous man is a king, 'lord of himself,
though not of lands.' All creatures serve the soul that serves God, and
all Christ's brethren share in His royalty.

II. The second part of this divine utterance is addressed to the whole
nation, as is marked by the 'ye' there compared with the 'thou' in
verse 4, and it lays down for succeeding generations the conditions on
which the new Temple, that stood glittering in the bright Eastern
sunshine, should retain its pristine beauty. While the address to
Solomon incited to obedience by painting its blessed consequences, that
to the nation reaches the same end by the opposite path of darkly
portraying the ruin that would be caused by departure from God. God
draws by holding out a hand full of good things, and He no less
lovingly drives by stretching out a hand armed with lightnings.

A plain declaration of the evils that dog disobedience is as loving as
a bright vision of the good that attends on submission. The sternest
threatenings of Scripture are spoken that they may never need to be
executed. There is no more foolish misconception of Christianity than
that which calls it harsh because it reveals that 'the wages of sin is
death.' Note that the threatenings come second, not first. God's heart
is averse to smite. To lavish blessing is His delight, and judgment is
'His work, His strange work,' forced on Him by sin.

The special sin against which Israel was warned was that to which it
was specially prone and tempted by its circumstances. When all the
nations 'worshipped stocks and stones,' it was hard to 'keep thy faith
so pure' as to have no share in the universal bewitchment. So the whole
history of the people is one of lapses into idolatry and of
chastisements leading to temporary amendment, until the long, sharp
lesson of the Captivity eradicated the disposition to be as the nations
around. No doubt, idolatry in its crudest forms is outgrown now in
Western lands, but sense still craves material embodiment of the
unseen, and still feels the pressure of the material and palpable.
Hence the earthward direction of so many lives. Asthmatical patients
often breathe more easily in the slums of a city than in pure mountain
air, and sense-bound men find difficulty in respiration on the heights
of a religion which minimises the appeal to sense.

The penalty attached to departure from God was the loss of the land.
Israel kept it on a tenure like that of some of our English nobility,
who hold their estates on condition of doing some service to the
sovereign. Of course, that connection between serving God and national
prosperity involved continual supernatural intervention, and cannot be
applied entirely to national prosperity now; but it still remains true
that moral and religious corruption saps the foundations of a people's
well-being, and, when carried far enough, destroys a people's
existence. The solemn threat of becoming 'a proverb and a byword' among
all peoples is quoted, apparently from Deuteronomy xxviii. 37, and has
been only too terribly fulfilled for weary centuries.

The promise in verse 3, that God's eyes and heart should be perpetually
on the Temple, has now the condition attached that Israel should cleave
to the Lord. Otherwise it will be cast out of His sight, and be a mark
for scorn and wonder. The vivid representation of a dialogue between
passers-by is quoted from Deuteronomy xxix. 24-26, where it is spoken
in reference to the nation. It carries the solemn thought that God's
name is made known among the heathen by the punishment of His
unfaithful people, not less really, and sometimes more strikingly, than
by the blessings bestowed on the obedient. If we will not magnify Him
by joyous service, by rewarding which, with good He can magnify
Himself, He will magnify Himself on us by retribution, the more severe
as our blessings have been the greater. The lightning-scathed tree,
standing white in the forest, witnesses to the power of the flash, as
its leafy sisters in their green beauty proclaim the energy of the
sunshine. Israel has, perhaps, been a more convincing witness for God,
in its homeless centuries, than ever it was when at rest in the good
land. 'If God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest He also
spare not thee.'




A ROYAL SEEKER AFTER WISDOM

'And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning
the name of the Lord, she came to prove him with hard questions. 2. And
she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bare
spices, and very much gold, and precious stones: and when she was come
to Solomon, she communed with him of all that was in her heart. 3. And
Solomon told her all her questions: there was not any thing hid from
the king, which he told her not. 4. And when the queen of Sheba had
seen all Solomon's wisdom, and the house that he had built, 5. And the
meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance
of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent
by which he went up unto the house of the Lord; there was no more
spirit in her. 6. And she said to the king, It was a true report that I
heard in mine own land of thy acts and of thy wisdom. 7. Howbeit I
believed not the words, until I came, and mine eyes had seen it: and,
behold, the half was not told me: thy wisdom and prosperity exceedeth
the fame which I heard. 8. Happy are thy men, happy are these thy
servants, which stand continually before thee, and that hear thy
wisdom. 9. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighteth in thee, to
set thee on the throne of Israel: because the Lord loved Israel for
ever, therefore made He thee king, to do judgment and justice. 10. And
she gave the king an hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices
very great store, and precious stones: there came no more such
abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king
Solomon. 11. And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir,
brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees, and precious stones.
12. And the king made of the almug trees pillars for the house of the
Lord, and for the king's house, harps also and psalteries for singers:
there came no such almug trees, nor were seen unto this day. 13. And
king Solomon gave unto the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatsoever
she asked, besides that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty. So
she turned and went to her own country, she and her servants.'--1 KINGS
x. 1-13.


We feel the breath of a new era in the accounts of Solomon's reign. One
most striking peculiarity is the friendly intercourse with the nations
around. The horizon has widened, and, instead of wars with Philistines
and Ammon, we have alliances with Egypt, Tyre, and, in the present
passage, with Sheba, a district of Southern Arabia. The expansion was
fruitful of both good and evil. It brought new ideas and much wealth;
but it brought, too, luxury and idolatry. Still Israel was meant to be
'a light to lighten the Gentiles,' and in this picturesque story of the
wisdom-seeking queen, we have the true relation of Israel to the
nations in its purest form. The details of the narrative. Interesting
as they are, need not occupy us long.

The queen had heard the fame of Solomon concerning the name of the
Lord, by which seems to be meant his reputation of being gifted with
deep knowledge of the divine character as revealed to him. The
questions which occupy earnest souls in all lands and ages were
stirring in the heart of this woman-chief. The only way, in these old
days, to learn the wisdom of the wise, was to go to them. So the
streets of Jerusalem saw the strange sight of the long train which had
come toiling up from Arabia, laden with its characteristic produce,
gold and spices and precious stones, in the enumeration of which is
reflected the wonder of the beholders at the unaccustomed procession.
But better than all her wealth was the eager woman's thirst for truth.
Surely it is a very unworthy and unlikely explanation of her 'hard
questions' and purpose to suppose that she came only for a duel of
wit,--to pose Solomon with half-playful riddles. The journey was too
toilsome, the gifts too large, the accent of conviction in her
subsequent words too grave, for that. She was a seeker after truth, and
probably after God, and had known the torture of the eternal questions
which rise in the mind, and, once having risen, leave no rest till they
are answered.

So she came, though half incredulous, hoping to find some solution to
what 'was in her heart,' and as thirsty for the answer as her country's
sands for water. Only they who have known the pain of carrying such
questions, like a fire in their bones, can know the joy which she felt
when she found one to whom she could speak them. It is something of a
drop to pass from Solomon's wisdom to the list of the splendours of his
household, and the effect which these produced on the queen; but the
whole account of Solomon's reign is marked by the same naive blending
of wisdom and material wealth. In those days, outward prosperity was
the sign of divine favour. But even in those days they knew that wisdom
was 'better than rubies.' The two elements were both at their height in
Solomon's reign, and the lower of them finally got uppermost, and
wrecked him. Plain living and high thinking are better than 'wisdom,'
which lets itself down to make much of 'the meat of the table,' and a
retinue of servants in fine clothes. How many of us would listen much
more respectfully to wisdom, if it lived in a palace, than in 'dens and
caves of the earth'? The queen's words in verses 6 to 9 are graceful
with a woman's tact, and full of feeling. She confesses that she had
come half-doubting, even though she risked the journey, and fervently
avows how far fame had been unlike itself in this instance, and had
diminished, and not magnified. Then she envies the servants who wait on
him, because they are so near the fountain, and finally breaks into
praise of Solomon's God, whose love to Israel was shown in giving it
such a king. One does not know whether praise of God or compliments to
Solomon were most in her mind. The words scarcely sound as if she had
become a worshipper of God. He is to her but 'thy God.' But we may
believe that she carried away some seed which grew up. Then, with
munificent interchange of gifts, she and her train glide out of the
story, and we lose them in the dark. The account of the wealth brought
by Hiram's ships comes singularly in, breaking the narrative of the
queen. Its insertion seems to indicate some connection between the
fleet and her, and to suggest that Sheba and Ophir were near each other
(which would put Ethiopia, where some have located it, out of court),
and that she heard of Solomon through it.

The whole incident may be regarded as an illustration of the spirit
that should mark all seekers after truth, whether earthly or heavenly.
This queen had to win a victory over national prejudices, over the
disabilities of her sex, over the temptations of her station, to travel
far, and face dangers, and to incur great cost. It was surely no mere
playful errand on which she was bent. She was smitten with the sacred
impulse to 'follow knowledge like a sinking star.' Seldom, indeed, have
rulers made progresses from their dominions for such an end, and seldom
have two of them met to confer on such subjects. We shall not rightly
measure the relative importance of things unless we resolutely set
ourselves to look at them with eyes purged from the illusions of sense,
and cleared to see how much better than wealth and all outward good is
the possession of truth. All sacrifices made to win it are richly
repaid, and wise investments. Even in regard to lower kinds of truth,
to win them is worth the effort of a life; and, in regard to the
highest kind, which is the personal Truth, he is the wise man who
counts all earthly good but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of
it. This queen points the path by which all pilgrims of the truth must
travel. It is not to be won without effort, without conquest of
prejudices, repression of weakness, sacrifices of delights, and long
effort. There must be humility, which will gladly learn, if there is
ever to be its possession.

           'Nor can the man that moulds in idle cell
            Unto her happy mansion attain.'

But in our days, the easier the attainment, the less the appreciation.
The queen of Sheba had no books, and she travelled far to get wisdom.
We are flooded with all appliances, and many of us would not cross the
road to get Solomon's wisdom, but would do much to be invited to feast
at his table, or to secure some of the queen's camels' load.

This story brings out the true ideal of Israel's relation to the
nations. Solomon is the embodiment of his people. His reign is marked
by largely increased and amicable relations with his neighbours. These
were not all wholesome, and ultimately led to much mischief. But, while
the purely commercial connection with Tyre was defective, in that there
was no attempt to bring Hiram and the men who worked for the Temple to
any knowledge of the God of the Temple, and the relation with Egypt was
more unsatisfactory still, in that it meant only the importation of
corrupting luxuries and the marriage with an Egyptian princess, an
idolatress, this relation with the queen of Sheba was the true one.
Solomon did in it what Israel was meant to do for the world. He
attracted a seeker from afar, and imparted to her the wisdom that God
had given him. He answered the torturing questions and won the
confidence of this woman who was groping in the dark, till he led her
by the hand to the light. A bond of friendship knit them together, and
mutual gifts cemented their amity.

All this is but the putting into concrete form of God's purpose in
choosing Israel for His own. It was not meant to retain or to enclose,
but to diffuse, the light. The world can only get blessing by one man
or people getting it first. As well charge the builder of the
lighthouse with partiality because he puts the bright lamps in that
narrow room, as find fault with the divine method of making the earth
know His name. The lighthouse is reared that the beams may stream out
over the tossing, nightly sea. So God appointed to His people of old
their task. So He has appointed the same task to His Church to-day. We
ought to attract seekers from afar, to win their frank speech when they
come, to be able to answer their anxious questions, and to bind them to
ourselves in grateful bonds. In these days there are multitudes
harassed by the modern forms of the same old, ever-pressing riddles
which burdened this ancient queen's heart; and that Church but ill
discharges its office which repels rather than draws the seekers, or
has no word of illumination for them if they come.

But the highest use to be made of the story is that which Christ made
of it. It stands as a perpetual witness against those who are too blind
to see the beauty, or too careless to be drawn to listen to the wisdom,
of a present Christ. The sacrifices which men can make for lower
objects are the most powerful rebukes of their unwillingness to make
sacrifices for the highest, just as their capacity of love and trust is
of their not loving and trusting Him. The same energy and effort which
this queen put forth to reach Solomon, and which men eagerly put forth
for some temporal good, would suffice to bring them to the feet of the
great Teacher. Her longing for wisdom, her discernment of the person
who could give it, and her toilsome journey, rebuke men's indifference
to Christ's gifts, their failure to recognise His sweetness and power
to make blessed, and their laziness and self-indulgence, which will not
take a hundredth part of the pains to secure heaven which they
cheerfully expend, and that often in vain, to secure earth. Will the
'Queen of the south' stand alone as witness in that day, or will there
not be many out of other lands, who, like her, stretched out their
hands to the dimly descried but yearned-for light, and came nearer to
it, though they seemed far off, than many who lived in its full blaze
and never cared for it? Will it be only Christ's contemporaries who
will be condemned by heathen seekers after God, or will there be many
of ourselves, convicted of stolid indifference to the Christ who has
been beside us all our lives, and has prayed us 'with much entreaty'
and in vain, to 'receive the gift'?

They who find their way to Him, and tell Him all that is in their
hearts, will have all their questions solved. We have not far to go;
for 'a greater than Solomon is here.' If we betake ourselves to Him,
and learn of Him, we too shall find that 'the half was not told us';
for Christ possessed is sweeter than all expectation, however
high-pitched it may be, and to win Him is the only gain in which there
is no disappointment, either at first or at last. We may all have the
blessedness of His servants, 'which stand continually before' Him, and
not only 'hear' but receive into their spirits His 'wisdom.'




THE FALL OF SOLOMON

'For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away
his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord
his God, as was the heart of David his father. 5. For Solomon went
after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, and after Milcom the
abomination of the Ammonites. 6. And Solomon did evil in the sight of
the Lord, and went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father.
7. Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of
Moab, in the hill that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech, the
abomination of the children of Ammon. 8. And likewise did he for all
his strange wives, which burnt incense and sacrificed unto their gods.
9. And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned
from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice, 10. And
had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after
other gods: but he kept not that which the Lord commanded. 11.
Wherefore the Lord said unto Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done of
thee, and thou hast not kept My covenant and My statutes, which I have
commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give
it to thy servant. 12. Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for
David thy father's sake: but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
13. Howbeit I will not rend away all the kingdom; but will give one
tribe to thy son for David My servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake
which I have chosen.'--1 KINGS xi. 4-13.


Scripture never blinks the defects of its heroes. Its portraits do not
smooth out wrinkles, but, with absolute fidelity, give all faults. That
pitiless truthfulness is no small proof of its inspiration. If these
historical books were simply fragments of national records, owning no
higher source than patriotism, they would never have blurted out the
errors and sins of David and Solomon as they do. Where else are there
national histories of which the very central idea is the laying bare of
national sins and chastisements? or where else are there legends of the
people's heroes which tell their sins without apology or reticence? The
difference in tone augurs a different origin. The Old Testament
histories are not written to tell Israel's glories, or even, we may
say, to recount its history, but to tell God's dealings with Israel,--a
very different theme, and one which finds its material equally in the
glories and in the miseries, which respectively follow its obedience
and disobedience. So Solomon's fall is told in the same frank way as
his wisdom and wealth; for what is of importance is not Solomon so much
as God's dealings with Solomon, when his heart was turned away. We are
told that the narrative of Solomon's reign is an ideal picture. Strange
idealising which leaves the ideal king wallowing in a sty of sensuality
and an apostate from Jehovah!

Here we are simply told of the two things,--his sin, and the divine
judgment which it drew after it.

I. Verses 4-8 tell the black story of Solomon's apostasy. What was its
extent? Did he himself take part in idolatrous worship, or simply, with
the foolish fondness of an old sensualist, let these foreign women have
their shrines? The darker supposition seems correct. The expression
that he 'went after other gods' is commonly used to mean actual
idolatry; and his wives could scarcely have been said to have 'turned
away his heart,' if all that he did was to wink at, or even to
facilitate, their worship. But, on the other hand, he does not seem to
have abandoned Jehovah's worship. The charge against him is that 'his
heart was not perfect,' or wholly devoted to the Lord, or, as verse 6
puts it, that he 'went not fully' after the Lord. His was a case of
halting between two opinions, or rather, of trying to hold both at
once. He wanted to be a worshipper of Jehovah and of these idols also.

Was his apostasy final? Yes, so far as we can gather from the
narrative. Not only is there no statement of his repentance, but the
silence with which he receives the divine announcement of retribution
is suspicious; and the prophecy of Ahijah to Jeroboam, which obviously
comes later in time than the threatenings of the text, treats the
idolatry as still existing (verse 33). Further, we learn from 2 Kings
xxiii.13 that the shrines which he built stood till Josiah's time. If
Solomon had ever abandoned his idolatry, he would not have left them
standing. So we seem to have in him a case of a fall which knew no
recovery, an eclipse which did not pass. The Book of Ecclesiastes, if
of his composition, would somewhat lighten the darkness of such an end;
but his authorship of it is now all but universally given up.

So there, on Olivet's southern ridge, right opposite the Temple, stood
the three altars, and there the king worshipped; and, if he did, he
would have a crowd of imitators. The lessons of such a fall are many.
First, it teaches the destructive effect of yielding to sensual
indulgence. Solomon's unbridled and monstrous polygamy sapped his
manhood and his principle, darkened his clear spirit, blinded his keen
eye, and turned a youth of noble aspiration and a manhood of noble
accomplishment into an old age without dignity, reverence, or calm. All
his wisdom was worth little if it could not keep him master of himself.
A young man who lets his passions run away with him is less to be
condemned than an old sensualist. God means that reason should govern
impulses and desires, and that conscience should govern all and be
governed by His will. The vessel is sure to be wrecked when the
officers are sent below and the mutineers get hold of the helm.

Second, it warns us that till the very end of life a fall is possible.
This ship went down when the voyage was nearly over. In sight of port
it struck, and that not for want of beacons. What pathetic warning lies
in that phrase, 'when Solomon was old'! After so many years of high
aims, so many temptations overcome, with such habits of wisdom and
kingly nobility, after such prayers and visions, he fell; and, if _he_
fell, who can be sure of standing? No length of life spent in holy
thoughts and service secures us against the possibility of disastrous
fall. Only one thing does,--'Hold Thou me up, and I shall be safe!'
John Bunyan saw a door opening down to hell hard by the gates of the
Celestial City. When a man that has been had in reputation for wisdom
and honour shames the record of his life by a great splash of mud on
the white page, near its end, he seldom returns. An old apostate is
usually finally an apostate.

Third, may we not venture to see a warning here against marriages in
which there is not unity in the deepest things, and a common faith?
'When you run in double harness, take a good look at the other horse.'
If a young Christian man or woman enters on such a union with one who
is not a Christian, it is a great deal more probable that, in the end,
there will be two unbelievers than that there will be two Christians.

We have nothing to do with pronouncing on Solomon's final condition,
But he stands on the page of this history, a sad, enigmatical figure, a
warning to all young people to take heed that the attrition of the
world does not rub off the bloom of early religion, or make them
cynically ashamed of the unselfishness of their early desires. There is
no sadder sight than an old man whose youthful enthusiasm for goodness
and belief in the super-excellency of wisdom have withered, leaving him
a hard worldling or a gross sensualist. Better the early days, when he
was obscure and poor, and believed in wisdom and in the God of wisdom,
than the late ones, when worldly success has spoiled him!

II. Verses 9-13 give the divine retribution announced. The immediate
connection of sin and punishment is the teaching intended by this close
juxtaposition of these two halves of our narrative. However long the
chastisement may be in bursting, the divine resolve to send it is
instantaneously consequent on the crime. The chain that binds departure
from God with loss of blessing may be of many or few links, but it is
riveted on when the evil is done. How gravely, as with the voice of an
indictment drawn in heaven, the aggravations of Solomon's crime are set
out, in that he had sinned against 'the Lord' who had appeared to him
twice (once in his youthful vision, and once after the completion of
the Temple), 'and had commanded him concerning' the very sin that he
had done. Sin is made more heinous by the abundance of God's favours
and the plainness of His commands. If we would remember God's
appearances to us and for us, and meditate on His revealed will, we
should be more impregnable to the assaults of temptation.

We do not learn _how_ the Lord said this to Solomon. Possibly it was by
the same prophet who afterwards announced to Jeroboam his destiny; but,
however announced, it seems to have been received in sullen silence,
and to have wrought no softening nor change. Like all God's
threatenings, it was spoken that it might not be inflicted. Solomon was
threatened before the prophet spoke to Jeroboam; and if Solomon had
repented, Jeroboam would never have been spoken to. But he is too far
gone to be stopped, though he has God's own word for it that he is
ruining his kingdom by his sin. We have as clear declarations of worse
results from ours; but they do not stop some of us. How strange it is
that men will put out their hands to grasp their sins, even though they
have to stretch across the smoke of the pit for them!

Note how forbearance delays and diminishes retribution. The separation
of the kingdom is deferred, and one tribe is left to the Davidic house;
probably Judah is meant, and Benjamin is omitted as being small.
Observe, too, how we have a double instance of the law of God's
providence which visits the father's deeds on the children. The
consequences of David's goodness fall on Solomon, and the consequences
of Solomon's evil fall on Rehoboam. Stated in the language of the
secular historian, that is to say that the consequences of great
national virtues or crimes are seldom reaped by the generation that
sowed the seed and did the deed, but take time to mature and work
themselves out. Stated in the language of Scripture, it is, 'The
fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set on
edge.' The separation of the kingdom was not brought about by miracle,
but came in the natural course of things. A people ground down by heavy
taxation and forced labour, to keep up the luxury of a court containing
all that disgusting crowd of wives and concubines, was ripe for revolt,
and when the sceptre fell into the hands of a headstrong fool, and
there was a capable leader on the other side, discontent soon became
rebellion, and rebellion soon became triumphant. It all flowed as
naturally as possible from the same fountain as the idolatry of which
it was the punishment; and so it teaches once more the great truth that
'the world's history is the world's judgment,' and that the so-called
'natural consequences' of our deeds are, even here and now, God's
retribution for our deeds.

What a lesson as to God's great patience is here! What a solemn glimpse
into man's power to counterwork God's purpose! So soon after its
establishment did the house of David prove unworthy, and the experiment
fail. Yet that long-suffering purpose is not turned aside, but
persistently and patiently goes on its way, altering its methods, but
keeping its end unaltered, bending even sin to minister to its design,
pitying and warning the sinner ere it strikes the blow that the sinner
has made needful.

Behind the figure of Solomon we see another. The wisest of men fell
shamefully, captured by coarse lust, and apparently steeled against all
remonstrances from Heaven. 'A greater than Solomon is here.' The faults
of the human kings of Israel prophesy of the true King, who is to be
the substance of which they were but faint shadows, and whose manhood
was stained by no flaw, nor His kingdom ever rent from His pure hands.
Solomon was wise, but Christ is 'Wisdom.' Solomon built a Temple, but
also altars to false gods overtopping it across the valley; and his
Temple was burned with fire. But Christ is the true Temple as well as
Priest and Sacrifice. Solomon was by name 'the peaceful,' and his land
had outward rest, darkened at the last by war and rebellion. But Christ
is the Prince of Peace, and of His dominion there shall be no end.
Solomon is the great example of the sad truth that the loftiest and
wisest share in the universal sinfulness. Christ is the one flawless
Man, who makes those who take Him for their King wise and peaceful,
prosperous, and in due time sinless, like Himself.




THE NEW GARMENT BENT

'And Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, an Ephrathite of Zereda, Solomon's
servant, whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman, even he lifted
up his hand against the king. 27. And this was the cause that he lifted
up his hand against the king: Solomon built Millo, and repaired the
breaches of the city of David his father. 28. And the man Jeroboam was
a mighty man of valour: and Solomon seeing the young man that he was
industrious, he made him ruler over all the charge of the house of
Joseph. 29. And it came to pass at that time when Jeroboam went out of
Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way;
and he had clad himself with a new garment; and they two were alone in
the field: 30. And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him, and
rent it in twelve pieces: 31. And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten
pieces: for thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend
the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to
thee: 32. (But he shall have one tribe for My servant David's sake, and
for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the
tribes of Israel:) 33. Because that they have forsaken Me, and have
worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the god of
the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not
walked in My ways, to do that which is right in Mine eyes, and to keep
My statutes and My judgments, as did David his father. 34. Howbeit I
will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand: but I will make him
prince all the days of his life for David My servant's sake, whom I
chose because he kept My commandments and My statutes: 35. But I will
take the kingdom out of his ion's hand, and will give it unto thee,
even ten tribes. 36. And unto his son will I give one tribe, that David
My servant may have a light alway before Me in Jerusalem, the city
which I have chosen Me to put My name there. 37. And I will take thee,
and thou shalt reign according to all that thy soul desireth, and shalt
be king over Israel. 38. And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all
that I command thee, and wilt walk in My ways, and do that is right in
My sight, to keep My statutes and My commandments, as David My servant
did; that I will be with thee, and build thee a sure house, as I built
for David, and will give Israel unto thee. 39. And I will for this
afflict the seed of David, but not for ever. 40. Solomon sought
therefore to kill Jeroboam. And Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt,
unto Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of
Solomon. 41. And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did,
and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of
Solomon? 42. And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all
Israel was forty years. 43. And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was
buried in the city of David his father: and Rehoboam his son reigned in
his stead.'--1 KINGS xi. 26-43.

Solomon falls into the background in the last part of the story of his
reign, and his enemies are more prominent than himself. So long as he
walked with God, he was of importance for the historian; but as soon as
he forsook God, and was consequently forsaken of His wisdom, he becomes
as insignificant as an empty vessel which has once held sweet perfume,
or a piece of carbon through which the electric current has ceased to
flow. The sunbeam has left that peak, and shines on other summits.
Never was there a sadder eclipse.

We are here told first how the instrument for shattering Solomon's
kingdom was shaped by himself. It is the old story of a young man of
mark, attracting the eyes of the king, being promoted to offices of
trust, which at once stir ambition, and give prominence and influence
which seem to afford a possibility of gratifying it. The passion for
building, so common in Eastern kings, and the cause of so much misery
to their subjects, had grown on Solomon; and as his later days were
harassed by war, and he had lost the safe defence of God's arm,
Jerusalem had to be enclosed by a wall. His father had been able to
leave a 'breach' because the Lord was a wall round him and his city;
and if Solomon had kept in his paths, he would have had no need to add
to the fortifications. The preservation of ancestral piety is for
nations and individuals a surer protection than the improvement of
ancestral outward defences. Jeroboam made himself conspicuous by his
energy (for that rather than 'valour' must be the meaning of the word),
and so got promotion. It was natural, but at the same time dangerous,
to put him in command of the forced labour of his own tribe, as the
narrative shows us was done; for 'the house of Joseph' is the tribe of
Ephraim, to which, according to the correct translation of verse 26, he
belonged. In such an office he would be thrown among his kinsmen, and
would at once gain influence and learn to sympathise with their
discontent, or, at any rate, to know where the sore places were, if he
ever wanted to inflame them. One can easily fancy the grumblings of the
Ephraimites dragged up to Jerusalem to the hated labour, which Samuel
had predicted (1 Samuel viii. 16), and how facile it would be for the
officer in charge to fan discontent or to win friends by judicious
indulgence. How long this went on we do not know, but the fire had
smouldered for some time under the unconscious king's very eyes, when
it was fanned into a flame by Ahijah's breath.

That is the second stage in the story,--the spark on the tinder. We
have heard nothing of prophets during Solomon's reign; but now this man
from Shiloh, the ancient seat of the Tabernacle, meets the ambitious
young officer in some solitary spot, with the message which answered to
his secret thoughts and made his heart beat fast. The symbolic action
preceding the spoken word, as usual, supplied the text, of which the
word was the explanation and expansion. How pathetic is the newness of
the garment! Unworn, strong, and fresh, it yet is rent in pieces. So
the kingdom is so recent, with such possibilities of duration, and yet
it must be shattered! Thus quickly has the experiment broken down! It
is little more than a century since Saul's anointing, little more than
seventy years since the choice of David, and already the fabric, which
had such fair promise of perpetuity, is ready to vanish away. If we may
say so, that 'new garment' represents the divine disappointment and
sorrow over the swift corruption of the kingdom. It was probably merely
some loose square of cloth which Ahijah tore, with violence
proportioned to its newness, into twelve pieces, ten of which he thrust
into the astonished Jeroboam's hands. The commentary followed.

Ahijah's prophecy is substantially the same as the previous
threatenings to Solomon, which had done no good. Their incipient
fulfilment in the wars with Edom and Syria had been equally futile; and
therefore God, who never strikes without warning, and never warns
without striking if men do not heed, now drops the message into ears
that were only too ready to hear. The seed fell on prepared soil, and
Jeroboam's half-formed plans would be consolidated and fixed. The scene
is like that in which the witches foretell to Macbeth his dignity.
Slumbering ambitions are stirred, and a half-inclined will is finally
determined by the glimpse into the future. How easily men are persuaded
that God speaks, and how willing they are to obey, when their
inclinations jump with Heaven's commandments! The prophet's message
makes the separation of the kingdoms a direct divine act, and yet it
was the breaking up of a divine institution. God's dealings have to be
shaped according to facts, and He changes His methods, and lets the
feebleness of His creatures and their sins mould His august procedure.
The divine Potter, like mere human artisans, has His spoiled pieces of
work, and, with infinite resource and patience as infinite, re-shapes
the clay into other forms. The separation of the kingdoms was a divine
act, and yet it is treated often in the later books as a crime and
rebellion. God works out His purposes through men's deeds, and their
motives determine whether their acts are sins or obedience. A man may
be a rebel while he is doing the will of God, if what he does be done
at the bidding of his own selfishness. The separation of the kingdoms
was God's doing, but it was brought about by the free action of men
obeying most secular impulses of political discontent, and led by a
cunning, self-seeking schemer.

Note that the prophecy is in three parts. First, verses 31-33 announce
the punishment, with the reservation of a dwindled dominion to the
Davidic house, for the sake of their great ancestor and of God's choice
of Jerusalem, and solemnly charge on the people the idolatry which the
king had introduced. The second part (verses 34-36) postpones the
execution of the sentence till after Solomon's death, and assigns the
same two reasons for this further forbearance. The third part (verses
37-39) promises Jeroboam the kingdom, and lays down the conditions on
which the favours promised to David and his house may be his. The whole
closes with the assurance that the affliction of the seed of David is
not to be for ever.

The punishment was heavy; for the disruption of the kingdom meant the
wreck of all the prosperity of Solomon's earlier days, the hopeless
weakness of the divided tribes as against the formidable powers that
pressed in on them from north and south, frequent intestine wars,
bitter hatred instead of amity. Yet there was another side to it; for
the very failure of the human kings made the Messianic hope the more
bright, like a light glowing in the deepening darkness, and tumult and
oppression might teach those whom prosperity and peace had only
corrupted. The great lesson for us is the ruin which follows on
departure from God. We do not see national sins followed with equal
plainness or swiftness by national judgments; but the history of Israel
is meant to show on a large scale what is always true, in the long run,
both for nations and for individuals, that 'it is an evil thing and a
bitter' to depart from the living God.

Mark, too, that the judgment is wrought out by perfectly natural
causes. The separation follows old lines of cleavage. The strength of
David's kingdom lay in the south; and Ephraim was too powerful a tribe
and too proud of its ancient glories, to acquiesce cheerfully in the
pre-eminence of Judah. The oppression of forced labour and heavy
taxation was put forward as the reason for the revolt, and, no doubt,
was the reason for the readiness with which the ten tribes rallied to
Jeroboam's flag. There are two ways of writing history. You can either
leave God out, or trace all to Him. The former way calls itself
'scientific' and 'positive.' The latter is the Bible way. Perhaps, if
modern history were written on the same principles as the Books of
Kings, the divine hand would be as plainly visible,--only it requires
an inspired historian to do it. The way of bringing about the judgment
for departing from God has changed, but the judgment remains the same
to-day as when Ahijah rent his garment.

Between verses 39 and 40 we must suppose an attempt at armed rebellion
by Jeroboam. That is implied by the expression that he 'lifted his hand
against the king' (verses 26, 27). That attempt must have been put down
by Solomon. And that it should have been made shows how little Jeroboam
was influenced by religious motives. The prophet's words had set him
all afire with ambitious hopes, and he paid no heed to the distinct
assurance that Solomon was to be 'prince all the days of his life.' He
stretched out a rash, self-willed hand to snatch the promised crown,
and broke God's commandment even while he pretended to be keeping it.
How different David's conduct in like circumstances! He took no steps
to bring about the fulfilment of Samuel's promise at his anointing, but
patiently waited for God to do as He had said, in His own time, and
meantime continued his lowly work. God's time is the best time; and he
who greedily grasps at a premature fulfilment of promised good will
have to pay for it by defeat and exile from the modest good that he had.

Jeroboam's flight to Egypt brings that ill-omened name on the page for
the first time since the Exodus. It has given occasion to an
extraordinary addition to the Septuagint, professing to tell his
adventures there,--how he was high in Shishak's favour, and married a
princess. That is apparently pure legend; but his residence there was
important, as the beginning of Egypt's interference in Israel's
affairs. It is an old trick of aggressive nations to side with a
pretender to the throne of a country which they covet, and benevolently
to strengthen him that he may weaken it. No doubt it was as Jeroboam's
ally that Shishak invaded Judah in the fifth year of Rehoboam, and
plundered the Temple and the palace. It was a bad beginning for a king
of Israel to be a pensioner of Egypt.

The narrative closes with the sad, reticent formula which ends each
reign, and in Solomon's case hides so much that is tragic and dark.
This was all that could be said about the end of a career that had
begun so nobly. If more had been said, the record would have been
sadder; and so the pitying narrative casts the veil of the stereotyped
summary over the miserable story. There are many instances in history
of lives of genius and enthusiasm, of high promise and partial
accomplishment, marred and flung away, but none which present the great
tragedy of wasted gifts, and blossoms never fruited, in a sharper, more
striking form than the life of the wise king of Israel, who 'in his
latter days' was 'a fool.' The goodliest vessel may be shipwrecked in
sight of port. Solomon was not an old man, as we count age, when he
died; for he reigned forty years, and was somewhere about twenty when
he became king. But it was 'when he was old' that he fell, and that
through passion which should have been well under control long before.
The sun went down in a thick bank of clouds, which rose from undrained
marshes in his soul, and stretched high up in the western horizon. His
career, in its glory and its shame, preaches the great lesson which the
Book of Ecclesiastes puts into his mouth as 'the conclusion of the
whole matter': 'Fear God, and keep His commandments; for this is the
whole duty of man.'




HOW TO SPLIT A KINGDOM

And Rehoboam went to Shechem: for all Israel were come to Shechem to
make him king. 2. And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
who was yet in Egypt, heard of it (for he was fled from the presence of
king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt); 3. That they sent and
called him. And Jeroboam and all the congregation of Israel came, and
spake unto Rehoboam, saying, 4. Thy father made our yoke grievous: now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy
yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee. 6. And he
said unto them, Depart yet for three days, then come again to me. And
the people departed. 6. And king Rehoboam consulted with the old men,
that stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, and said, How
do ye advise that I may answer this people? 7. And they spake unto him,
saying, If thou wilt be a servant unto this people this day, and wilt
serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they
will be thy servants for ever. 8. But he forsook the counsel of the old
men, which they had given him, and consulted with the young men that
were grown up with him, and which stood before him: 9. And he said unto
them, What counsel give ye that we may answer this people, who have
spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke which thy father did put upon us
lighter? 10. And the young men that were grown up with him spake unto
him, saying, Thus shalt thou speak unto this people that spake unto
thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter
unto us; thus shalt thou say unto them, My little finger shall be
thicker than my father's loins. 11. And now whereas my father did lade
you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke: my father hath
chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions. 12.
So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the
king had appointed, saying, 'Come to me again the third day. 13. And
the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the old men's counsel
that they gave him; 14. And spake to them after the counsel of the
young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to
your yoke: my father also chastised you with whips, but I will chastise
you with scorpions. 15. Wherefore the king hearkened not unto the
people; for the cause was from the Lord, that He might perform His
saying, which the Lord spake by Ahijah the Shilonite unto Jeroboam the
son of Nebat. 16. So when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not
unto them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we
in David? neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your
tents, O Israel: now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed
unto their tents. 17. But as for the children of Israel which dwelt in
the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.'--1 KINGS xii. 1-17.



The separation of the kingdom of Solomon into two weak and hostile
states is, in one aspect, a wretched story of folly and selfishness
wrecking a nation, and, in another, a solemn instance of divine
retribution working its designs by men's sins. The greater part of this
account deals with it in the former aspect, and shows the despicable
motives of the men in whose hands was the nation's fate; but one
sentence (verse 15) draws back the curtain for a moment, and shows us
the true cause. There is something very striking in that one flash,
which reveals the enthroned God, working through the ignoble strife
which makes up the rest of the story. This double aspect of the
disruption of the kingdom is the main truth about it which the
narrative impresses on us.

As to the mere details of the incident, as a political revolution, they
are in four stages. First come the terms of allegiance offered to the
new king. Rehoboam goes to Shechem, because 'Israel was gone' there.
The choice of the place is suspicious; for it was in the tribe of
Ephraim, and had been for a time the centre of national life; and its
selection at once indicated discontent with the preponderance of
