believing gaze upon that Lord who died because He would do the will
of the Father, and is throned and crowned in the heavens because He
died, is--By patient continuance in well-doing let us commit the
keeping of our souls to Him: and abide in the calling wherewith we
are called.

And, again, the sight of the risen Christ leads to a life of calm
expectancy. 'If I will that He _tarry_ till I come' conveys that
shade of meaning. The Apostle was to wait for the Lord from Heaven,
and that vision which was given to these 500 men sent them home to
their abodes to make all the rest of their lives one calm aspiration
for, and patient expectation of, the return of the Lord. These
primitive Christians expected that Jesus Christ would come speedily.
That expectation was disappointed in so far as the date was
concerned, but after nineteen centuries it still remains true that
all vigorous and vital Christian life must have in it, as a very
important element of its vitality, the onward look which ever is
anticipating, which often is desiring, and which constantly is
confident of, the coming of the Lord from Heaven. The Resurrection
has for its consequences, its sequel and corollary, first the
Ascension; then the long tract of time during which Jesus Christ is
absent, but still in divine presence rules the world; and, finally,
His coming again in that same body in which the disciples saw Him
depart from them. And no Christian life is up to the level of its
privileges, nor has any Christian faith grasped the whole articles of
its creed, except that which sets in the very centre of all its
visions of the future that great thought--He shall come again.

Questions of chronology have nothing to do with that. It stands there
before us, the certain fact, made certain and inevitable by the past
facts of the Cross and the Grave and Olivet. He has come, He will
come; He has gone, He will come back. And for us the life that we
live in the flesh ought to be a life of waiting for God's Son from
Heaven, and of patient, confident expectancy that when He shall be
manifested we also shall be manifested with Him in glory.

So much, then, for life--calm, persistent in every duty, and animated
by that blessed and far-off, but certain, hope, and all of these
founded upon the vision and the faith of a risen Lord. What have
fears and cares and distractions and faint-heartedness and gloomy
sorrow to do with the eyes that have beheld the Christ, and with the
lives that are based on faith in the risen Lord?

II. So, secondly, consider what death becomes to those who have seen
Christ risen from the dead.

'Some are fallen asleep.' Now that most natural and obvious metaphor
for death is not only a Christian idea, but is found, as would be
expected, in many tongues, but yet with a great and significant
difference. The Christian reason for calling death a sleep embraces a
great deal more than the heathen reason for doing so, and in some
respects is precisely the opposite of that, inasmuch as to most
others who have used the word, death has been a sleep that knew no
waking, whereas the very pith and centre of the Christian reason for
employing the symbol are that it makes our waking sure. We have here
what the act of dying and the condition of the dead become by virtue
of faith in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

They have 'fallen asleep.' The act of dying is but a laying one's
self down to rest, and a dropping out of consciousness of the
surrounding world. It is very remarkable and very beautiful that the
new Testament scarcely ever employs the words _dying_ and _death_ for
the act of separating body and spirit, or for the condition either of
the spirit parted from the body, or of the body parted from the
spirit. It keeps those grim words for the reality, the separation of
the soul from God; and it only exceptionally uses them for the shadow
and the symbol, the physical fact of the parting of the man from the
house which here he has dwelt in. But the reason why Christianity
uses these periphrases or metaphors, these euphemisms for death, is
the opposite of the reason why the world uses them. The world is so
afraid of dying that it durst not name the grim, ugly thing. The
Christian, or at least the Christian faith, is so little afraid of
death that it does not think such a trivial matter worth calling by
the name, but only names it 'falling asleep.'

Even when the circumstances of that dropping off to slumber are
painful and violent, the Bible still employs the term. Is it not
striking that the first martyr, kneeling outside the city, bruised by
stones and dying a bloody death, should have been said to fall
asleep? If ever there was an instance in which the gentle metaphor
seemed all inappropriate it was that cruel death, amidst a howling
crowd, and with fatal bruises, and bleeding limbs mangled by the
heavy rocks that lay upon them. But yet, 'when he had said this he
fell asleep.' If that be true of such a death, no physical pains of
any kind make the sweet word inappropriate for any.

We have here not only the designation of the act of dying, but that
of the condition of the dead. They are fallen asleep, and they
continue asleep. How many great thoughts gather round that metaphor
on which it is needless for me to try to dilate! They will suggest
themselves without many words to you all.

There lies in it the idea of repose. 'They rest from their labours.'
Sleep restores strength, and withdraws a man at once from effort on
the outer world, and from communication from it. We may carry the
analogy into that unseen world. We know nothing about the relations
to an external universe of the departed who sleep in Jesus. It may be
that, if they sleep in Him, since He knows all, they, through Him,
may know, too, something--so much as He pleases to impart to them--of
what is happening here. And it may even be that, if they sleep in
Him, and He wields the energies of Omnipotence, they, through Him,
may have some service to do, even while they wait for their house
which is from heaven. But there is no need for, nor profit in, such
speculations. It is enough that the sweet emblem suggests repose, and
that in that sleep there are folded around the sleepers the arms of
the Christ on whose bosom they rest, as an infant does on its first
and happiest home--its mother's breast.

But then, besides that, the emblem suggests the idea of continuous
and conscious existence. A man asleep does not cease to be a man; a
dead man does not cease to live. It has often been argued from this
metaphor that we are to conceive of the space between death and the
resurrection as being a period of unconsciousness, but the analogies
seem to me to be in the opposite direction. A sleeping man does not
cease to know himself to be, and he does not cease to know himself to
be himself. That mysterious consciousness of personal identity
survives the passage from waking to sleep, as dreams sufficiently
show us. And, therefore, they that sleep know themselves to be.

And, finally, the emblem suggests the idea of waking. Sleep is a
parenthesis. If the night comes, the morning comes. 'If winter comes,
can spring be far behind?' They that sleep will awake, and be
satisfied when they 'awake with Thy likeness.' And so these three
things--repose, conscious, continuous existence, and the certainty of
awaking--all lie in that metaphor.

Now, then, the risen Christ is the only ground of such hope, and
faith in Him is the only state of mind which is entitled to cherish
it. Nothing proves immortality except that open grave. Every other
foundation is too weak to bear the weight of such a superstructure.
The current of present opinion shows, I think, that neither
metaphysical nor ethical arguments for the future life will stand the
force of the disintegrating criticism which is brought to bear upon
that hope by the fashionable materialism of this generation. There is
one barrier that will resist that force, and only one, and that is
the historical facts that Jesus Christ died, and that Jesus Christ
has risen again. He rose; therefore death is not the end of
individual existence. He rose; therefore life beyond the grave is
possible for humanity. He rose; therefore His sacrifice for the
world's sin is accepted, and I may be delivered from my guilt and my
burden. He rose; therefore He is declared to be the Son of God with
power. He rose; therefore we, if we trust Him, may partake in His
Resurrection and in some reflection of His glory. The old Greek
architects were often careless of the solidity of the soil on which
they built their temples, and so, many of them have fallen in ruins.
The Temple of Immortality can be built only upon the rock of that
proclamation--Jesus Christ is risen from the dead. And we, dear
brethren, should have all our hopes founded upon that one fact.

So then, for us, the calm, peaceful passage from life into what else
is the great darkness is possible on condition of our having beheld
the risen Lord. These witnesses of whom my text speaks, Paul would
suggest to us, laid themselves quietly down to sleep, because before
them there still hovered the memory of the vision which they had
beheld. Faith in the risen Christ is the anchor of the soul in death,
and there is nothing else by which we can hold then.

As the same Apostle, in one of his other letters, puts it, the belief
that Christ is risen is not only the irrefragable ground of our hope
that we, too, shall rise, but has the power to change the whole
aspect of our death. Did you ever observe the emphasis with which He
says, 'If we believe that Jesus _died_ and rose again, even so
them also which _sleep_ in Jesus will God bring with Him?' His
death was death indeed, and faith in it softens ours to sleep. He
bore the reality that we might never need to know it, and if our poor
hearts are resting upon that dear Lord, then the flames are but
painted ones and will not burn, and we shall pass through them, and
no smell of fire will be upon us, and all that will be consumed will
be the bonds which bind us. He has abolished death. The physical fact
remains, but all which to men makes the idea of death is gone if we
trust the risen Lord. So that, between two men dying under precisely
the same circumstances, of the same disease, in adjacent beds in the
same hospital, there may be such a difference as that the same word
cannot be applied to the experiences of both.

My dear friends, we have each of us to pass through that last
struggle; but we may make it either a quiet going to sleep with a
loved Face bending over our closing eyes, like a mother's over her
child's cradle, and the same Face meeting us when we open them in the
morning of heaven; or we may make it a reluctant departure from all
that we care for, and a trembling advance into all from which
conscience and heart shrink.

Which is it going to be to you? The answer depends upon that to
another question. Are you looking to that Christ that died and is
alive for evermore as your life and your salvation? Do you hold fast
that Gospel which Paul preached, 'how that Christ died for our sins
according to the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that He rose
again the third day, according to the Scriptures'? If you do, life
will be a calm, persevering, expectant waiting upon Him, and death
will be nothing more terrible than falling asleep.




PAUL'S ESTIMATE OF HIMSELF

   'By the grace of God I am what I am: and His grace
   which was bestowed upon me was not in vain.'--1 COR. xv. 10.


The Apostle was, all his life, under the hateful necessity of
vindicating his character and Apostleship. Thus here, though his main
purpose in the context is simply to declare the Gospel which he
preached, he is obliged to turn aside in order to assert, and to back
up his assertion, that there was no sort of difference between him
and the other recognised teachers of Christian truth. He was forced
to do this by persistent endeavours in the Corinthian Church to deny
his Apostleship, and the faithfulness of his representation of the
Christian verities. The way in which he does it is eminently
beautiful and remarkable. He fires up in vindication of himself; and
then he checks himself. 'By the grace of God I am'--and he is going
to say what he is, but he bethinks himself, as if he had reflected;
'No! I will leave other people to say what that is. By the grace of
God I am--what I am, whatever that be. And all that I have to say is
that God made me, and that I helped Him. For the grace of God which
was bestowed upon me was not in vain. You Corinthians may judge what
the product is. I tell you how it has come about.' So there are
thoughts here, I think, well worth our pondering and taking into our
hearts and lives.

I. First, as to the one power that makes men.

'By the grace of God I am what I am.' Now that word 'grace' has got
to be worn threadbare, and to mean next door to nothing, in the ears
and minds of a great many continual hearers of the Gospel. But
Paul had a very definite idea of what he meant by it; and what he
meant by it was a very large thing, which we may well ponder for a
moment as being the only thing which will transform and ennoble
character and will produce fruit that a man need not be ashamed of.
The grace of God, in Paul's use of the words, which is the scriptural
use of them generally, implies these two things which are connected
as root and product--the active love of God, in exercise towards us
low and sinful creatures, and the gifts with which that love comes
full charged to men. These two things, which at bottom are one, love
and its gifts, are all, in the Apostle's judgment, gathered up and
stored, as in a great storehouse, in Jesus Christ Himself, and
through Him are made accessible to us, and brought to bear upon us
for the ennobling of our natures, and the investing of us with graces
and beauties of character, all strange to us apart from these.

Now it seems to me that these two things, which come from one root,
are the precise things which you and I need in order to make us
nobler and purer and more Godlike men than otherwise we could ever
become. For what is it that men need most for noble and pure living?
These two things precisely--motive and power to carry out the
dictates of conscience.

Every man in the world knows enough of duty and of right to be a far
nobler man than any man in the world is. And it is not for want of
clear convictions of duty, it is not for want of recognised models
and patterns of life, that men go wrong; but it is because there are
these two things lacking, motives for nobler service, and power to do
and be what they know they ought to be. And precisely here Paul's
gospel comes in, 'By the grace of God I am what I am.' That grace,
considered in its two sides of love and of giving, supplies all that
we want.

It supplies motives. There is nothing that will bend a man's will
like the recognition of divine love which it is blessedness to come
in contact with, and to obey. You may try to sway him by motives of
advantage and self-interest, and to thunder into his ears the pealing
words of duty and right and 'ought,' and there is no adequate
response. You cannot soften a heart by the hammers of the law. You
cannot force a man to do right by brandishing before him the whip
that punishes doing wrong. You cannot sway the will by anything but
the heart; and when you can touch the deepest spring it moves the
whole mass.

You have seen some ponderous piece of machinery, which resists all
attempts of a puny hand laid upon it to make it revolve. But down in
one corner is a little hidden spring. Touch that and with majestic
slowness and certainty the mighty mass turns. You know those
rocking-stones down in the south of England; tons of weight poised
upon a pin point, and so exquisitely balanced that a child's finger
rightly applied may move the mass. So the whole man is made mobile
only by the touch of love; and the grace that comes to us, and says,
'If ye love Me, keep My commandments'--is, as I believe, the sole
motive which will continuously and adequately sway the rebellious,
self-centred wills of men, to obedience resulting in nobility of
life.

The other aspect of this same great word is, in like manner, that
which we need. What men want is, first of all, the will to be noble
and good; and, second, the power to carry out the will. It is God
that worketh in us both the willing and the doing. I venture to
affirm that there is no power known, either to thinkers, or
philanthropists, or doctrinaires, or strivers after excellence in the
world--no power known and available which will lift a life to such
heights of beauty and self-sacrificing nobility, as will the power
that comes to us by communication of the grace that is in Jesus
Christ.

I am perpetually trying to insist, dear brethren, upon this one
thought, that the communication of actual new life is the central
gift of the Gospel; and this new life it is, this nature endowed with
new desires, hopes, aims, capacities, which alone will lift the whole
man into unwonted heights of beauty and serenity. It is the grace of
God, the gift of His Divine Spirit who will dwell with all of us, if
we will, which alone can be trusted to make men good.

And now, if that be true, what follows? Surely this, that for all you
who have, in any measure, caught a glimpse of what you ought to be,
and have been more or less vainly trying to realise your ideal, and
reach your goal, there is a better way than the way of self-centred
and self-derived and self-dependent effort. There is the way of
opening your hearts and spirits to the entrance and access of that
great power, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, which will do in us
and for us all that we know we ought to do, and yet feel hampered and
hindered in performing.

Oh, dear friends! there are many of you, I believe, who have more or
less spasmodically and interruptedly, but with a continual recurrence
to the effort, sought to plant your feet firmly in the paths of
righteousness, and have more or less failed. Listen to this Gospel,
and accept it, and put it to the proof. The love of God which is in
Christ Jesus, and the life which that love brings in its hands, for
all of us who will trust it, will dwell in you if you will, and mould
you into His own likeness, and the law of the spirit of life which
was in Christ Jesus will make us free from the law of sin and death.

All noble living is a battle. Can you and I, with our ten thousand,
meet him that cometh against us with his twenty, the temptations of
the world and of its Prince? Send for the reinforcements, and Jesus
Christ will come and teach your hands to war and your fingers to
fight. All noble life is self-denial, coercion, restraint; and can my
poor, feeble hands apply muscular force enough to the brake to keep
the wheels clogged, and prevent them from whirling me downhill into
ruin? Let Him come and put His great gentle hand on the top of yours,
and that will enable you to scotch the wheels, and make self-denial
possible. All noble life is a building up by slow degrees from the
foundation. And can you and I complete the task with our own limited
resources, and our own feeble strengths? Will not 'all that pass by
begin to mock' us and say, 'This man began to build and was not able
to finish'? That is the epitaph written over all moralities and over
all lives which, catching some glimpse of the good and the true and
the noble, have tried, apart from Christ, to reproduce them in
themselves. Frightful gaps, and an unfinished, however fair structure
end them all. Go to Him. 'His hand hath laid the foundation of the
house, His hand shall also finish it.' He who is Himself the
foundation-stone is also the headstone of the corner, which is
brought forth with shouting of 'Grace! Grace unto it!'

I need not, I suppose, linger to remind you what important and large
lessons these thoughts carry, not only for men who are trying to work
at the task of mending and making their own characters, but on the
larger scale, for all who seek to benefit and elevate their fellows.
Brethren, it is not for me to depreciate any workers who, in any
department, and by any methods, seek, and partially effect, the
elevation of humanity. But I should be untrue to my own deepest
convictions, and unfaithful to the message which God's providence has
given it to me as my life's task to proclaim, if I did not declare
that nothing will truly _re-form_ humanity, society, the nation, the
city, except that which re-creates the individual: 'the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ' entering into their midst.

II. And so, secondly, and very briefly, notice the lesson we get here
as to how we should think of our own attainments.

I have already pointed out that there are two beautiful touches in my
text. The Apostle traces everything that he is, in his character and
in his Christian standing and in his Apostolic work and success, to
that grace that has come down upon him, and clothed his nakedness
with so glorious a garment. And then, in addition to that, he
modestly, and with a fine sense of dignity, refrains from parading
his attainments or his achievements, and says, 'It is not for me to
estimate what I am; it is for you to do it.' True, indeed, in the
next verse he does set forth, in very lofty language, his claims to
be in nothing behind the very chiefest of the Apostles, and 'to have
laboured more abundantly than they all.' But still the spirit of that
humble and yet dignified silence runs through the whole context. 'By
the grace of God I am--what I am.'

Well, then, it is not necessary for a man to be ignorant, or to
pretend that he is ignorant, of what he can do. We hear a great deal
about the unconsciousness of genius. There is a partial truth in it;
and possibly the highest examples of power and success, in any
department of mental or intellectual effort, are unaware of their
achievements and stature. But if a man can do a certain kind of
service there is no harm whatever in his recognising the fact that he
can do it. The only harm is in his thinking that because he can, he is
a very fine fellow, and that the work itself is a great work; and
so setting himself up above his brethren. There is a vast deal of
hypocrisy in what is called unconsciousness of power. Most men who
have been chosen and empowered to do a great work for God or for men,
in any department, have been aware that they could do it. But the
less we think about ourselves, in any way, the better. The more
entire our recognition of the influx of grace on which we depend for
keeping our reservoir full, the less likelihood there will be of
touchy self-assertion, the less likelihood of the misuse of the
powers that we have. If we are to do much for God, if we are to keep
what we have already attained, if we are to make our own lives sweet
and beautiful, if we are to be invested with any increase of
capacity, or led to any higher heights of nobleness and
Christlikeness, we must copy, and make a conscious effort to copy,
these two things, which marked the Apostle's estimate of himself--a
distinct recognition that we are only reservoirs and nothing
more--'What hast thou that thou hast not received? Why then dost thou
glory as if thou hadst not received it?'--and a humble waiving aside
of the attempt to determine what it is that we are. For however
clearly a man may know his own powers and achievements, it is hard
for him to estimate the relations of these to his whole character.

So, dear brethren, although it is a very homely piece of advice, and
may seem to be beneath the so-called dignity of the pulpit, let me
venture just to remind you that self-conceit is no disease peculiar
to the ten-talented people, but is quite as rife, if not a good deal
rifer, among those with one talent. They are very humble when it
comes to work, and are quite contented to wrap the one talent up in a
napkin then; but when it comes to self-assertion, or what they expect
to receive of recognition from others, they need to be reminded quite
as much as their betters in endowment--'By the grace of God I am what
I am.'

III. And so, lastly, one word about the responsibility for our
co-operation with the grace, in order to the accomplishment of its
results.

'The grace which was bestowed upon me was not in vain,' says Paul.
'Not I, but the grace of God which was with me, and so I laboured
more abundantly than they all.' That is to say, God in His giving
love; Christ with His ever out-flowing Spirit, move round our hearts,
and desire to enter. But the grace, the love, the gifts of the love
may all be put away by our unfaithfulness, by our non-receptivity, by
our misuse, and by our negligence. Paul yielded himself to the grace
that was brought to work upon him. Have you yielded yourselves?

Paul said, 'By the grace of God I am what I am.' He could not have
said that, could he, if he had known that the most part of what he
was was dead against God's will and purpose? Has God anything to do
with making you what you are, or has it been the devil that has had
the greater share in it? This man, because he knew that he had
submitted himself to the often painful, searching, crucifying,
self-restraining and stimulating influences of the Gospel and Spirit
of Christ, could say, 'God's grace has made me what I am, and I
helped Him to make me.' And can you say anything like that?

Take your life. In how many of its deeds has there been present the
consciousness of God and His love? Take your character. How much of
it has been shot through and through, so to speak, by the fiery darts
of that cleansing, warming, consuming grace of God? Are you daily
being baptized in that Spirit, searched by that Spirit, condemned by
that grace? Is it the grace of God, or nature and self and the world
and the flesh that have made you what you are?

Oh, brethren I let us cultivate the sense of our need of this divine
help, for it does not come where men do not know how weak they are,
and how much they want it. The mountain tops are high,--yes! and they
are dry; there is no water there. The rivers run in the green valleys
deep down. 'God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble.'
Let us see that we open our hearts to the reception of these
quickening and cleansing influences, for it is possible for us to
cover ourselves over with such an impenetrable covering that that
grace cannot pass through it. Let us see to it that we keep ourselves
in close contact with the foundation of all this grace, even Jesus
Christ Himself, by desire, by faith, by love, by communion, by
meditation, by approximation, by sympathy, by service. And let us see
that we use the grace that we possess. 'For to him that hath shall be
given, and from him that hath not'--not possessing in any real sense
because not utilising for its appointed purpose--'shall be taken away
even that he hath.' Wherefore, brethren, I 'beseech you that ye
receive not the grace of God in vain.'




THE UNITY OF APOSTOLIC TEACHING

   'Whether it were I or they, so we preach,
   and so ye believed.'--1 COR. xv. 11.


Party spirit and faction were the curses of Greek civic life, and
they had crept into at least one of the Greek churches--that in the
luxurious and powerful city of Corinth. We know that there was a very
considerable body of antagonists to Paul, who ranked themselves under
the banner of Apollos or of Cephas _i.e._ Peter. Therefore, Paul,
keenly conscious that he was speaking to some unfriendly critics,
hastens in the context to remove the possible objection which might
be made, that the Gospel which he preached was peculiar to himself,
and proceeds to assert that the whole substance of what he had to say
to men, was held with unbroken unanimity by the other apostles.
'They' means all of _them_; and 'so' means the summary of the Gospel
teaching in the preceding verses.

Now, Paul would not have ventured to make that assertion, in the face
of men whom he knew to be eager to pick holes in anything that he
said, unless he had been perfectly sure of his ground. There were
broad differences between him and the others. But their partisans
might squabble, as is often the case, and the men, whose partisans
they were, be unanimous. There were differences of individual
character, of temper, and of views about certain points of Christian
truth. But there was an unbroken front of unanimity in regard to all
that lies within the compass of that little word which covers so much
ground--'_So_ we preach.'

Now, I wish to turn to that outstanding fact--which does not always
attract the attention which it deserves--of the absolute identity of
the message which all the apostles and primitive teachers delivered,
and to seek to enforce some of the considerations and lessons which
seem to me naturally to flow from it.

I. First, then, I ask you to think of the fact itself--the unbroken
unanimity of the whole body of Apostolic teachers.

As I have said, there were wide differences of characteristics
between them, but there was a broad tract of teaching wherein they
all agreed. Let me briefly gather up the points of unanimity, the
contents of the one Gospel, which every man of them felt was his
message to the world. I may take it all from the two clauses in the
preceding context, 'how that Christ died for our sins according to
the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that He rose again the
third day according to the Scriptures.' These are the things about
which, as Paul declares, there was not the whisper of a dissentient
voice. There is the vital centre which he declares every Christian
teacher grasped as being the essential of his message, and in various
tones and manners, but in substantial identity of content, declared
to the world.

Now, what lies in it? The Person spoken of--the Christ, and all that
that word involves of reference to the ancient and incomplete
Revelation in the past, its shadows and types, its prophecies and
ceremonies, its priesthood and its sacrifices; with all that it
involves of reference to the ancient hopes on which a thousand
generations had lived, and which either are baseless delusions, or
are realised in Jesus--the Person whom all the Apostles proclaimed
was One anointed from God as Prophet, Priest, and King; who had come
into the world to fulfil all that the ancient system had shadowed by
sacrifice, temple, and priest, and was the Monarch of Israel and of
the world.

And not only were they absolutely unanimous in regard to the Person,
but they were unbrokenly consentient in regard to the facts of His
life, His death, and His Resurrection. But the proclamation of the
external fact is no gospel. You must add the clause 'for our sins,'
and then the record, which is a mere piece of history, with no more
good news in it than the record of the death of any other martyr,
hero, or saint, starts into being truly the good news for the world.
The least part of a historical fact is the fact; the greatest part of
it is the explanation of the fact, and the setting it in its place in
regard to other facts, the exhibition of the principles which it
expresses, and of the conclusions to which it leads. So the bare
historical declaration of a death and a resurrection is transmuted
into a gospel, by that which is the most important part of the
Gospel, the explanation of the meaning of the fact--'He died for our
sins.'

If redemption from sin through the death of a Person is the
fundamental conception of the Gospel for the world, then it is clear
that, for such a purpose, a divine nature in the Person is wanted.
Your notion of what Christ came to do will determine your notion of
who He is. If you only recognise that His work is to teach,
or to show in exercise a fair human character, then you may rest
content with the lower notion of His nature which sees in Him but the
foremost of the sons of men. But if we grasp 'died for our sins,'
then for such a task the incarnation of the Eternal Son of God is the
absolute pre-requisite.

Still further, our text brings out the contents of this gospel as
being the declaration of the Resurrection. On that I need not here
and now dwell at any length. But these are the points, the Person,
the two facts, death and resurrection, and the great meaning of the
death--viz. the expiation for the world's sins: these are the things
on which the whole of the primitive teachers of the Apostolic Church
had one voice and one message.

Now, I do not suppose that I need spend any time in showing to you
how the extant records bear out, absolutely, this contention of the
Apostle's. I need only remind you how the opposition that was waged
against him--and it was a very vigorous and a very bitter
opposition--from a section of the Church, had no bearing at all upon
the question of what he taught, but only upon the question of to whom
it was to be taught. The only objection that the so-called Judaising
party in the early Church had against Paul and his preaching, was not
the Gospel that he declared, but his assertion that the Gentile
nations might enter into the Church through faith in Jesus Christ,
without passing through the gate of circumcision. Depend upon it, if
there had been any, even the most microscopic, divergence on his part
from the general, broad stream of Christian teaching, the sleepless,
keen-eyed, unscrupulous enemies that dogged him all his days would
have pounced upon it eagerly, and would never have ceased talking
about it. But not one of them ever said a word of the sort, but
allowed his teaching to pass, because it was the teaching of every
one of the apostles.

If I had time, or if it were necessary, it would be easy to point you
to the records that we have left of the Apostolic teaching, in order
to confirm this unbroken unanimity. I do not need to spend time on
that. Proof-texts are not worth so much as the fact that these
doctrines are interwoven into the whole structure of the New
Testament as a whole--just as they are into Paul's letters. But I may
gather one or two sayings, in which the substance of each writer's
teaching has been concentrated by himself. For instance, Peter speaks
about being 'redeemed by the precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb
without blemish and without spot,' and declares that 'He Himself bare
our sins in His own body on the tree.' John comes in with his
doxology: 'Unto Him that loved us, and loosed us from our sins in His
own blood'; and it is his pen that records how in the heavens there
echoed 'glory and honour and thanks and blessing, for ever and ever,
to the Lamb that was slain, and has redeemed us unto God by His
blood.' The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews, steeped as he is in
ceremonial and sacrificial ideas, and having for his one purpose to
work out the thought that Jesus Christ is all that the ancient
ritual, sacerdotal and sacrificial system shadows and foretells, sums
up his teaching in the statement that Christ having come, a high
priest of good things to come, 'through His own blood, entered in,
once for all, into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption
for us.'

There were limits to the unanimity, as I have already said. Paul and
Peter had a great quarrel about circumcision and related subjects.
The Apostolic writings are wondrously diverse from one another. Peter
is far less constructive and profound than Paul. Paul and Peter are
both untouched with the mystic wisdom of the Apostle John. But, in
regard to the facts that I have signalised, the divinity, the person
of Jesus Christ, His death and Resurrection, and the significance to
be attached to that death, they are absolutely one. The instruments
in the orchestra are various, the tender flute, the ringing trumpet,
and many another, but the note they strike is the same. 'Whether it
were I or they, so we preach.'

II. Now, let me ask you to consider the only explanation of this
unanimity.

Time was when the people, who did not believe in Christ's divinity
and sacrificial death, tortured themselves to try and make out
meanings for these epistles, which should not include the obnoxious
doctrines. That is nearly antiquated. I suppose that there is nobody
now, or next to nobody, who does not admit that, right or wrong,
Paul, Peter, John--all of them--teach these two things, that Christ
is the Eternal Son of the Father, and that His death is the Sacrifice
for the world's sin. But they say that that is not the primitive,
simple teaching of the Man of Nazareth; and that the unanimity is a
unanimity of misapprehension of, and addition to, His words and to
the drift of His teaching.

Now, just think what a huge--I was going to say--inconceivability
that supposition is. For there is no point, say from the time at
which the Apostle who wrote the words of my text, which was somewhere
about the year 56 or 57 A.D.,--there is no point between that period,
working backwards through the history of the Church to the
Crucifixion, where you can insert such a tremendous revolution of
teaching as this. There is no trace of such a change. Peter's
earliest speeches, as recorded in Acts, are in some important
respects less developed doctrinally than are the epistles, but
Christ's Messiahship, death, and Resurrection, with which is
connected the remission of sins, are as clearly and emphatically
proclaimed as at any later time. So these points of the Apostolic
testimony were preached from the first, and, if in preaching them,
the witnesses perverted the simple teaching of the Carpenter of
Nazareth, and ascribed to Him a character which He had not claimed,
and to His death a power of which He had not dreamed, they did so at
the very time when the impressions of His personality and teaching
were most recent and strong. It seems to me, apart altogether from
other considerations, that such a right-about-face movement on the
part of the early teachers of Christianity, is an absolute
impossibility, regard being had to the facts of the case, even if you
make much allowance for possible errors in the record.

But I would make another remark. If misapprehension came in, if these
men, in their unanimous declaration of Christ's death as the
Sacrifice for sin, were not fairly representing the conclusions
inevitable from the facts of Christ's life and death, and from His
own words, is it not an odd thing that the same misapprehension
affected them all? When people misconceive a teacher's doctrine, they
generally differ in the nature of their misconceptions, and split
into sections and parties. But here you have to account for the fact
that every man of them, with all their diversity of idiosyncrasy and
character, tumbled into the same pit of error, and that there was not
one of them left sane enough to protest. Does that seem to be a
likely thing?

And what about the worth of the teacher's teaching, that did not
guard its receivers from such absolute misapprehension as that? If
the whole Church unanimously mistook everything that Jesus Christ had
said to them, and unwarrantably made out of Him what they did, on
this hypothesis, I do not think that there is much left to honour or
admire in a teacher, whose teaching was so ambiguous, as that it led
all that received it into such an error as that into which, by the
supposition, they fell.

No, brethren; they were one, because their Gospel was the only
possible statement of the principles that underlay, and the
conclusions that flowed from, the plain facts of the life and the
teaching of Jesus Christ. I am not going to spend time in quoting His
own words. I can only refer to one or two of them very succinctly.
'Destroy this Temple, and in three days I will raise it up.' 'As
Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son
of Man be lifted up.' 'My flesh is the bread which I will give for
the life of the world.' 'The Son of Man came not to be ministered
unto, but to minister, and to give His life a ransom for many.' 'This
is My body broken for you; take, eat, in remembrance of Me.' 'This is
My blood, shed for many for the remission of sins; this do ye, as
often as ye drink it, in remembrance of Me.' What possible
explanation, doing justice to these words, is there, except 'Jesus
Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures'? And how could
men who had heard them with their own ears, and with their own eyes
had seen Him risen from the dead and ascending into heaven, do
otherwise than eagerly, enthusiastically, at the cost of all, and
with unhesitating voice of unbroken unanimity, 'so preach'?

I quite admit that in Christ's teaching in the gospels you will not
find the articulate drawing out into doctrinal statement of the
principles that underlay, and the conclusions that flow from, the
historical fact of Christ's propitiatory death. I do not wonder at
that, nor do I admit that it is any argument against the truth of the
divine revelation which is made in these doctrinal statements, to
allege that we find nothing corresponding to them in Jesus Christ's
own words. The silence is not as absolute as is alleged, as the
quotations which I have made, and which might have been multiplied,
do distinctly enough show. Even if it were more absolute than it is,
the silence is by no means unintelligible. Christ had to offer the
Sacrifice before the Sacrifice could be preached. He Himself warned
His disciples against accepting His own words prior to the Cross, as
the conclusive and ultimate revelation. 'I have many things to say
unto you, but you cannot carry them now.' There was need that the
Cross should be a fact before it was evolved into a doctrine. And so
I venture to say that the unanimity of the preaching is only
explicable on the ground of that preaching in both its parts--its
assertion of Jesus' Messiahship and of His propitiatory death--being
the repetition on the housetop of the lessons which they had heard in
the ear from Him.

III. Note, briefly, the lesson from this unanimity.

Let us distinctly apprehend where is the living heart of the
Gospel--that it is the message of redemption by the incarnation and
sacrifice of the Son of God. There follows from that incarnation and
sacrifice all the great teaching about the work of the Divine Spirit
in men, dwelling in them for evermore. But the beginning of all is,
'Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures.' And,
brethren, that message meets, as nothing else meets, the deepest
needs of every human soul. It is able, as nothing else is able, to
open out into a whole encyclopaedia and universe of wisdom and truth
and power. If we strike it out of our conception of Christianity, or
if we obscure it as being the very palpitating centre of the whole,
then feebleness will creep over the Christianity that is _minus_ a
Cross, or does not see in it the Sacrifice for the world's sin. You
may cast overboard the sails to lighten the ship. If you do, she lies
a log on the waters. And if, for the sake of meeting new phases of
thought, Christian churches tamper with this central truth, they have
flung away their means of progress and of power.

Let me say again, and in a word only, that the considerations that I
have been trying to submit to you in this sermon, show us the limits
within which the modern cry of 'Back to the Christ of the Gospels,'
is right, and where it may be wrong. I believe that in former days,
and to some extent in the present day, we evangelical teachers have
too much sometimes talked rather about the doctrines than about the
Person who is the doctrines. And if the cry of 'Back to the Christ'
means, 'Do not talk so much about the Atonement and Propitiation;
talk about the Christ who atones,' then, with all my heart, I say,
'Amen!' But put the Person in the foreground, the living-loving, the
dying-loving, the risen-loving Christ, put Him in the foreground. But
if it is implied, as I am afraid it is often implied, that the Christ
of the Gospels is one and the Christ of the epistles is another, and
that to go back to the Christ of the gospels means to drop 'died for
our sins according to the Scriptures,' and to retain only the
non-miraculous, moral and religious teachings that are recorded in
the three first gospels, then I say that it is fatal for the Church,
and it is false to the facts, for the Christ of the epistles is the
Christ of the gospels: the difference only being that in the one you
have the facts, and in the other you have their meaning and their
power.

So, lastly, let this text teach us what we ourselves have to do with
this unanimous testimony. 'So we preach, and so ye believed.'
Brother! Do you believe _so_? That is to say, is your conception
of the Gospel the mighty redemptive agency which is wrought by the
Incarnate Son of God, who was crucified for our offences, and rose
that we might live, and is glorified that we, too, may share His
glory? Is that your Gospel? But do not be content with an
intellectual grasp of the thing. 'So ye believed' means a great deal
more than 'I believe that Christ died for our sins.' It means 'I
believe in the Christ who did die for my sins.' You must cast
yourself as a sinful man on Him; and, so casting, you will find that
it is no vain story which is commended to us by all these august
voices from the past, but you will have in your own experience the
verification of the fact that He died for our sins, in your own
consciousness of sins forgiven, and new love bestowed; and so may
turn round to Paul, the leader of the chorus, and to all the
apostolic band, and say to them, 'Now I believe, not because of thy
saying, but because I have seen Him, and myself heard Him.'




THE CERTAINTY AND JOY OF THE RESURRECTION

   'But now is Christ risen from the dead ... the first
   fruits of them that slept.'--1 COR. xv. 20.


The Apostle has been contemplating the long train of dismal
consequences which he sees would arise if we only had a dead Christ.
He thinks that he, the Apostle, would have nothing to preach, and we,
nothing to believe. He thinks that all hope of deliverance from sin
would fade away. He thinks that the one fact which gives assurance of
immortality having vanished, the dead who had nurtured the assurance
have perished. And he thinks that if things were so, then Christian
men, who had believed a false gospel, and nourished an empty faith,
and died clinging to a baseless hope, were far more to be pitied than
men who had had less splendid dreams and less utter illusions.

Then, with a swift revulsion of feeling, he turns away from that
dreary picture, and with a change of key, which the dullest ear can
appreciate, from the wailing minors of the preceding verses, he
breaks into this burst of triumph. 'Now'--things being as they are,
for it is the logical 'now,' and not the temporal one--things being
as they are, 'Christ is risen from the dead, and that as the first
