the same individual, can be no evidence as to date. II. There is direct
evidence that heresies, such as those described in these epistles,
existed in the Church long before Paul's first imprisonment. See 1 Cor.
iii. 18, 19, xv. 12; 2 Cor. xi. 4, 13, 14, 15, 22, compared with 1 Tim.
i. 3, 7. III. The early Churches were very soon organised, as appears
from Acts xiv. 23; 1 Thess. v. 12, 13; so that the state of
ecclesiastical organisation described in the First Epistle to Timothy
and the Epistle to Titus is no proof of the late date of these letters.
IV. But the grand argument in support of the early date, and one with
which the advocates of the later chronology have never fairly grappled,
is derived from the fact that Paul never was in Ephesus after the time
mentioned in Acts xx. When he wrote to Timothy he intended shortly to
return thither. See 1 Tim. i. 3, iii. 14, 15. It is evident that when
the apostle addressed the elders of Ephesus (Acts xx. 25) and told them
they should "see his face no more," he considered himself as speaking
prophetically. It is clear, too, that his words were so understood by
his auditors (Acts xx. 38), and that the evangelist, who wrote them down
several years afterwards, was still under the same impression. I agree,
therefore, with Wieseler, and others, in assigning an early date to the
First Epistle to Timothy and the Epistle to Titus.

[130:1] 2 Cor. xi. 9, 24-28, 32, 33, xii. 2, 7-9. The Second Epistle to
the Corinthians was written late in A.D. 57.

[130:2] 2 Cor. ii. 4.

[130:3] [Greek: eis ten Hellada], _i.e._, Achaia.

[130:4] Acts xx. 2, 3.

[130:5] Rom. xvi. 1, 2, 23.

[130:6] Rom. i. 8.

[130:7] Rom. xvi. 7, 11.

[130:8] Rom. xvi. 3.

[130:9] Acts xix. 21; Rom. i. 10, 11, xv. 23, 24.

[131:1] Acts xx. 3.

[131:2] Acts xx. 6.

[131:3] Acts xx. 6.

[131:4] Acts xx. 17-35.

[131:5] Acts xx. 36-38.

[131:6] Acts xxi. 8.

[131:7] Acts xx. 23, xxi. 10, 11.

[131:8] [Greek: hepiskeuaramenoi]--the reading adopted by Lachmann and
others. The word "carriages" used in the authorised version for baggage,
or luggage, is now unintelligible to the English reader. The word
"carriage" is also used in our translation in Judges xviii. 21, and 1
Sam. xvii. 22, for something to be carried.

[131:9] Acts xxi. 15.

[132:1] Acts ii. 45.

[132:2] Rom. xv. 26.

[132:3] 1 Cor. xvi. 3; 2 Cor. viii. 19.

[132:4] Acts xx. 4.

[133:1] Prov. xviii. 10.

[133:2] Acts xxi. 17.

[133:3] Acts xxi. 24.

[133:4] "It was customary among the Jews for those who had received
deliverance from any great peril, or who from other causes desired
publicly to testify their dedication to God, to take upon themselves the
vow of a Nazarite.... No rule is laid down (Numb. vi.) as to the time
during which this life of ascetic rigour was to continue; but we learn
from the Talmud and Josephus that thirty days was at least a customary
period. During this time the Nazarite was bound to abstain from wine,
and to suffer his hair to grow uncut. At the termination of the period,
he was bound to present himself in the temple, with certain offerings,
and his hair was then cut off and burnt upon the altar. The offerings
required were beyond the means of the very poor, and consequently it was
thought an act of piety for a rich man to pay the necessary expenses,
and thus enable his poorer countrymen to complete their vow."
--_Conybeare and Howson_, ii. 250, 251.

[133:5] Acts xxi. 26.

[134:1] Acts xxi. 29.

[134:2] Acts xxi. 30.

[134:3] Acts xxi. 30.

[134:4] Acts xxiii. 26.

[134:5] Acts xxi. 32.

[134:6] Acts xxi. 33, 34. There were barracks in the tower of Antonia.

[135:1] Acts xxi. 38. "_Assassins_ is in the original a Greek inflection
of the Latin word _Sicarii_, so called from _Sica_, a short sword or
dagger, and described by Josephus as a kind of robbers who concealed
short swords beneath their garments, and infested Judea in the period
preceding the destruction of Jerusalem."--_Alexander on the Acts_, ii.
289.

[135:2] Acts xxii. 2.

[135:3] Acts xxii. 22-24.

[136:1] Acts xxiii. 6.

[136:2] Acts xxiii. 7.

[136:3] Acts xxiii. 10.

[136:4] Acts xxiii. 12, 21.

[136:5] Acts xxiii. 16, 23, 30.

[136:6] "Per omnem saevitiam ac libidinem jus regium servili ingenio
exercuit."--_Hist_. v. 9.

[136:7] Josephus' "Antiq." xx. c. 7. Sec. 1,2.

[137:1] Acts xxiv. 25.

[137:2] Acts xxiv. 27.

[137:3] See some account of him in Josephus' "Antiq," xx. c. 8, Sec.. 9, 10.

[138:1] Acts. xxv. 11.

[138:2] Acts xxv. 12.

[138:3] Acts xxv. 13. Festus appears to have been Procurator from the
beginning of the autumn of A.D. 60 to the summer of A.D. 62. Felix was
recalled A.D. 60. See Conybeare and Howson, Appendix ii. note (C).

[139:1] Josephus' "Wars," ii. c. 12, Sec. 8; "Antiq." xx. c. 5, Sec. 2.

[139:2] Acts xxv. 23.

[139:3] Acts xxvi. 6.

[140:1] Acts xxvi. 22.

[140:2] Acts xxvi. 24.

[140:3] Acts xxvi. 27.

[140:4] Acts xxvi. 28. Some would translate [Greek: en oligo] "in
short," instead of "almost."

[140:5] Acts xxvi. 29.

[141:1] Acts xxvi. 30-32.

[141:2] Eph. vi. 22; Phil. ii. 1, 2; Col. i. 24, iv. 8; Philem. 7,
compared with 2 Cor i. 3, 4.

[141:3] Acts ix. 15, 16.

[142:1] Acts xxvii. 20. This part of the history of the apostle has been
illustrated with singular ability by James Smith, Esq. of Jordanhill in
his "Voyage and Shipwreck of St Paul."

[142:2] Acts xxvii. 5, 6.

[142:3] Acts xxviii. 1. That Melita is Malta has been conclusively
established by Smith in his "Voyage and Shipwreck of St Paul."
"Dissertation," ii.

[142:4] Acts xxviii. 11. "With regard to the dimensions of the ships of
the ancients, some of them must have been quite equal to the largest
merchantman of the present day. The ship of St Paul had, in passengers
and crew, 276 persons on board, besides her cargo of wheat, and as they
were carried on by another ship of the same class, she must also have
been of great size. The ship in which Josephus was wrecked contained 600
people."--Smith's _Voyage and Shipwreck of St Paul_, p. 147.

[143:1] Acts xxviii. 13.

[143:2] Acts xxvii. 17.

[143:3] Acts xxvii. 29. "The ancient vessels did not carry, in general,
so large anchors as those which we employ; and hence they had often a
greater number of them. Athenaeus mentions a ship which had eight iron
anchors." Hackett, p. 372.

[143:4] Acts xxvii. 27.

[143:5] "When the _Lively_, frigate, unexpectedly fell in with this very
point, the quarter-master on the look-out, who first observed it,
states, in his evidence at the court-martial, that, _at the distance of
a quarter of a mile_ the land could not be seen."--Smith's _Voyage and
Shipwreck of St Paul_, pp. 89, 90.

[144:1] Hackett, p. 371.

[144:2] Acts xxvii. 28.

[144:3] Conybeare and Howson, ii. 351.

[144:4] Acts xxvii. 39.

[144:5] Acts xxvii 41.

[144:6] Smith's "Voyage and Shipwreck of St Paul," p. 102.

[144:7] Smith's "Voyage and Shipwreck of St Paul," p. 92.

[144:8] Acts xxvii. 41.

[145:1] Smith's "Voyage and Shipwreck of St Paul," p. 104.

[145:2] Conybeare and Howson make the population more than 2,000,000
(ii. 376). Merivale reduces it to something less than 700,000 (iv. 520).
In Smith's "Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography" it is stated as
upwards of 2,000,000. Greswell makes it about 1,000,000
("Dissertations," iv. 46). Dean Milman reckons it from 1,000,000 to
1,500,000 ("History of Latin Christianity," i. 23).

[145:3] Merivale, iv. 391.

[145:4] Rev. xvii. 1.

[146:1] Merivale, iv. 412.

[146:2] Merivale, iv. 414-420.

[146:3] Rev. xviii. 11.

[146:4] Acts xxviii. 14.

[147:1] Acts xxviii. 14.

[147:2] Acts xxviii. 15.

[147:3] Acts xxviii. 15.

[147:4] Called in our English version "the captain of the guard." The
celebrated Burrus was at this time (A.D. 61) the Praetorian Prefect.
Wieseler, p. 393. See also Greswell's "Dissertations," iv. p. 199.

[147:5] Acts xxviii. 16.

[148:1] Acts xxviii. 17.

[148:2] Acts xxviii. 23.

[148:3] Acts xxviii. 24.

[148:4] Acts xxviii. 31.

[148:5] Conybeare and Howson, ii. 296.

[149:1] Philem. 9.

[149:2] 2 Cor. x. 10.

[149:3] See Conybeare and Howson, ii. 428.

[149:4] Phil. ii. 25; Philem. 2.

[149:5] Eph. vi. 13, 14, 16, 17.

[149:6] Phil. iv. 3. When speaking of a "_true_ yoke-fellow," he may
here refer to the way in which he was himself unequally yoked.

[149:7] See Acts xxvi. 1, 29.

[149:8] Eph. iv. 1.

[150:1] [Greek: en olo to praitorio]--"We never find the word employed
for the Imperial house at Rome; and we believe the truer view to
be--that it denotes here, not the palace itself, but the quarters of
that part of the Imperial guards which was in immediate attendance on
the Emperor."-_Conybeare and Howson_, ii. 428.

[150:2] Phil. i. 12-14.

[150:3] Philem. 18, 19.

[150:4] Col. iv. 7.

[150:5] Col. ii. 8, 16, 18, 23.

[150:6] Eph. vi. 21, 22.

[151:1] Eph. i. 1.

[151:2] Col. iv. 16.

[151:3] Phil. i. 3-7.

[152:1] Phil. ii. 24; Philem. 22.

[152:2] Phil. i. 23-25.

[152:3] Rom. xv. 24, 28.

[153:1] [Greek: epi to terma tes duseos]--Epist. to the Corinthians v.
Clement in the same place mentions that Paul was seven times in bonds.
See also Greswell, "Dissertations," vol. iv. p. 225-228.

[153:2] See Cave's "Fathers," i. 147. Oxford, 1840.

[153:3] [Greek: ton phelonen]. Some think that he wished for the cloak
to protect him against the cold of winter. See 2 Tim. iv. 21.

[153:4] In the "Life of St Columba" by Adamnan (Dublin, 1857), the
learned editor, Dr Reeves, has given an interesting account of an
ancient leather book-case in his own possession. See "Life of St
Columba," p. 115. If Paul referred to a case, it was probably to one of
a larger description.

[153:5] 2 Tim. iv. 13. It is probable that, in the anticipation of his
death, he wished to give the documents as a legacy to some of his
friends. Among them may have been Scripture autographs.

[153:6] 2 Tim. iv. 20. [Greek: apelipon]. The translation "_they_ left,"
instead of "_I_ left," is given up even by Dr Davidson, though he
rejects the idea of a second imprisonment. See his "Introduction to the
New Testament," iii. 53.

[153:7] Miletum, or Miletus, in Crete, is mentioned by Homer. "Iliad,"
ii. 647.

[154:1] Acts xii. 6-9.

[154:2] Heb. xiii. 23, 24. In this epistle he apparently refers to his
late imprisonment. Heb. x. 34, but the reading of the _textus receptus_
is here rejected by many of our highest critical authorities, such as
Griesbach, Lachmann, Tischendorf, and Scholz. Respecting the second
imprisonment, see also Eusebius, ii. c. 22.

[155:1] 2 Tim. iv. 20.

[155:2] Phil. ii. 24.

[155:3] 2 Tim. iv. 13.

[155:4] Philem. 22.

[155:5] Heb. xiii. 23.

[155:6] 2 Tim. iv. 20.

[155:7] 2 Tim. iv. 16, ii. 9.

[155:8] This may refer to some powerful defence of Christianity which he
had made before the Gentile tribunal of Nero.

[155:9] 2 Tim. iv. 16, 17.

[156:1] 2 Tim. iv. 6-8.

[156:2] "Euseb. Hist." ii. 25.

[156:3] Euseb. ii. 25. See the Note of Valesius on the words [Greek:
katha ton auton kairon]. See also Davidson's "Introduction to the New
Testament," iii. 361.

[156:4] 2 Tim. iv. 11.

[156:5] Tertullian "De Praescrip," c. 36. Euseb. ii. 25. See also
Lactantius, or the work ascribed to him, "De Mort. Persecutorum," c. 2.

[156:6] According to Gregory Nazianzen, Judea was the sphere of Peter.
"Oratio." 25, tom. i. 438. If so, Paul when visiting Jerusalem was
likely to meet with him.

[157:1] 1 Pet. v. 13.

[157:2] Rev. xvii. 5, xviii. 2, 10, 21.

[157:3] Euseb. ii. 15.

[157:4] 1 Pet. iv. 12.

[157:5] 2 Tim. iv. 11.

[157:6] 1 Pet. v. 13.

[157:7] 1 Pet. v. 12.

[157:8] Acts xv. 40, xvi. 19, 25, xvii. 4, 10, xviii. 5; 1 Thess. i. 1;
2 Thess. i. 1.

[158:1] 1 Pet. v. 12.

[158:2] The Jews at this time were wont to call Rome by the name of
Babylon. It was not, therefore, strange that Peter, being a Jew, used
this phraseology. See Wordsworth's "Lectures on the Apocalypse," p. 345,
and the authorities there quoted.

[158:3] 2 Pet. i. 12, iii. 1.

[158:4] These words apparently suggest that the preceding letter was
written not long before.

[159:1] 2 Pet. i. 13. 14.

[159:2] Gal. iv. 17, 21, vi. 12; Col. ii. 16-18.

[159:3] 1 Pet. i. 1.

[159:4] 2 Pet. iii. 16.

[159:5] As Heb. vi. 4-6, vii. 1-3, ix. 17.

[160:1] 2 Pet. iii. 16.

[160:2] Euseb. iii. 1.

[160:3] Euseb. iii. 1.

[160:4] Prudentius, "Peristeph. in Pass. Petr. et Paul." Hymn xii.
Augustine, serm. 28. "De Sanctis." The testimony of earlier witnesses
represents them as dying "_about_ the same time." See Euseb. ii. c. 25.

[161:1] Phil. iv. 22.

[161:2] Caius, a Roman presbyter who flourished about the beginning of
the third century, refers to the Vatican and the Ostian Way as the
places where they suffered. Routh's "Reliquiae," ii. p. 127.

[162:1] Hab. ii. 3.

[163:1] John i. 11.

[163:2] John xix. 15.

[163:3] Acts iv. 3, v. 18.

[164:1] Acts xii. 2, 3.

[164:2] See Acts xvii. 5, xviii. 12.

[165:1] Acts xviii. 2. Suetonius in Claud. (c. 25), says--"Judaeos
impulsore Chresto assidue tumultuantes Roma expulit." The words Christus
and Chrestus seem to have been often confounded, and it has been thought
that the historian here refers to some riotous proceedings among the
Jews in Rome arising out of discussions relative to Christianity. These
disturbances took place about A.D. 53. It is remarkable that even in the
beginning of the third century the Christians were sometimes called
_Chrestiani_. Hence Tertullian says--"Sed et cum perperam Chrestianus
pronunciatur a vobis, nam nec nominis certa est notitia penes vos, de
suavitate vel benignitate compositum est." "Apol." c. iii. See also
"Ad Nationes," lib. i. c. 3.

[165:2] See Greswell's "Dissertations," iv. p. 233.

[165:3] Eusebius, ii. 23.

[166:1] "Certi enim esse debemus, si quos latet per ignorantiam
literature secularis, etiam ostiorum deos apud Romanos, Cardeam a
cardinibus appellatam, et Forculum a foribus, et Limentinum a limine, et
ipsum Janum a janua." Tertullian, "De Idololatria," c. 15. See also the
same writer "Ad Nationes," ii. c. 10, 15; and "De Corona," 13.

[166:2] 2 Tim. iii. 12. Cyprian touches upon the same subject in his
Treatise on the "Vanity of Idols," c. 2.

[167:1] The Christians were familiar with the idea of the conflagration
of the world, and there is much plausibility in the conjecture that, as
they gazed on the burning city, they may have given utterance to
expressions which were misunderstood, and which awakened suspicion.
"Some," says Dean Milman, "in the first instance, apprehended and
examined, may have made acknowledgments before a passionate and
astonished tribunal, which would lead to the conclusion that, in the
hour of general destruction, they had some trust, some security, denied
to the rest of mankind; and this exemption from common misery, if it
would not mark them out in some dark manner, as the authors of the
conflagration, at all events would convict them of that hatred of the
human race so often advanced against the Jews."--_Milman's History of
Christianity,_ ii. 37, 38.

[167:2] Tacitus, "Annal." xv. 44.

[167:3] Heb. xii. 4.

[167:4] Heb. x. 25.

[168:1] 1 Pet. iv. 12.

[168:2] 1 Pet. iv. 17.

[168:3] Tertullian, "Ad Nationes," i. 7.

[168:4] See "De Mortibus Persecutorum," c. 2, and Sulpitius Severus,
lib. ii. p. 139; Edit. Leyden, 1635.

[168:5] Dan. ix. 27.

[169:1] Matt. xxiv. 2, 15, 16, 34; Mark xiii. 2, 14, 30; Luke xxi. 6,
20, 21, 24, 32.

[169:2] See Euseb. iii. 31.

[169:3] Acts xvii. 7.

[169:4] Euseb. iii. 20.

[169:5] Matt. xiii. 55. See Greswell's "Dissertations," ii. 114, 121,
122.

[170:1] Matt, xxvii. 57; Mark xv. 43.

[170:2] Acts xiii. 7.

[170:3] Phil. iv. 22.

[170:4] Dio Cassius, lxvii. 14.

[170:5] Euseb. iii. 18.

[171:1] Rev. i. 9.

[171:2] Tertullian, "De Praescrip. Haeret." c. 36.

[171:3] See Mosheim, Cent. i. part i. ch. 5.

[171:4] According to Baronius ("Annal." ad. an. 92, 98) John was six
years in Patmos, or from A.D. 92 to A.D. 98. Other writers think that he
was set at liberty some time before the death of Domitian, or about A.D.
95. According to this reckoning, had he been six years in exile, he must
have been banished A.D. 89. This conclusion derives some countenance
from the "Chronicon" of Eusebius, which represents the tyrant in the
eighth and ninth years of his reign, or about A.D. 89, as proscribing
and putting to death very many of his subjects. If the visions of the
Apocalypse were vouchsafed to John in A.D. 89, the interval between
their revelation and the establishment of the Pope as a temporal prince
is found to be 755-89, or exactly 666 years. See Rev. xiii. 18. There is
another very curious coincidence in this case; for the interval between
the fall of the Western Empire, and the establishment of the Bishop of
Rome as a temporal prince, is 755-476=279 complete, or 280 current
years, that is, 40 prophetic weeks. But it so happens that the period of
human gestation is 40 weeks, and this would lead to the inference that
the Man of Sin was conceived as soon as the Western Empire fell. See 2
Thess. ii. 7, 8. I am not aware that these remarkable coincidences have
yet been noticed, and I therefore submit them to the consideration of
the students of prophecy.

[172:1] See Burton's "Lectures," i. 361.

[172:2] 2 John 1; 3 John 1.

[172:3] 1 Pet. v. 1; Philem. 1.

[172:4] Acts xx. 28.

[172:5] Mark iii. 17.

[172:6] Jerome, "Comment. on Galatians," vi. 10.

[172:7] See Vitringa, "Observationes Sacrae," lib. iv. c. 7, 8.

[173:1] Rev. iii. 16.

[173:2] Rev. iii. 2.

[173:3] Rev. ii. 5.

[173:4] Claudia, the wife of Pudens, supposed to be mentioned 2 Tim. iv.
21, is said to have been a Briton by birth. See Fuller's "Church History
of Britain," vol. i. p. 11; Edit. London, 1837.

[173:5] Euseb. ii. 16.

[173:6] Acts ii. 10.

[174:1] Acts ii. 9, 11.

[174:2] See in Cave's "Fathers," Bartholomew, Matthew, and Thomas.

[175:1] 1 Cor. vi. 9-11.

[175:2] Prov. xviii. 24.

[177:1] John xiv. 26.

[177:2] John xvi. 13.

[177:3] See Irenaeus, "Adv. Haeres.," iii. 1; and Euseb. vi. 14.

[177:4] It is probable that these three Gospels were written nearly at
the same time. When Luke wrote, he does not seem to have been aware of
the existence of any other Gospel. See Luke i. 4.

[177:5] Origen, "Dial, de Recta in Deum Fide," sec. i. tom. i. p. 806;
Edit. Delarue. Paris, 1733. See Whitby's "Preface to Luke." There is
good reason to believe that the "young man" mentioned Mark xiv. 51, 52,
was no other than Mark himself (Davidson's "Introduction to the New
Testament," i. 139); and if so, we have thus additional evidence that
the evangelist had enjoyed the advantages of our Lord's ministry. He has
always been reputed the founder of the Church of Alexandria, and the
testimony of Origen to the fact that he was one of the Seventy is
therefore of special value; as the Alexandrian presbyter was, no doubt,
well acquainted with the traditions of the Church of the Egyptian
metropolis.

[178:1] Acts i. 21.

[178:2] Luke i. 2.

[178:3] Matt. ix. 9, x. 3.

[178:4] Mark xiv. 71.

[178:5] Luke xxiv. 25.

[178:6] John xxi. 23.

[178:7] Matt. xxviii. 19.

[179:1] Mark ix. 15.

[179:2] Luke x. 1.

[179:3] John xiv., xv., xvi., xvii.

[179:4] See Horne's "Introduction," ii. 173. Sixth Edition.

[180:1] See Baumgarten on Acts, vii., viii., ix., xiii.

[180:2] Period i. sec. i. chap. 7, 8, 9.

[180:3] Horne, iv. 359.

[181:1] See Wordsworth "On the Canon," Lectures viii. ix.

[181:2] Prov. xxx. 5.

[181:3] This designation is not found in the most ancient manuscripts.
Thus, in the very ancient "Recension of the Four Gospels in Syriac,"
recently edited by Dr Cureton, we have simply--"Gospel of Mark"--"Gospel
of John," &c. See p. 6, Preface. See also any ordinary edition of the
Greek Testament.

[181:4] Horne, ii. 174.

[182:1] Titus iii. 12.

[182:2] Some, however, assign to it a much earlier date. See Davidson's
"Introduction to the New Testament," iii. 320.

[182:3] See Period i. sec. i. chap. 10, p. 158.

[182:4] See Wordsworth "On the Canon," p. 273.

[182:5] See Davidson's "Introduction," iii. 464, 491.

[182:6] Irenaeus, v. 30. Euseb. iii. 18.

[182:7] See Wordsworth "On the Canon," p. 157, 160, 249.

[182:8] Justin Martyr, ap. i. 67.

[182:9] 2 Pet. iii. 16

[183:1] Wordsworth "On the Canon," p. 205.

[183:2] "The allusions to the Epistle to the Hebrews are so numerous
that it is not too much to say that it was wholly transfused into
Clement's mind."--_Westcott on the Canon_, p. 32. See also Euseb. iii.
38.

[183:3] Wordsworth "On the Canon," p. 249.

[183:4] "The word ([Greek: graphe]) translated _Scripture_, which
properly means simply _a writing_, occurs fifty times in the New
Testament; and in all these fifty places, it is applied to the writings
of the Old and New Testament, and _to no other_."--Wordsworth, p. 185,
186.

[183:5] Wordsworth, p. 249, 250.

[184:1] See Davidson's "Introduction," iii. 540-550.

[184:2] See Horne's "Introduction," ii. 168. The author of the present
division into chapters is said to have been Hugo de Sancto Caro, a
learned writer who flourished about the middle of the thirteenth
century. The New Testament was first divided into verses by Robert
Stephens in 1551. The Geneva Bible was the first English version of the
Scriptures into which these divisions of Stephens were introduced.

[184:3] Horne, ii. 169.

[185:1] John v. 39; 2 Tim. iii. 15.

[185:2] Rev. i. 3. See also 2 Peter i. 19.

[185:3] Paul's epistles were often written with the hand of another. See
Rom. xvi. 22; 2 Thess. iii. 17.

[186:1] Ps. xii. 6.

[186:2] The epistle to Diognetus may have been written in the first
century, but it is commonly referred to a later date.

[186:3] He speaks of the Church of Corinth at the time as "most ancient"
(Sec. 47), and refers apparently to the Domitian persecution. See Euseb.
iii. 15, 16.

[186:4] Tertullian also illustrates the resurrection by the story of the
phoenix, "De Resurrec. Carn." c. 13.

[187:1] Clement's "Epistle to the Corinthians," Sec. 25. The fragment of
the second epistle is not generally considered genuine.

[189:1] Matt. v. 17.

[189:2] 2 Tim. i. 10.

[189:3] Matt. xvi. 16; John i. 41.

[189:4] Luke xxiv. 19, 21; John i. 49.

[189:5] Matt. xvi. 21, 22; John xii. 34.

[189:6] Mark xv. 43; Luke ii. 38.

[189:7] John iv. 20-25.

[189:8] John xix. 12.

[189:9] Matt. ii. 2, 3, xx. 21; John vi. 15.

[190:1] Acts i. 6.

[190:2] Luke xxiv. 45.

[190:3] Luke xxiv. 44.

[190:4] Acts x. 34, 35.

[190:5] Acts xi. 3, 17.

[190:6] Heb. x. 1, 14, 18.

[190:7] Period i. sec. ii. chap. 1.

[191:1] Mark vii. 7-9.

[191:2] Matt. iv. 1-10, xii. 3, 5, 7; Mark xii. 26.

[191:3] John v. 39.

[191:4] Acts ii. 14-36.

[191:5] 2 Tim. iii. 15.

[191:6] 2 Tim. iii. 16, 17.

[191:7] Matt. xxii. 43, 45; Gal. iii. 16; Heb. ii. 8, 11.

[191:8] John x. 34, 35; Heb. viii. 13.

[191:9] Acts xxviii. 25; Heb. iii. 7.

[191:10] Heb. i. 1, 2; Matt. i. 22, ii. 15.

[192:1] 1 Cor. ii. 13.

[192:2] 2 Tim. iii. 16.

[192:3] Gen. iii. 15; Ps. cxxx. 7, 8; Dan. ix. 24.

[192:4] Ps. xcviii. 1-4; Isa. ix. 6.

[192:5] Rom. iii. 19.

[192:6] Eph. ii. 1.

[192:7] John v. 24.

[192:8] Rev. iii. 20.

[192:9] Heb. xi. 27.

[193:1] Heb. xii. 2.

[193:2] Heb. vi. 18.

[193:3] 1 Pet. ii. 3.

[193:4] Rom. v. 1.

[193:5] Acts xv. 9.

[193:6] 1 John v. 4.

[193:7] Rom. v. 2.

[193:8] Heb. xi. 1.

[193:9] John xx. 31.

[193:10] John i. 29.

[193:11] Rom. x. 4.

[194:1] Eph. v. 23.

[194:2] Rev. xvii. 14.

[194:3] Col. i. 27.

[194:4] Ps. cxlvi. 8, compared with John ix. 32, 33.

[194:5] Job ix. 8, compared with Matt. xiv. 25.

[194:6] Ps. cvii. 29, compared with Luke viii. 24.

[194:7] Amos iv. 13, compared with Matt. xii. 25, and John ii. 24, 25.

[194:8] Tit. ii. 14.

[194:9] Mark ii. 5-10.

[194:10] Eph. v. 26.

[194:11] Acts xvi. 14; Luke xxiv. 45.

[194:12] Rev. ii. 23.

[194:13] Mal. iii. i.

[194:14] Isa. xl. 3, and vi. 1, compared with John xii. 38-41.

