
The barbarous expulsion of Mr. and Mrs. Coffing from Hadjin, in
1862, will be remembered.[1] This was attributed, at the time, to
the priests and the Turkish governor, and not to the people. Mr.
Adams from Adana, and Mr. Trowbridge from Marash, went there in
1870, in company with Hagop Effendi, the Civil Head of the
Protestants in Turkey, who was then on an official tour through the
empire. They found the door for Christian effort wide open, as
Messrs. Montgomery and Perry had done the year before. Though
situated on the northern side of the Taurus mountains, Hadjin is
more conveniently cared for by the Central mission than by the
Western, and that section of country had been transferred
accordingly. Native laborers had gone there, and a great change had
taken place. Thirty-two had been enrolled as Protestants, and no
mention is made of opposition. At the evening services on the
house-top, where the missionary's tent was pitched, not only the
Protestants, but large numbers of the Armenians, listened with eager
attention. From early morn until dark on the Sabbath, there was
hardly an intermission in the preaching, exposition, or reading of
the Word of God.

[1] See p. 221.

In the autumn of 1869, Dr. Schneider, by direction of the mission,
attended the examination of the Theological School at Marsovan. He
writes, "The examination continued through most of three days, and
as a whole was quite satisfactory. The appearance of the students in
theology was peculiarly gratifying. The readiness and propriety of
their answers proved that they had bestowed thought on the various
points brought up, and saw their relations to one another. Their
public addresses, when they received their diplomas, were all
excellent, while some were of quite a superior order, and exhibited
no common degree of oratorical power." He was also much gratified by
the appearance of the girls' boarding-school.

Seven days' travel, on his return to Broosa, brought him to Angora,
a city of from forty to fifty thousand inhabitants. The probable
estimate gave ten thousand to the Catholics, three hundred to the
Greeks, a thousand to the Armenians, and five hundred to the Jews;
the remainder were Mussulmans. Many books had been sold there, much
light disseminated, and a small body of Protestants earnestly
entreated for a missionary to reside among them, or at least for an
educated native preacher. No uneducated man could sustain himself
there against the powerful array which the Roman Catholics could
bring to bear upon him by means of their educational establishments.
Among the obstacles to be encountered, were the extreme worldliness
of the people, and their devotion to sensual pleasures. Angora is
within the limits of the ancient Galatia, and very probably was the
site of one of "the churches of Galatia." It appears not yet to be
occupied as a station.

Another interesting place was Erzingan, within the Erzroom district,
visited by Mr. and Mrs. Cole in the autumn of 1870. They travelled
the whole distance of a hundred miles in a gig; with many risks, it
is true, but with no disaster. The city was supposed to contain as
many as ten thousand Armenians, forming a third part of the
population. Mr. Dunmore, the brave pioneer, had spent three months
there, and various helpers had been stationed there from time to
time. The missionary and his wife were received with the utmost
kindness, and had crowded meetings during the nine days they were
there. Mrs. Cole had several interesting meetings, also, with the
women. "Thus time passed," writes Mr. Cole, "and you may be sure it
was a continual feast to the soul, and we felt quite reluctant to
turn homeward."

The mission sent by native churches to the Koords, like most new
missions, had a tardy success; and, after four years, the zeal of
the native churches began to flag, and some of the native pastors
proposed to stop the work in Koordistan, and devote themselves more
fully to the "home field." Knowing that the influence of such a
course would be disastrous, Mr. Wheeler threw himself into the
breach, and was off for a three weeks' tour in Koordistan. Redwan,
the seat of the mission, was eighty miles east of Diarbekir. He was
accompanied by Hagop Effendi, Civil Head of the Protestants, and two
native preachers; and was rejoiced to find at Redwan a congregation
of eighteen men, thirteen women, and twenty-two children. They had
learned, or begun to learn, to read in the Armeno-Koordish, into
which the four Gospels had been translated; and some were learning
the Armenian language, so as to be able to read the whole Bible.
Their chapel, of sun-dried brick, ten feet by twenty, was crowded on
the evening of their arrival. "They sang 'Sweet hour of prayer,'"
writes Mr. Wheeler, "and 'There is no other name so sweet,'
translated from Armenian by their preacher, who had also translated,
with the help of Pastor Mardiros of Harpoot, 'Forever with the
Lord,' 'How lost was my condition,' 'My faith looks up to Thee,'
'Safely through another week,' 'My days are passing swiftly by,' and
others. Perhaps it was all romance, but somehow that little, close,
low, dark, foul-aired chapel seemed to me almost a heavenly place,
as we joined,--they in Koordish and I in Armenian,--in singing those
sweet hymns." At an expense of forty dollars in gold, the people
bought a fine lot for a larger building, including chapel,
school-room, and parsonage, which they hoped to put up in the
following year. They desired also the formation of a church, and the
ordination of a pastor. "Do you wonder," adds Mr. Wheeler, "that I
returned with a light heart to tell the churches these good news
from their mission field?" The Harpoot church immediately decided to
send a school-teacher to Redwan, so that the preacher might give
himself entirely to his work.

Mr. Pond, of Mardin, went to Sert four days distant in Koordistan,
and experienced the usual trials by the way,--sleeping in "stifling
stables, with a perfect menagerie of animals and fowls, and creeping
creatures too numerous to catalogue."

The church at Sert he found full of brotherly love, simple faith,
and a desire for knowledge. It had given freely to the brethren in
Redwan, and paid the entire salary of its own pastor. "Indeed," says
the missionary, "but for this church in Sert, we should almost
despond for the Arabic-speaking portion of our field. In Mardin, it
is true, we have a flourishing church and community, but not so
refreshing in its simplicity and strength of faith and love. The
pastor of the Sert church is one of the best men for the pastoral
work I have ever seen in Turkey, and is the chief cause, under God,
of the cheering state of his flock."

Mr. Pond next visited Mosul, and found it no longer an unpleasant
part of their field. "Once, and that not long ago, it was the least
hopeful spot in all our bishopric. For over thirty years has the
Gospel been preached there, and by such men as Grant, and Lobdell,
and Williams, Marsh, and Hinsdale. The church contained at one time
twenty members, but had dwindled to ten."

A pastor was to be ordained at Mosul, and Mr. Andrus, missionary
from Mardin, Pastor Jurgis of Mardin, Pastor Elias of Sert, and
delegates from these two churches were there to aid in that service.
The pastor elect was ordained, the dead branches in the church were
cut off, and eight new members were added, while as many more were
ready to join at the next communion.

Dr. Williams died at Mardin on the l4th of February, 1871, at the
age of fifty-three, broken down by an accumulation of labors and
cares, which, until near the close of his life, he had been
compelled to bear alone. It was a great loss to the mission, but
especially to Mardin; and he was called from earth just when the
clouds, which had made his field seem dark to him, began to break.
He saw it, and rejoiced. He said he was like Moses, who was
permitted to look into the promised land from Pisgah, but was not
allowed to enter it.

Mr. H. N. Barnum, who knew Dr. Williams intimately, while admitting
that he was unduly disposed to distrust his own powers and judgment,
says that, aside from this, he was a rare man. "He had great
self-control, and was so undemonstrative, that those who did not
know him intimately can scarcely be said to have known him at all.
He possessed genuine refinement; and with his marvelous fund of
information in almost all departments of knowledge, his fine command
of language, and his good nature and enthusiasm, he was, in his more
cheerful moods, a fascinating member of our social circle. His clear
mind had been carefully cultivated, and his acquisitions were very
exact. However much he distrusted his own judgment, his associates
confided in it. He was forward to acknowledge any mistake, and
correct it, and he was enthusiastic in his zeal for the policy of
self-support in the missionary work. His students held him in the
highest admiration, and very few missionaries have secured the
affection of the people for whom they labor so fully as he did. Had
he remained at home, I am sure he would have stood conspicuous among
the clergy. He was very careful in the use of missionary funds, and
in everything maintained a conscience void of offense. He was,
withal, eminently spiritual. His many trials had wrought in him a
deep and thorough work of grace."

"The _one_ attraction of heaven for Mr. Williams," writes his
bereaved wife, "was _Jesus_. 'Like Jesus,' and 'without sin,' and
'to be with Jesus and see Him as He is,' were phrases ever on his
lips. He used often to speak of the great host gone before, and of
the loved ones constantly gathering there; but it was rare to hear
him speak of joy at the prospect of meeting them. It was always
'_Jesus_, the joy of loving hearts.' Neither did he long for heaven
as a place of _rest_, until very near the end. He loved toil, and
felt a great desire to live and labor for the Master." "At last,"
she says, "he did grow very weary, and often exclaimed; 'So tired,
O, so tired.' In one of those weariest hours, he asked me if I
remembered Bickersteth's description of Paradise. 'Well,' he said,
'I can't bear to think of it. To think of climbing over those
mountains, it is so wearisome. I think, 'In my Father's house are
many mansions,' and I want to be taken right into one of them, and
laid down to rest--to rest--O, how sweet.' His intellect was clouded
in the last hours."

I find some facts, received in 1871, concerning the women in the
region of Cesarea, indicating a decided progress. "Three years ago,
with the exception of Cesarea, Yozgat, and Moonjasoon, the truth
seemed to have gained but very slight hold upon the women at our
several out-stations. But few were ever found in the Sabbath
congregation, scarcely any could read, and some bitterly persecuted
their husbands. But now a marked change is visible, and the women
form no inconsiderable part of all our congregations; large numbers
are learning to read; female prayer-meetings are held at nearly or
quite every out-station; and an earnest desire for improvement is
everywhere apparent. As a consequence, a corresponding change is
observed in the conduct of these women. They become better wives and
mothers, and their influence is felt for good upon those around
them."

Messrs. Wheeler and Reynolds made a visit to Van in the summer of
1871, preparatory to the occupation of that important post. Most of
the ninety miles from Bitlis to Van, was within sight of the lake;
its waters reposing in quiet beauty amid the mountains, on whose
loftiest peaks there still lingered patches of snow. They reached
the city in September, and were there a week. They found more
readiness to receive the Word of God, and its teachers, and to have
intercourse with them, than they had expected. They were also
agreeably disappointed in the number, who were desirous that
missionaries should reside among them. The region southeast of Van,
which they had supposed was exclusively a Koordish-speaking section,
they found to contain a number of Armenian villages, speaking their
own language, with Bibles in the modern tongue, and men accustomed
to read them. At the time of writing these pages, missionaries are
understood to be on their way for the permanent occupation of Van,
should such be the will of Providence.

The church at Cutterbul, and indeed the whole region around
Diarbekir, experienced a severe bereavement early in 1872, in the
death of its first pastor Abd en Noor. "He was a thoughtful man,"
writes Mr. Andrus of Mardin, "and a more independent thinker than
many. He had made him a place in the village, so that even the young
men of the Jacobite community looked to him as their father. He was
very anxious to improve the condition of his race, was faithful both
as a preacher and as a pastor, and in the latter capacity was more
especially active during the past winter. He was one of the eight
pupils received into the first class formed by Dr. Williams in
Mardin, in September, 1862 (was then about thirty years old), and
remained three years in the class, supplying the pulpit in Cutterbul
during the winter months, where he had been preaching before he
entered the school."

The impressions made on Dr. Clarke, Foreign Secretary of the Board,
by occurrences in 1871, on his way from Adana to Aintab, are
significant of the work of grace, now in progress in the region
distinguished by the early labors of the Apostle Paul. His route was
across the Cilician and Antioch plains, over the Amarus mountains
and another range, and for the most part through a region of
wonderful fertility, needing only proper cultivation.

"The journey," Dr. Clarke writes, "was not without some items of
missionary interest, as showing how widely the truth is diffused.
The first night out we encamped a little distance from a village
that bears the name of Missis, built on the ruins of the ancient
Mopsuestia--a place of some note in the early history of the Church.
As we were setting up our tent, two Armenians from the village
accosted us with the question,--'Are you the men that are bringing
light into this dark land?' On being assured that we were just those
very men, they gave us a hearty welcome, and did their best to
assist us in every way, remaining till dark, and coming again in the
early morning. This they did as a labor of love, and to receive some
words of counsel and cheer. They were Protestants, but not
church-members, who had come here for business--one from near
Antioch, and the other from the neighborhood of Harpoot. Here, where
no preacher of the truth had ever been stationed by us, these men
were faithful to the light they had, spending the Sabbath together
in studying the Scriptures and in prayer, and speaking to all who
would listen of the Gospel of Christ. One of the men had formerly
been a keeper of a drinking shop. One day, while plying his trade,
he called out to a passer-by to come in and drink. The reply, 'I
cannot, I am a Protestant,' arrested his attention, and eventually
led him to give up his wicked traffic for an honest calling.

"On another day we met a party of laborers coming down into Cilicia
from Eastern Turkey, whom we at first mistook for Koords. But coming
nearer, Mr. Trowbridge recognized them as Armenians, and at once
asked if there were any Protestants among them. 'O yes,' cried
several; and in proof they drew Testaments from their bosoms. One of
them, a leading Protestant from Haboosi, on learning who I was, at
once beset me to hurry on to the dedication of their new church,
that was to come off in a few days. He, poor man, had been obliged
to come away, but was very anxious to have me go. I was really sorry
I could not do so, and thus be a witness to some of the ripe fruits
of the great work in the villages about Harpoot. What may not be
accomplished by such a party of Christian laborers, going into
villages and neighborhoods unreached by other means? It is thus that
the good seed is now scattered broadcast over the land.

"We had hoped to reach Hassan-Beyli for the Sabbath, but the
distance proved too great, and as it was three hours off from the
main road, we had to give up a visit to this mountain eyrie,--now a
centre of Christian influence, a few years ago a nest of robbers.
But they would not let us off so. Tuesday morning, by six o'clock,
we were surprised to see a half dozen of those stalwart men, who had
left their mountain crags, three hours before, to come down and
exchange Christian salutations. As I looked at them, I could not but
wonder at the work of grace manifest in them. After words of
exhortation through an interpreter, on mounting my horse I took them
each by the hand, while the grasp tightened and eyes flashed and
filled at the words--'Christ, Hallelujah, Amen.'"






CHAPTER XLIV.

THE ARMENIANS.--EDUCATION.

1872.


The common school is as much a necessity in mission fields, as it is
that the people should be able to read the Word of God; and it has
everywhere been a primary object of attention; but always, and more
especially of late years, with the aim and expectation, that it will
speedily derive its support from the parents of the children.

Properly conducted, the tendency of the common school is to
development. Teachers are learning all the while; new branches of
study are introduced; there is greater thoroughness in the teaching
and discipline; till at length the Academy is evolved, and perhaps
the College.

This would be the natural order of development, were general
education the leading object of missionary societies. But the
unevangelized nations must be evangelized, and chiefly by their own
people. Consequently one of the first efforts is to raise up
teachers and preachers.

Enough has probably been said, in this history, respecting the
common schools. So, also, of the Seminary at Bebek, instituted in
1840,[1] and the Girls' Boarding-school in the metropolis,
instituted in 1845.[2] The Bebek Seminary was in some respects the
forerunner of "Robert College." But however suitable its proximity
to the capital may have been, regarding it as an incipient college,
the location was not well adapted, on the whole, for a school to
raise up young men for pastoral work in the towns and villages of
the interior. Hence its discontinuance in 1862, and the opening of a
training Seminary in Marsovan, in 1865. The delay of three years was
owing to peculiar and unexpected causes. The Girls' Boarding-school
at Constantinople was also discontinued for similar reasons, and was
reopened at Marsovan in 1865.

[1] See Chapter xxxiii.

[2] See Chapter xxxiii.

A highly intelligent Armenian gentleman thus addressed Dr. Hamlin:
"The Bebek Seminary has given birth to influences, which have waked
up our young men all over the land; and you are regarded as a public
benefactor, although you can never be regarded as our religious
guide. Still, in sentiment, you have--not eight thousand, but eight
hundred thousand followers. We shall never be called Protestants; it
is not an Armenian term; but we hope to see the day when the
Armenian Church will be as evangelical as yours."

The present Theological Seminaries are at Harpoot, Marsovan, Marash,
and Mardin. There are, besides these, theological classes at
Cesarea, Broosa, Sivas, Harpoot, Bitlis, Erzroom, and Eski Zagra.
The first of the four seminaries above named originated in 1859, the
second, in 1865, the third in 1868; and the fourth, in 1870. Like
similar institutions in the United States, they are intended to
receive only such as not only give evidence of piety, but are
promising candidates for the gospel ministry. The course of study at
Harpoot illustrates, substantially, the education given, or
contemplated, in each of those institutions.

For the _first_ year, Exegesis, the Synoptic Gospels and Pentateuch,
the Turkish and Ancient Armenian languages, Algebra, Physiology,
Reading, Writing, and Spelling Armenian.

For the _second year_, Exegesis, Isaiah, Daniel, and Revelation,
Geometry, Natural Philosophy, and Astronomy, Rhetoric in Ancient
Armenian, Evidences of Christianity (Turkish).

For the _third_ year, Exegesis, Acts, Pauline Epistles, except
Romans and Hebrews, Mental Philosophy, Moral Philosophy, and
Theology.

For the _fourth_ year, Exegesis, Pastoral Epistles, Romans, Hebrews,
and Gospel of John, Sermonizing, Pastoral Theology, Church History,
and Logic.

Weekly exercises in composition and declamation through the first
three years; and lectures on Physical Geography, Geology, History,
and Chronology, and lessons in singing, distributed through the
course at convenience.

The female boarding-schools are mainly designed to educate teachers,
Bible-readers, and wives for native teachers and pastors. They are
in Marsovan, Aintab, Marash, Harpoot, Mardin, Bitlis, Erzroom, and
Samokov. The pupils in the theological seminaries and classes, and
in the female boarding-schools, as reported in the year 1871, were
as follows:--

                           Theological Theological      Female
                            Seminaries.  Classes.  Boarding-schools.
WESTERN TURKEY. Marsovan.       26          -             38
                Cesarea.         -          5              -
                Broosa.          -         13              -
                Sivas.           -          2              -
CENTRAL TURKEY. Aintab.          -          -             20
                Marash.         35          -              -
EASTERN TURKEY. Harpoot.        17         25[1]          34
                Mardin.          5          -              5
                Bitlis.          -          9             20
                Erzroom.         -          6              8
                              -----      -----          -----
                Total.          83         60            125

[1] More properly called a "Normal school."

Thus the number in training for the gospel ministry, in 1871, was
one hundred and forty-three, and the number in the female
boarding-schools was one hundred and twenty-five.

The Marsovan Seminary commenced with eight pupils, and the number
was increased in two years to twenty-four. Classes were organized at
the stations, to prepare candidates for admission to the seminary,
and to train such helpers as were not to take the full course of
study. The plan of instruction in the seminary has recently been
enlarged so as to include the training of native agents for the
Greek-speaking races of southwestern Asia Minor. Eight young men,
who graduated in 1869, received licenses to preach from the "Central
Evangelical Union," and were in great demand. Thirteen were thus
commissioned in 1870, in which year a convenient seminary building
was finished.[1]

[1] See Chap. xxiv. p. 17; Report of the Board for 1870, p. 21; and
_Missionary Herald_ for 1869, pp. 87, 122, 257; and for 1871, p.
109.

Mr. Wheeler has given a full and interesting description of the
theological and female Seminaries at Harpoot, in his valuable work,
entitled "Ten Years on the Euphrates," and to that the reader is
referred.[1] Eighteen pupils graduated in 1863, seven in 1865, and
eleven in 1867; of whom thirty-two became pastors, preachers, or
helpers.

[1] _Ten Years on the Euphrates_, pp. 162-221.

Theological classes were taught at Aintab and Marash, as early as
1860. It was resolved, eight years afterwards, in view of the
greater number of students at Marash, that the Theological Seminary,
then about being established, should be at that station. The
examination of the students of this seminary in 1869, drew together
an audience of a thousand persons. Thirty-three students were here
in the following year, and it was necessary for the resident
missionaries to give themselves almost wholly to their instruction;
while the work in the city and at the out-stations was committed to
the churches in Marash. That was a year of growth and prosperity to
these churches; sixty-six new members being added to them on
profession of faith. A new class of eighteen members was received in
October.

The Seminaries at Mardin are conducted on the same principles as
those at Harpoot. They are comparatively new, and are designed to
reach the race speaking the Arabic language.

The training-school at Tocat was broken up by the fire, which
consumed the mission premises in 1859.

A very valuable high school was taught for some years at Aintab, by
Mr. Alexan; who was transferred to Marash, in 1864, as assistant
teacher in the new Theological Seminary.

Thirty-five pupils attended the female Seminary at Marsovan in 1869,
and many of them were hopefully converted. In 1870 there were forty
pupils.

A majority of the young men in the Seminary at Harpoot were married,
and one main design of the female seminary at that station was the
education of their wives. These kept house for their husbands, and
attended school about seven hours a day, five days of the week.
Their younger children were committed to the care of a woman
employed for the purpose, while the older ones went to one of the
city schools. Of the ninety-four connected with the seminary
previous to 1867, forty-one were hopefully converted while in it.
Their chief text-book was the Bible; and some of them, besides
learning to read intelligently, and to write, keep accounts, and
know something of geography and astronomy, became intelligent
