some hold the contrary.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 4]

Whether This Sacrament Ought to Be Made of Unleavened Bread?

Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament ought not to be made of
unleavened bread. Because in this sacrament we ought to imitate
Christ's institution. But Christ appears to have instituted this
sacrament in fermented bread, because, as we have read in Ex. 12, the
Jews, according to the Law, began to use unleavened bread on the day
of the Passover which is celebrated on the fourteenth day of the
moon; and Christ instituted this sacrament at the supper which He
celebrated "before the festival day of the Pasch" (John 13:1, 4).
Therefore we ought likewise to celebrate this sacrament with
fermented bread.

Obj. 2: Further, legal observances ought not to be continued in the
time of grace. But the use of unleavened bread was a ceremony of the
Law, as is clear from Ex. 12. Therefore we ought not to use
unfermented bread in this sacrament of grace.

Obj. 3: Further, as stated above (Q. 65, A. 1; Q. 73, A. 3), the
Eucharist is the sacrament of charity just as Baptism is the
sacrament of faith. But the fervor of charity is signified by
fermented bread, as is declared by the gloss on Matt. 13:33: "The
kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven," etc. Therefore this sacrament
ought to be made of leavened bread.

Obj. 4: Further, leavened or unleavened are mere accidents of bread,
which do not vary the species. But in the matter for the sacrament of
Baptism no difference is observed regarding the variation of the
accidents, as to whether it be salt or fresh, warm or cold water.
Therefore neither ought any distinction to be observed, as to whether
the bread be unleavened or leavened.

_On the contrary,_ According to the Decretals (Extra, De Celebr.
Miss.), a priest is punished "for presuming to celebrate, using
fermented bread and a wooden cup."

_I answer that,_ Two things may be considered touching the matter of
this sacrament, namely, what is necessary, and what is suitable. It
is necessary that the bread be wheaten, without which the sacrament
is not valid, as stated above (A. 3). It is not, however, necessary
for the sacrament that the bread be unleavened or leavened, since it
can be celebrated in either.

But it is suitable that every priest observe the rite of his Church
in the celebration of the sacrament. Now in this matter there are
various customs of the Churches: for, Gregory says: "The Roman Church
offers unleavened bread, because our Lord took flesh without union of
sexes: but the Greek Churches offer leavened bread, because the Word
of the Father was clothed with flesh; as leaven is mixed with the
flour." Hence, as a priest sins by celebrating with fermented bread
in the Latin Church, so a Greek priest celebrating with unfermented
bread in a church of the Greeks would also sin, as perverting the
rite of his Church. Nevertheless the custom of celebrating with
unleavened bread is more reasonable. First, on account of Christ's
institution: for He instituted this sacrament "on the first day of
the Azymes" (Matt. 26:17; Mk. 14:12; Luke 22:7), on which day there
ought to be nothing fermented in the houses of the Jews, as is stated
in Ex. 12:15, 19. Secondly, because bread is properly the sacrament
of Christ's body, which was conceived without corruption, rather than
of His Godhead, as will be seen later (Q. 76, A. 1, ad 1). Thirdly,
because this is more in keeping with the sincerity of the faithful,
which is required in the use of this sacrament, according to 1 Cor.
5:7: "Christ our Pasch is sacrificed: therefore let us feast . . .
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth."

However, this custom of the Greeks is not unreasonable both on
account of its signification, to which Gregory refers, and in
detestation of the heresy of the Nazarenes, who mixed up legal
observances with the Gospel.

Reply Obj. 1: As we read in Ex. 12, the paschal solemnity began on
the evening of the fourteenth day of the moon. So, then, after
immolating the Paschal Lamb, Christ instituted this sacrament: hence
this day is said by John to precede the day of the Pasch, while the
other three Evangelists call it "the first day of the Azymes," when
fermented bread was not found in the houses of the Jews, as stated
above. Fuller mention was made of this in the treatise on our Lord's
Passion (Q. 46, A. 9, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 2: Those who celebrate the sacrament with unleavened bread
do not intend to follow the ceremonial of the Law, but to conform to
Christ's institution; so they are not Judaizing; otherwise those
celebrating in fermented bread would be Judaizing, because the Jews
offered up fermented bread for the first-fruits.

Reply Obj. 3: Leaven denotes charity on account of one single effect,
because it makes the bread more savory and larger; but it also
signifies corruption from its very nature.

Reply Obj. 4: Since whatever is fermented partakes of corruption,
this sacrament may not be made from corrupt bread, as stated above
(A. 3, ad 4); consequently, there is a wider difference between
unleavened and leavened bread than between warm and cold baptismal
water: because there might be such corruption of fermented bread that
it could not be validly used for the sacrament.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 5]

Whether Wine of the Grape Is the Proper Matter of This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that wine of the grape is not the proper matter
of this sacrament. Because, as water is the matter of Baptism, so is
wine the matter of this sacrament. But Baptism can be conferred with
any kind of water. Therefore this sacrament can be celebrated in any
kind of wine, such as of pomegranates, or of mulberries; since vines
do not grow in some countries.

Obj. 2: Further, vinegar is a kind of wine drawn from the grape, as
Isidore says (Etym. xx). But this sacrament cannot be celebrated with
vinegar. Therefore, it seems that wine from the grape is not the
proper matter of this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the clarified wine is drawn from grapes, so
also are the juice of unripe grapes and must. But it does not appear
that this sacrament may be made from such, according to what we read
in the Sixth Council (Trull., Can. 28): "We have learned that in some
churches the priests add grapes to the sacrifice of the oblation; and
so they dispense both together to the people. Consequently we give
order that no priest shall do this in future." And Pope Julius I
rebukes some priests "who offer wine pressed from the grape in the
sacrament of the Lord's chalice." Consequently, it seems that wine
from the grape is not the proper matter of this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ As our Lord compared Himself to the grain of
wheat, so also He compared Himself to the vine, saying (John 15:1):
"I am the true vine." But only bread from wheat is the matter of this
sacrament, as stated above (A. 3). Therefore, only wine from the
grape is the proper matter of this sacrament.

_I answer that,_ This sacrament can only be performed with wine from
the grape. First of all on account of Christ's institution, since He
instituted this sacrament in wine from the grape, as is evident from
His own words, in instituting this sacrament (Matt. 26:29): "I will
not drink from henceforth of this fruit of the vine." Secondly,
because, as stated above (A. 3), that is adopted as the matter of the
sacraments which is properly and universally considered as such. Now
that is properly called wine, which is drawn from the grape, whereas
other liquors are called wine from resemblance to the wine of the
grape. Thirdly, because the wine from the grape is more in keeping
with the effect of this sacrament, which is spiritual; because it is
written (Ps. 103:15): "That wine may cheer the heart of man."

Reply Obj. 1: Such liquors are called wine, not properly but only
from their resemblance thereto. But genuine wine can be conveyed to
such countries wherein the grape-vine does not flourish, in a
quantity sufficient for this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: Wine becomes vinegar by corruption; hence there is no
returning from vinegar to wine, as is said in _Metaph._ viii. And
consequently, just as this sacrament may not be made from bread which
is utterly corrupt, so neither can it be made from vinegar. It can,
however, be made from wine which is turning sour, just as from bread
turning corrupt, although he who does so sins, as stated above (A. 3).

Reply Obj. 3: The juice of unripe grapes is at the stage of
incomplete generation, and therefore it has not yet the species of
wine: on which account it may not be used for this sacrament. Must,
however, has already the species of wine, for its sweetness [*"Aut
dulcis musti Vulcano decoquit humorem"; Virgil, Georg. i, 295]
indicates fermentation which is "the result of its natural heat"
(Meteor. iv); consequently this sacrament can be made from must.
Nevertheless entire grapes ought not to be mixed with this sacrament,
because then there would be something else besides wine. It is
furthermore forbidden to offer must in the chalice, as soon as it has
been squeezed from the grape, since this is unbecoming owing to the
impurity of the must. But in case of necessity it may be done: for it
is said by the same Pope Julius, in the passage quoted in the
argument: "If necessary, let the grape be pressed into the chalice."
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 6]

Whether Water Should Be Mixed with the Wine?

Objection 1: It seems that water ought not to be mixed with the wine,
since Christ's sacrifice was foreshadowed by that of Melchisedech,
who (Gen. 14:18) is related to have offered up bread and wine only.
Consequently it seems that water should not be added in this
sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, the various sacraments have their respective
matters. But water is the matter of Baptism. Therefore it should not
be employed as the matter of this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, bread and wine are the matter of this sacrament. But
nothing is added to the bread. Therefore neither should anything be
added to the wine.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Alexander I writes (Ep. 1 ad omnes orth.):
"In the sacramental oblations which in mass are offered to the Lord,
only bread and wine mixed with water are to be offered in sacrifice."

_I answer that,_ Water ought to be mingled with the wine which is
offered in this sacrament. First of all on account of its
institution: for it is believed with probability that our Lord
instituted this sacrament in wine tempered with water according to
the custom of that country: hence it is written (Prov. 9:5): "Drink
the wine which I have mixed for you." Secondly, because it harmonizes
with the representation of our Lord's Passion: hence Pope Alexander I
says (Ep. 1 ad omnes orth.): "In the Lord's chalice neither wine only
nor water only ought to be offered, but both mixed because we read
that both flowed from His side in the Passion." Thirdly, because this
is adapted for signifying the effect of this sacrament, since as Pope
Julius says (Concil. Bracarens iii, Can. 1): "We see that the people
are signified by the water, but Christ's blood by the wine. Therefore
when water is mixed with the wine in the chalice, the people is made
one with Christ." Fourthly, because this is appropriate to the fourth
effect of this sacrament, which is the entering into everlasting
life: hence Ambrose says (De Sacram. v): "The water flows into the
chalice, and springs forth unto everlasting life."

Reply Obj. 1: As Ambrose says (De Sacram. v), just as Christ's
sacrifice is denoted by the offering of Melchisedech, so likewise it
is signified by the water which flowed from the rock in the desert,
according to 1 Cor. 10:4: "But they drank of the spiritual rock which
came after them."

Reply Obj. 2: In Baptism water is used for the purpose of ablution:
but in this sacrament it is used by way of refreshment, according to
Ps. 22:3: "He hath brought me up on the water of refreshment."

Reply Obj. 3: Bread is made of water and flour; and therefore, since
water is mixed with the wine, neither is without water.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 7]

Whether the Mixing with Water Is Essential to This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the mixing with water is essential to this
sacrament. Because Cyprian says to Cecilius (Ep. lxiii): "Thus the
Lord's chalice is not water only and wine only, but both must be
mixed together: in the same way as neither the Lord's body be of
flour only, except both," i.e. the flour and the water "be united as
one." But the admixture of water with the flour is necessary for this
sacrament. Consequently, for the like reason, so is the mixing of
water with the wine.

Obj. 2: Further, at our Lord's Passion, of which this is the
memorial, water as well as blood flowed from His side. But wine,
which is the sacrament of the blood, is necessary for this sacrament.
For the same reason, therefore, so is water.

Obj. 3: Further, if water were not essential to this sacrament, it
would not matter in the least what kind of water was used; and so
water distilled from roses, or any other kind might be employed;
which is contrary to the usage of the Church. Consequently water is
essential to this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Cyprian says (Ep. lxiii): "If any of our
predecessors, out of ignorance or simplicity, has not kept this
usage," i.e. of mixing water with the wine, "one may pardon his
simplicity"; which would not be the case if water were essential to
the sacrament, as the wine or the bread. Therefore the mingling of
water with the wine is not essential to the sacrament.

_I answer that,_ Judgment concerning a sign is to be drawn from the
thing signified. Now the adding of water to the wine is for the
purpose of signifying the sharing of this sacrament by the faithful,
in this respect that by the mixing of the water with the wine is
signified the union of the people with Christ, as stated (A. 6).
Moreover, the flowing of water from the side of Christ hanging on the
cross refers to the same, because by the water is denoted the
cleansing from sins, which was the effect of Christ's Passion. Now it
was observed above (Q. 73, A. 1, ad 3), that this sacrament is
completed in the consecration of the matter: while the usage of the
faithful is not essential to the sacrament, but only a consequence
thereof. Consequently, then, the adding of water is not essential to
the sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: Cyprian's expression is to be taken in the same sense
in which we say that a thing cannot be, which cannot be suitably. And
so the comparison refers to what ought to be done, not to what is
essential to be done; since water is of the essence of bread, but not
of the essence of wine.

Reply Obj. 2: The shedding of the blood belonged directly to Christ's
Passion: for it is natural for blood to flow from a wounded human
body. But the flowing of the water was not necessary for the Passion;
but merely to show its effect, which is to wash away sins, and to
refresh us from the heat of concupiscence. And therefore the water is
not offered apart from the wine in this sacrament, as the wine is
offered apart from the bread; but the water is offered mixed with the
wine to show that the wine belongs of itself to this sacrament, as of
its very essence; but the water as something added to the wine.

Reply Obj. 3: Since the mixing of water with the wine is not
necessary for the sacrament, it does not matter, as to the essence
of the sacrament, what kind of water is added to the wine, whether
natural water, or artificial, as rose-water, although, as to the
propriety of the sacrament, he would sin who mixes any other than
natural and true water, because true water flowed from the side of
Christ hanging on the cross, and not phlegm, as some have said, in
order to show that Christ's body was truly composed of the four
elements; as by the flowing blood, it was shown to be composed of
the four humors, as Pope Innocent III says in a certain Decree.
But because the mixing of water with flour is essential to this
sacrament, as making the composition of bread, if rose-water, or
any other liquor besides true water, be mixed with the flour, the
sacrament would not be valid, because it would not be true bread.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 74, Art. 8]

Whether Water Should Be Added in Great Quantity?

Objection 1: It seems that water ought to be added in great quantity,
because as blood flowed sensibly from Christ's side, so did water:
hence it is written (John 19:35): "He that saw it, hath given
testimony." But water could not be sensibly present in this sacrament
except it were used in great quantity. Consequently it seems that
water ought to be added in great quantity.

Obj. 2: Further, a little water mixed with much wine is corrupted.
But what is corrupted no longer exists. Therefore, it is the same
thing to add a little water in this sacrament as to add none. But it
is not lawful to add none. Therefore, neither is it lawful to add a
little.

Obj. 3: Further, if it sufficed to add a little, then as a
consequence it would suffice to throw one drop of water into an
entire cask. But this seems ridiculous. Therefore it does not suffice
for a small quantity to be added.

_On the contrary,_ It is said in the Decretals (Extra, De Celeb.
Miss.): "The pernicious abuse has prevailed in your country of adding
water in greater quantity than the wine, in the sacrifice, where
according to the reasonable custom of the entire Church more wine
than water ought to be employed."

_I answer that,_ There is a threefold opinion regarding the water
added to the wine, as Pope Innocent III says in a certain Decretal.
For some say that the water remains by itself when the wine is
changed into blood: but such an opinion cannot stand, because in the
sacrament of the altar after the consecration there is nothing else
save the body and the blood of Christ. Because, as Ambrose says in De
Officiis (De Mysteriis ix): "Before the blessing it is another
species that is named, after the blessing the Body is signified;
otherwise it would not be adored with adoration of latria." And
therefore others have said that as the wine is changed into blood, so
the water is changed into the water which flowed from Christ's side.
But this cannot be maintained reasonably, because according to this
the water would be consecrated apart from the wine, as the wine is
from the bread.

And therefore as he (Innocent III, Decretals, Extra, De Celeb. Miss.)
says, the more probable opinion is that which holds that the water is
changed into wine, and the wine into blood. Now, this could not be
done unless so little water was used that it would be changed into
wine. Consequently, it is always safer to add little water,
especially if the wine be weak, because the sacrament could not be
celebrated if there were such addition of water as to destroy the
species of the wine. Hence Pope Julius I reprehends some who "keep
throughout the year a linen cloth steeped in must, and at the time of
sacrifice wash a part of it with water, and so make the offering."

Reply Obj. 1: For the signification of this sacrament it suffices for
the water to be appreciable by sense when it is mixed with the wine:
but it is not necessary for it to be sensible after the mingling.

Reply Obj. 2: If no water were added, the signification would be
utterly excluded: but when the water is changed into wine, it is
signified that the people is incorporated with Christ.

Reply Obj. 3: If water were added to a cask, it would not suffice for
the signification of this sacrament, but the water must be added to
the wine at the actual celebration of the sacrament.
_______________________

QUESTION 75

OF THE CHANGE OF BREAD AND WINE INTO THE BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST
(In Eight Articles)

We have to consider the change of the bread and wine into the body
and blood of Christ; under which head there are eight points of
inquiry:

(1) Whether the substance of bread and wine remain in this sacrament
after the consecration?*

(2) Whether it is annihilated?

(3) Whether it is changed into the body and blood of Christ?

(4) Whether the accidents remain after the change?

(5) Whether the substantial form remains there?

(6) Whether this change is instantaneous?

(7) Whether it is more miraculous than any other change?

(8) By what words it may be suitably expressed?

[*The titles of the Articles here given were taken by St. Thomas
from his Commentary on the Sentences (Sent. iv, D, 90). However, in
writing the Articles he introduced a new point of inquiry, that of
the First Article; and substituted another division of the matter
under discussion, as may be seen by referring to the titles of the
various Articles. Most editions have ignored St. Thomas's original
division, and give the one to which he subsequently adhered.]
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 1]

Whether the Body of Christ Be in This Sacrament in Very Truth, or
Merely As in a Figure or Sign?

Objection 1: It seems that the body of Christ is not in this
sacrament in very truth, but only as in a figure, or sign. For it is
written (John 6:54) that when our Lord had uttered these words:
"Except you eat the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood,"
etc., "Many of His disciples on hearing it said: 'this is a hard
saying'": to whom He rejoined: "It is the spirit that quickeneth; the
flesh profiteth nothing": as if He were to say, according to
Augustine's exposition on Ps. 4 [*On Ps. 98:9]: "Give a spiritual
meaning to what I have said. You are not to eat this body which you
see, nor to drink the blood which they who crucify Me are to spill.
It is a mystery that I put before you: in its spiritual sense it will
quicken you; but the flesh profiteth nothing."

Obj. 2: Further, our Lord said (Matt. 28:20): "Behold I am with you
all days even to the consummation of the world." Now in explaining
this, Augustine makes this observation (Tract. xxx in Joan.): "The
Lord is on high until the world be ended; nevertheless the truth of
the Lord is here with us; for the body, in which He rose again, must
be in one place; but His truth is spread abroad everywhere."
Therefore, the body of Christ is not in this sacrament in very truth,
but only as in a sign.

Obj. 3: Further, no body can be in several places at the one time.
For this does not even belong to an angel; since for the same reason
it could be everywhere. But Christ's is a true body, and it is in
heaven. Consequently, it seems that it is not in very truth in the
sacrament of the altar, but only as in a sign.

Obj. 4: Further, the Church's sacraments are ordained for the profit
of the faithful. But according to Gregory in a certain Homily (xxviii
in Evang.), the ruler is rebuked "for demanding Christ's bodily
presence." Moreover the apostles were prevented from receiving the
Holy Ghost because they were attached to His bodily presence, as
Augustine says on John 16:7: "Except I go, the Paraclete will not
come to you" (Tract. xciv in Joan.). Therefore Christ is not in the
sacrament of the altar according to His bodily presence.

_On the contrary,_ Hilary says (De Trin. viii): "There is no room for
doubt regarding the truth of Christ's body and blood; for now by our
Lord's own declaring and by our faith His flesh is truly food, and
His blood is truly drink." And Ambrose says (De Sacram. vi): "As the
Lord Jesus Christ is God's true Son so is it Christ's true flesh
which we take, and His true blood which we drink."

_I answer that,_ The presence of Christ's true body and blood in this
sacrament cannot be detected by sense, nor understanding, but by
faith alone, which rests upon Divine authority. Hence, on Luke 22:19:
"This is My body which shall be delivered up for you," Cyril says:
"Doubt not whether this be true; but take rather the Saviour's words
with faith; for since He is the Truth, He lieth not."

Now this is suitable, first for the perfection of the New Law. For,
the sacrifices of the Old Law contained only in figure that true
sacrifice of Christ's Passion, according to Heb. 10:1: "For the law
having a shadow of the good things to come, not the very image of the
things." And therefore it was necessary that the sacrifice of the New
Law instituted by Christ should have something more, namely, that it
should contain Christ Himself crucified, not merely in signification
or figure, but also in very truth. And therefore this sacrament which
contains Christ Himself, as Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii), is
perfective of all the other sacraments, in which Christ's virtue is
participated.

Secondly, this belongs to Christ's love, out of which for our
salvation He assumed a true body of our nature. And because it is the
special feature of friendship to live together with friends, as the
Philosopher says (Ethic. ix), He promises us His bodily presence as a
reward, saying (Matt. 24:28): "Where the body is, there shall the
eagles be gathered together." Yet meanwhile in our pilgrimage He does
not deprive us of His bodily presence; but unites us with Himself in
this sacrament through the truth of His body and blood. Hence (John
6:57) he says: "He that eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood,
abideth in Me, and I in him." Hence this sacrament is the sign of
supreme charity, and the uplifter of our hope, from such familiar
union of Christ with us.

Thirdly, it belongs to the perfection of faith, which concerns His
humanity just as it does His Godhead, according to John 14:1: "You
believe in God, believe also in Me." And since faith is of things
unseen, as Christ shows us His Godhead invisibly, so also in this
sacrament He shows us His flesh in an invisible manner.

Some men accordingly, not paying heed to these things, have contended
that Christ's body and blood are not in this sacrament except as in a
sign, a thing to be rejected as heretical, since it is contrary to
Christ's words. Hence Berengarius, who had been the first deviser of
this heresy, was afterwards forced to withdraw his error, and to
acknowledge the truth of the faith.

Reply Obj. 1: From this authority the aforesaid heretics have taken
occasion to err from evilly understanding Augustine's words. For when
Augustine says: "You are not to eat this body which you see," he
means not to exclude the truth of Christ's body, but that it was not
to be eaten in this species in which it was seen by them. And by the
words: "It is a mystery that I put before you; in its spiritual sense
it will quicken you," he intends not that the body of Christ is in
this sacrament merely according to mystical signification, but
"spiritually," that is, invisibly, and by the power of the spirit.
Hence (Tract. xxvii), expounding John 6:64: "the flesh profiteth
nothing," he says: "Yea, but as they understood it, for they
understood that the flesh was to be eaten as it is divided piecemeal
in a dead body, or as sold in the shambles, not as it is quickened by
the spirit . . . Let the spirit draw nigh to the flesh . . . then the
flesh profiteth very much: for if the flesh profiteth nothing, the
Word had not been made flesh, that It might dwell among us."

Reply Obj. 2: That saying of Augustine and all others like it are to
be understood of Christ's body as it is beheld in its proper species;
according as our Lord Himself says (Matt. 26:11): "But Me you have
not always." Nevertheless He is invisibly under the species of this
sacrament, wherever this sacrament is performed.

Reply Obj. 3: Christ's body is not in this sacrament in the same way
as a body is in a place, which by its dimensions is commensurate with
the place; but in a special manner which is proper to this sacrament.
Hence we say that Christ's body is upon many altars, not as in
different places, but "sacramentally": and thereby we do not
understand that Christ is there only as in a sign, although a
sacrament is a kind of sign; but that Christ's body is here after a
fashion proper to this sacrament, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 4: This argument holds good of Christ's bodily presence,
as He is present after the manner of a body, that is, as it is in its
visible appearance, but not as it is spiritually, that is, invisibly,
after the manner and by the virtue of the spirit. Hence Augustine
(Tract. xxvii in Joan.) says: "If thou hast understood" Christ's
words spiritually concerning His flesh, "they are spirit and life to
thee; if thou hast understood them carnally, they are also spirit and
life, but not to thee."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 2]

Whether in This Sacrament the Substance of the Bread and Wine Remains
After the Consecration?

Objection 1: It seems that the substance of the bread and wine does
remain in this sacrament after the consecration: because Damascene
says (De Fide Orth. iv): "Since it is customary for men to eat bread
and drink wine, God has wedded his Godhead to them, and made them His
body and blood": and further on: "The bread of communication is not
simple bread, but is united to the Godhead." But wedding together
belongs to things actually existing. Therefore the bread and wine are
at the same time, in this sacrament, with the body and the blood of
Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, there ought to be conformity between the sacraments.
But in the other sacraments the substance of the matter remains, like
the substance of water in Baptism, and the substance of chrism in
Confirmation. Therefore the substance of the bread and wine remains
also in this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, bread and wine are made use of in this sacrament,
inasmuch as they denote ecclesiastical unity, as "one bread is made
from many grains and wine from many grapes," as Augustine says in his
book on the Creed (Tract. xxvi in Joan.). But this belongs to the
substance of bread and wine. Therefore, the substance of the bread
and wine remains in this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv): "Although the figure
of the bread and wine be seen, still, after the Consecration, they
are to be believed to be nothing else than the body end blood of
Christ."

_I answer that,_ Some have held that the substance of the bread and
wine remains in this sacrament after the consecration. But this
opinion cannot stand: first of all, because by such an opinion the
truth of this sacrament is destroyed, to which it belongs that
Christ's true body exists in this sacrament; which indeed was not
there before the consecration. Now a thing cannot be in any place,
where it was not previously, except by change of place, or by the
conversion of another thing into itself; just as fire begins anew to
be in some house, either because it is carried thither, or because it
is generated there. Now it is evident that Christ's body does not
begin to be present in this sacrament by local motion. First of all,
because it would follow that it would cease to be in heaven: for what
is moved locally does not come anew to some place unless it quit the
former one. Secondly, because every body moved locally passes through
all intermediary spaces, which cannot be said here. Thirdly, because
it is not possible for one movement of the same body moved locally to
be terminated in different places at the one time, whereas the body
of Christ under this sacrament begins at the one time to be in
several places. And consequently it remains that Christ's body cannot
begin to be anew in this sacrament except by change of the substance
of bread into itself. But what is changed into another thing, no
longer remains after such change. Hence the conclusion is that,
saving the truth of this sacrament, the substance of the bread cannot
remain after the consecration.

Secondly, because this position is contrary to the form of this
sacrament, in which it is said: "This is My body," which would not be
true if the substance of the bread were to remain there; for the
substance of bread never is the body of Christ. Rather should one say
in that case: "Here is My body."

Thirdly, because it would be opposed to the veneration of this
sacrament, if any substance were there, which could not be adored
with adoration of latria.

Fourthly, because it is contrary to the rite of the Church, according
to which it is not lawful to take the body of Christ after bodily
food, while it is nevertheless lawful to take one consecrated host
after another. Hence this opinion is to be avoided as heretical.

Reply Obj. 1: God "wedded His Godhead," i.e. His Divine power, to the
bread and wine, not that these may remain in this sacrament, but in
order that He may make from them His body and blood.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ is not really present in the other sacraments,
as in this; and therefore the substance of the matter remains in the
other sacraments, but not in this.

Reply Obj. 3: The species which remain in this sacrament, as shall be
said later (A. 5), suffice for its signification; because the nature
of the substance is known by its accidents.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 3]

Whether the Substance of the Bread or Wine Is Annihilated After the
Consecration of This Sacrament, or Dissolved into Their Original
Matter?

Objection 1: It seems that the substance of the bread is annihilated
after the consecration of this sacrament, or dissolved into its
original matter. For whatever is corporeal must be somewhere. But the
substance of bread, which is something corporeal, does not remain, in
this sacrament, as stated above (A. 2); nor can we assign any place
where it may be. Consequently it is nothing after the consecration.
Therefore, it is either annihilated, or dissolved into its original
matter.

Obj. 2: Further, what is the term _wherefrom_ in every change exists
no longer, except in the potentiality of matter; e.g. when air is
changed into fire, the form of the air remains only in the
potentiality of matter; and in like fashion when what is white
becomes black. But in this sacrament the substance of the bread or of
the wine is the term _wherefrom,_ while the body or the blood of
Christ is the term "whereunto": for Ambrose says in De Officiis (De
Myster. ix): "Before the blessing it is called another species, after
the blessing the body of Christ is signified." Therefore, when the
consecration takes place, the substance of the bread or wine no
longer remains, unless perchance dissolved into its (original) matter.

Obj. 3: Further, one of two contradictories must be true. But this
proposition is false: "After the consecration the substance of the
bread or wine is something." Consequently, this is true: "The
substance of the bread or wine is nothing."

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Q. 83): "God is not the cause of
tending to nothing." But this sacrament is wrought by Divine power.
Therefore, in this sacrament the substance of the bread or wine is
not annihilated.

_I answer that,_ Because the substance of the bread and wine does not
remain in this sacrament, some, deeming that it is impossible for the
substance of the bread and wine to be changed into Christ's flesh and
blood, have maintained that by the consecration, the substance of the
bread and wine is either dissolved into the original matter, or that
it is annihilated.

Now the original matter into which mixed bodies can be dissolved is
the four elements. For dissolution cannot be made into primary
matter, so that a subject can exist without a form, since matter
cannot exist without a form. But since after the consecration nothing
remains under the sacramental species except the body and the blood
of Christ, it will be necessary to say that the elements into which
the substance of the bread and wine is dissolved, depart from thence
by local motion, which would be perceived by the senses. In like
manner also the substance of the bread or wine remains until the last
instant of the consecration; but in the last instant of the
consecration there is already present there the substance of the body
or blood of Christ, just as the form is already present in the last
instant of generation. Hence no instant can be assigned in which the
original matter can be there. For it cannot be said that the
substance of the bread or wine is dissolved gradually into the
original matter, or that it successively quits the species, for if
this began to be done in the last instant of its consecration, then
at the one time under part of the host there would be the body of
Christ together with the substance of bread, which is contrary to
what has been said above (A. 2). But if this begin to come to pass
before the consecration, there will then be a time in which under one
part of the host there will be neither the substance of bread nor the
body of Christ, which is not fitting. They seem indeed to have taken
this into careful consideration, wherefore they formulated their
proposition with an alternative viz. that (the substance) may be
annihilated. But even this cannot stand, because no way can be
assigned whereby Christ's true body can begin to be in this
sacrament, except by the change of the substance of bread into it,
which change is excluded the moment we admit either annihilation of
the substance of the bread, or dissolution into the original matter.
Likewise no cause can be assigned for such dissolution or
annihilation, since the effect of the sacrament is signified by the
form: "This is My body." Hence it is clear that the aforesaid opinion
is false.

Reply Obj. 1: The substance of the bread or wine, after the
consecration, remains neither under the sacramental species, nor
elsewhere; yet it does not follow that it is annihilated; for it is
changed into the body of Christ; just as if the air, from which fire
is generated, be not there or elsewhere, it does not follow that it
is annihilated.

Reply Obj. 2: The form, which is the term _wherefrom,_ is not
changed into another form; but one form succeeds another in the
subject; and therefore the first form remains only in the
potentiality of matter. But here the substance of the bread is
changed into the body of Christ, as stated above. Hence the
conclusion does not follow.

Reply Obj. 3: Although after the consecration this proposition is
false: "The substance of the bread is something," still that into
which the substance of the bread is changed, is something, and
consequently the substance of the bread is not annihilated.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 4]

Whether Bread Can Be Converted into the Body of Christ?

Objection 1: It seems that bread cannot be converted into the body of
Christ. For conversion is a kind of change. But in every change there
must be some subject, which from being previously in potentiality is
now in act. because as is said in _Phys._ iii: "motion is the act of
a thing existing in potentiality." But no subject can be assigned for
the substance of the bread and of the body of Christ, because it is
of the very nature of substance for it "not to be in a subject," as
it is said in _Praedic._ iii. Therefore it is not possible for the
whole substance of the bread to be converted into the body of Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, the form of the thing into which another is
converted, begins anew to inhere in the matter of the thing converted
into it: as when air is changed into fire not already existing, the
form of fire begins anew to be in the matter of the air; and in like
manner when food is converted into non-pre-existing man, the form of
the man begins to be anew in the matter of the food. Therefore, if
bread be changed into the body of Christ, the form of Christ's body
must necessarily begin to be in the matter of the bread, which is
false. Consequently, the bread is not changed into the substance of
Christ's body.

Obj. 3: Further, when two things are diverse, one never becomes the
other, as whiteness never becomes blackness, as is stated in _Phys._
  i. But since two contrary forms are of themselves diverse, as being
the principles of formal difference, so two signate matters are of
themselves diverse, as being the principles of material distinction.
Consequently, it is not possible for this matter of bread to become
this matter whereby Christ's body is individuated, and so it is not
possible for this substance of bread to be changed into the substance
of Christ's body.

_On the contrary,_ Eusebius Emesenus says: "To thee it ought neither
to be a novelty nor an impossibility that earthly and mortal things
be changed into the substance of Christ."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), since Christ's true body is
in this sacrament, and since it does not begin to be there by local
motion, nor is it contained therein as in a place, as is evident from
what was stated above (A. 1, ad 2), it must be said then that it
begins to be there by conversion of the substance of bread into
itself.

Yet this change is not like natural changes, but is entirely
supernatural, and effected by God's power alone. Hence Ambrose says
[(De Sacram. iv): "See how Christ's word changes nature's laws, as He
wills: a man is not wont to be born save of man and woman: see
therefore that against the established law and order a man is born of
a Virgin": and] [*The passage in the brackets is not in the Leonine
edition] (De Myster. iv): "It is clear that a Virgin begot beyond the
order of nature: and what we make is the body from the Virgin. Why,
then, do you look for nature's order in Christ's body, since the Lord
Jesus was Himself brought forth of a Virgin beyond nature?"
Chrysostom likewise (Hom. xlvii), commenting on John 6:64: "The words
which I have spoken to you," namely, of this sacrament, "are spirit
and life," says: i.e. "spiritual, having nothing carnal, nor natural
consequence; but they are rent from all such necessity which exists
upon earth, and from the laws here established."

For it is evident that every agent acts according as it is in act.
But every created agent is limited in its act, as being of a
determinate genus and species: and consequently the action of every
created agent bears upon some determinate act. Now the determination
of every thing in actual existence comes from its form. Consequently,
no natural or created agent can act except by changing the form in
something; and on this account every change made according to
nature's laws is a formal change. But God is infinite act, as stated
in the First Part (Q. 7, A. 1; Q. 26, A. 2); hence His action extends
to the whole nature of being. Therefore He can work not only formal
conversion, so that diverse forms succeed each other in the same
subject; but also the change of all being, so that, to wit, the whole
substance of one thing be changed into the whole substance of
another. And this is done by Divine power in this sacrament; for the
whole substance of the bread is changed into the whole substance of
Christ's body, and the whole substance of the wine into the whole
substance of Christ's blood. Hence this is not a formal, but a
substantial conversion; nor is it a kind of natural movement: but,
with a name of its own, it can be called "transubstantiation."

Reply Obj. 1: This objection holds good in respect of formal change,
because it belongs to a form to be in matter or in a subject; but it
does not hold good in respect of the change of the entire substance.
Hence, since this substantial change implies a certain order of
substances, one of which is changed into the other, it is in both
substances as in a subject, just as order and number.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument also is true of formal conversion or
change, because, as stated above (ad 1), a form must be in some
matter or subject. But this is not so in a change of the entire
substance; for in this case no subject is possible.

Reply Obj. 3: Form cannot be changed into form, nor matter into
matter by the power of any finite agent. Such a change, however, can
be made by the power of an infinite agent, which has control over all
being, because the nature of being is common to both forms and to
both matters; and whatever there is of being in the one, the author
of being can change into whatever there is of being in the other,
withdrawing that whereby it was distinguished from the other.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 5]

Whether the Accidents of the Bread and Wine Remain in This Sacrament
After the Change?

Objection 1: It seems that the accidents of the bread and wine do not
remain in this sacrament. For when that which comes first is removed,
that which follows is also taken away. But substance is naturally
before accident, as is proved in _Metaph._ vii. Since, then, after
consecration, the substance of the bread does not remain in this
sacrament, it seems that its accidents cannot remain.

Obj. 2: Further, there ought not to be any deception in a sacrament
of truth. But we judge of substance by accidents. It seems, then,
that human judgment is deceived, if, while the accidents remain, the
substance of the bread does not. Consequently this is unbecoming to
this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, although our faith is not subject to reason, still
it is not contrary to reason, but above it, as was said in the
beginning of this work (I, Q. 1, A. 6, ad 2; A. 8). But our reason
has its origin in the senses. Therefore our faith ought not to be
contrary to the senses, as it is when sense judges that to be bread
which faith believes to be the substance of Christ's body. Therefore
it is not befitting this sacrament for the accidents of bread to
remain subject to the senses, and for the substance of bread not to
remain.

Obj. 4: Further, what remains after the change has taken place seems
to be the subject of change. If therefore the accidents of the bread
remain after the change has been effected, it seems that the
accidents are the subject of the change. But this is impossible; for
"an accident cannot have an accident" (Metaph. iii). Therefore the
accidents of the bread and wine ought not to remain in this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in his book on the Sentences of
Prosper (Lanfranc, De Corp. et Sang. Dom. xiii): "Under the species
which we behold, of bread and wine, we honor invisible things, i.e.
flesh and blood."

_I answer that,_ It is evident to sense that all the accidents of the
bread and wine remain after the consecration. And this is reasonably
done by Divine providence. First of all, because it is not customary,
but horrible, for men to eat human flesh, and to drink blood. And
therefore Christ's flesh and blood are set before us to be partaken
of under the species of those things which are the more commonly used
by men, namely, bread and wine. Secondly, lest this sacrament might
be derided by unbelievers, if we were to eat our Lord under His own
species. Thirdly, that while we receive our Lord's body and blood
invisibly, this may redound to the merit of faith.

Reply Obj. 1: As is said in the book _De Causis,_ an effect depends
more on the first cause than on the second. And therefore by God's
power, which is the first cause of all things, it is possible for
that which follows to remain, while that which is first is taken away.

Reply Obj. 2: There is no deception in this sacrament; for the
accidents which are discerned by the senses are truly present. But
the intellect, whose proper object is substance as is said in _De
Anima_ iii, is preserved by faith from deception.

And this serves as answer to the third argument; because faith is not
contrary to the senses, but concerns things to which sense does not
reach.

Reply Obj. 4: This change has not properly a subject, as was stated
above (A. 4, ad 1); nevertheless the accidents which remain have some
resemblance of a subject.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 6]

Whether the Substantial Form of the Bread Remains in This Sacrament
After the Consecration?

Objection 1: It seems that the substantial form of the bread remains
in this sacrament after the consecration. For it has been said (A. 5)
that the accidents remain after the consecration. But since bread is
an artificial thing, its form is an accident. Therefore it remains
after the consecration.

Obj. 2: Further, the form of Christ's body is His soul: for it is
said in _De Anima_ ii, that the soul "is the act of a physical body
which has life in potentiality". But it cannot be said that the
substantial form of the bread is changed into the soul. Therefore it
appears that it remains after the consecration.

Obj. 3: Further, the proper operation of a things follows its
substantial form. But what remains in this sacrament, nourishes, and
performs every operation which bread would do were it present.
Therefore the substantial form of the bread remains in this sacrament
after the consecration.

_On the contrary,_ The substantial form of bread is of the substance
of bread. But the substance of the bread is changed into the body of
Christ, as stated above (AA. 2, 3, 4). Therefore the substantial form
of the bread does not remain.

_I answer that,_ Some have contended that after the consecration not
only do the accidents of the bread remain, but also its substantial
form. But this cannot be. First of all, because if the substantial
form of the bread were to remain, nothing of the bread would be
changed into the body of Christ, excepting the matter; and so it
would follow that it would be changed, not into the whole body of
Christ, but into its matter, which is repugnant to the form of the
sacrament, wherein it is said: "This is My body."

Secondly, because if the substantial form of the bread were to
remain, it would remain either in matter, or separated from matter.
The first cannot be, for if it were to remain in the matter of the
bread, then the whole substance of the bread would remain, which is
against what was said above (A. 2). Nor could it remain in any other
matter, because the proper form exists only in its proper matter. But
if it were to remain separate from matter, it would then be an
actually intelligible form, and also an intelligence; for all forms
separated from matter are such.

Thirdly, it would be unbefitting this sacrament: because the
accidents of the bread remain in this sacrament, in order that the
body of Christ may be seen under them, and not under its proper
species, as stated above (A. 5).

And therefore it must be said that the substantial form of the bread
does not remain.

Reply Obj. 1: There is nothing to prevent art from making a thing
whose form is not an accident, but a substantial form; as frogs and
serpents can be produced by art: for art produces such forms not by
its own power, but by the power of natural energies. And in this way
it produces the substantial forms of bread, by the power of fire
baking the matter made up of flour and water.

Reply Obj. 2: The soul is the form of the body, giving it the whole
order of perfect being, i.e. being, corporeal being, and animated
being, and so on. Therefore the form of the bread is changed into the
form of Christ's body, according as the latter gives corporeal being,
but not according as it bestows animated being.

Reply Obj. 3: Some of the operations of bread follow it by reason of
the accidents, such as to affect the senses, and such operations are
found in the species of the bread after the consecration on account
of the accidents which remain. But some other operations follow the
bread either by reason of the matter, such as that it is changed into
something else, or else by reason of the substantial form, such as an
operation consequent upon its species, for instance, that it
"strengthens man's heart" (Ps. 103:15); and such operations are found
in this sacrament, not on account of the form or matter remaining,
but because they are bestowed miraculously upon the accidents
themselves, as will be said later (Q. 77, A. 3, ad 2, 3; AA. 5, 6).
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 7]

Whether This Change Is Wrought Instantaneously?

Objection 1: It seems that this change is not wrought
instantaneously, but successively. For in this change there is first
the substance of bread, and afterwards the substance of Christ's
body. Neither, then, is in the same instant, but in two instants. But
there is a mid-time between every two instants. Therefore this change
must take place according to the succession of time, which is between
the last instant in which the bread is there, and the first instant
in which the body of Christ is present.

Obj. 2: Further, in every change something is _in becoming_ and
something is _in being._ But these two things do not exist at the one
time for, what is _in becoming,_ is not yet, whereas what is _in
being,_ already is. Consequently, there is a before and an after in
such change: and so necessarily the change cannot be instantaneous,
but successive.

Obj. 3: Further, Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv) that this sacrament "is
made by the words of Christ." But Christ's words are pronounced
successively. Therefore the change takes place successively.

_On the contrary,_ This change is effected by a power which is
infinite, to which it belongs to operate in an instant.

_I answer that,_ A change may be instantaneous from a threefold
reason. First on the part of the form, which is the terminus of the
change. For, if it be a form that receives more and less, it is
acquired by its subject successively, such as health; and therefore
because a substantial form does not receive more and less, it follows
that its introduction into matter is instantaneous.

Secondly on the part of the subject, which sometimes is prepared
successively for receiving the form; thus water is heated
successively. When, however, the subject itself is in the ultimate
disposition for receiving the form, it receives it suddenly, as a
transparent body is illuminated suddenly. Thirdly on the part of the
agent, which possesses infinite power: wherefore it can instantly
dispose the matter for the form. Thus it is written (Mk. 7:34) that
when Christ had said, "'Ephpheta,' which is 'Be thou opened,'
immediately his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
loosed."

For these three reasons this conversion is instantaneous. First,
because the substance of Christ's body which is the term of this
conversion, does not receive more or less. Secondly, because in this
conversion there is no subject to be disposed successively. Thirdly,
because it is effected by God's infinite power.

Reply Obj. 1: Some [*Cf. Albert the Great, Sent. iv, D, 11; St.
Bonaventure, Sent., iv, D, 11] do not grant simply that there is a
mid-time between every two instants. For they say that this is true
of two instants referring to the same movement, but not if they refer
to different things. Hence between the instant that marks the close
of rest, and another which marks the beginning of movement, there is
no mid-time. But in this they are mistaken, because the unity of time
and of instant, or even their plurality, is not taken according to
movements of any sort, but according to the first movement of the
heavens, which is the measure of all movement and rest.

Accordingly others grant this of the time which measures movement
depending on the movement of the heavens. But there are some
movements which are not dependent on the movement of the heavens, nor
measured by it, as was said in the First Part (Q. 53, A. 3)
concerning the movements of the angels. Hence between two instants
responding to those movements there is no mid-time. But this is not
to the point, because although the change in question has no relation
of itself to the movement of the heavens, still it follows the
pronouncing of the words, which (pronouncing) must necessarily be
measured by the movement of the heavens. And therefore there must of
necessity be a mid-time between every two signate instants in
connection with that change.

Some say therefore that the instant in which the bread was last, and
the instant in which the body of Christ is first, are indeed two in
comparison with the things measured, but are one comparatively to the
time measuring; as when two lines touch, there are two points on the
part of the two lines, but one point on the part of the place
containing them. But here there is no likeness, because instant and
time is not the intrinsic measure of particular movements, as a line
and point are of a body, but only the extrinsic measure, as place is
to bodies.

Hence others say that it is the same instant in fact, but another
according to reason. But according to this it would follow that
things really opposite would exist together; for diversity of reason
does not change a thing objectively.

And therefore it must be said that this change, as stated above, is
wrought by Christ's words which are spoken by the priest, so that the
last instant of pronouncing the words is the first instant in which
Christ's body is in the sacrament; and that the substance of the
bread is there during the whole preceding time. Of this time no
instant is to be taken as proximately preceding the last one, because
time is not made up of successive instants, as is proved in _Phys._
vi. And therefore a first instant can be assigned in which Christ's
body is present; but a last instant cannot be assigned in which the
substance of bread is there, but a last time can be assigned. And the
same holds good in natural changes, as is evident from the
Philosopher (Phys. viii).

Reply Obj. 2: In instantaneous changes a thing is "in becoming," and
is "in being" simultaneously; just as becoming illuminated and to be
actually illuminated are simultaneous: for in such, a thing is said
to be "in being" according as it now is; but to be "in becoming,"
according as it was not before.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (ad 1), this change comes about in the
last instant of the pronouncing of the words. For then the meaning of
the words is finished, which meaning is efficacious in the forms of
the sacraments. And therefore it does not follow that this change is
successive.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 75, Art. 8]

Whether This Proposition Is False: "The Body of Christ Is Made Out of
Bread"?

Objection 1: It seems that this proposition is false: "The body of
Christ is made out of bread." For everything out of which another is
made, is that which is made the other; but not conversely: for we say
that a black thing is made out of a white thing, and that a white
thing is made black: and although we may say that a man becomes black
still we do not say that a black thing is made out of a man, as is
shown in _Phys._ i. If it be true, then, that Christ's body is made
out of bread, it will be true to say that bread is made the body of
Christ. But this seems to be false, because the bread is not the
subject of the making, but rather its term. Therefore, it is not said
truly that Christ's body is made out of bread.

Obj. 2: Further, the term of _becoming_ is something that is, or
something that is _made._ But this proposition is never true: "The
bread is the body of Christ"; or "The bread is made the body of
Christ"; or again, "The bread will be the body of Christ." Therefore
it seems that not even this is true: "The body of Christ is made out
of bread."

Obj. 3: Further, everything out of which another is made is converted
into that which is made from it. But this proposition seems to be
false: "The bread is converted into the body of Christ," because such
conversion seems to be more miraculous than the creation of the
world, in which it is not said that non-being is converted into
being. Therefore it seems that this proposition likewise is false:
"The body of Christ is made out of bread."

Obj. 4: Further, that out of which something is made, can be that
thing. But this proposition is false: "Bread can be the body of
Christ." Therefore this is likewise false: "The body of Christ is
made out of bread."

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv): "When the
consecration takes place, the body of Christ is made out of the
bread."

_I answer that,_ This conversion of bread into the body of Christ has
something in common with creation, and with natural transmutation,
and in some respect differs from both. For the order of the terms is
common to these three; that is, that after one thing there is another
(for, in creation there is being after non-being; in this sacrament,
Christ's body after the substance of bread; in natural transmutation
white after black, or fire after air); and that the aforesaid terms
are not coexistent.

Now the conversion, of which we are speaking, has this in common with
creation, that in neither of them is there any common subject
belonging to either of the extremes; the contrary of which appears in
every natural transmutation.

Again, this conversion has something in common with natural
transmutation in two respects, although not in the same fashion.
First of all because in both, one of the extremes passes into the
other, as bread into Christ's body, and air into fire; whereas
non-being is not converted into being. But this comes to pass
differently on the one side and on the other; for in this sacrament
the whole substance of the bread passes into the whole body of
Christ; whereas in natural transmutation the matter of the one
receives the form of the other, the previous form being laid aside.
Secondly, they have this in common, that on both sides something
remains the same; whereas this does not happen in creation: yet
differently; for the same matter or subject remains in natural
transmutation; whereas in this sacrament the same accidents remain.

From these observations we can gather the various ways of speaking in
such matters. For, because in no one of the aforesaid three things
are the extremes coexistent, therefore in none of them can one
extreme be predicated of the other by the substantive verb of the
present tense: for we do not say, "Non-being is being" or, "Bread is
the body of Christ," or, "Air is fire," or, "White is black." Yet
because of the relationship of the extremes in all of them we can use
the preposition _ex_ (out of), which denotes order; for we can truly
and properly say that "being is made out of non-being," and "out of
bread, the body of Christ," and "out of air, fire," and "out of
white, black." But because in creation one of the extremes does not
pass into the other, we cannot use the word "conversion" in creation,
so as to say that "non-being is converted into being": we can,
however, use the word in this sacrament, just as in natural
transmutation. But since in this sacrament the whole substance is
converted into the whole substance, on that account this conversion
is properly termed transubstantiation.

Again, since there is no subject of this conversion, the things which
are true in natural conversion by reason of the subject, are not to
be granted in this conversion. And in the first place indeed it is
evident that potentiality to the opposite follows a subject, by
reason whereof we say that "a white thing can be black," or that "air
can be fire"; although the latter is not so proper as the former: for
the subject of whiteness, in which there is potentiality to
blackness, is the whole substance of the white thing; since whiteness
is not a part thereof; whereas the subject of the form of air is part
thereof: hence when it is said, "Air can be fire," it is verified by
synecdoche by reason of the part. But in this conversion, and
similarly in creation, because there is no subject, it is not said
that one extreme can be the other, as that "non-being can be being,"
or that "bread can be the body of Christ": and for the same reason it
cannot be properly said that "being is made of (_de_) non-being," or
that "the body of Christ is made of bread," because this preposition
"of" (_de_) denotes a consubstantial cause, which consubstantiality
of the extremes in natural transmutations is considered according to
something common in the subject. And for the same reason it is not
granted that "bread will be the body of Christ," or that it "may
become the body of Christ," just as it is not granted in creation
that "non-being will be being," or that "non-being may become being,"
because this manner of speaking is verified in natural transmutations
by reason of the subject: for instance, when we say that "a white
thing becomes black," or "a white thing will be black."

Nevertheless, since in this sacrament, after the change, something
remains the same, namely, the accidents of the bread, as stated above
(A. 5), some of these expressions may be admitted by way of
similitude, namely, that "bread is the body of Christ," or, "bread
will be the body of Christ," or "the body of Christ is made of
bread"; provided that by the word "bread" is not understood the
substance of bread, but in general "that which is contained under the
species of bread," under which species there is first contained the
substance of bread, and afterwards the body of Christ.

Reply Obj. 1: That out of which something else is made, sometimes
implies together with the subject, one of the extremes of the
transmutation, as when it is said "a black thing is made out of a
white one"; but sometimes it implies only the opposite or the
extreme, as when it is said--"out of morning comes the day." And so
it is not granted that the latter becomes the former, that is, "that
morning becomes the day." So likewise in the matter in hand, although
it may be said properly that "the body of Christ is made out of
bread," yet it is not said properly that "bread becomes the body of
Christ," except by similitude, as was said above.

Reply Obj. 2: That out of which another is made, will sometimes be
that other because of the subject which is implied. And therefore,
since there is no subject of this change, the comparison does not
hold.

Reply Obj. 3: In this change there are many more difficulties than in
creation, in which there is but this one difficulty, that something
is made out of nothing; yet this belongs to the proper mode of
production of the first cause, which presupposes nothing else. But in
this conversion not only is it difficult for this whole to be changed
into that whole, so that nothing of the former may remain (which does
not belong to the common mode of production of a cause), but
furthermore it has this difficulty that the accidents remain while
the substance is destroyed, and many other difficulties of which we
shall treat hereafter (Q. 77). Nevertheless the word "conversion" is
admitted in this sacrament, but not in creation, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 4: As was observed above, potentiality belongs to the
subject, whereas there is no subject in this conversion. And
therefore it is not granted that bread can be the body of Christ: for
this conversion does not come about by the passive potentiality of
the creature, but solely by the active power of the Creator.
_______________________

QUESTION 76

OF THE WAY IN WHICH CHRIST IS IN THIS SACRAMENT
(In Eight Articles)

We have now to consider the manner in which Christ exists in this
sacrament; and under this head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the whole Christ is under this sacrament?

(2) Whether the entire Christ is under each species of the sacrament?

(3) Whether the entire Christ is under every part of the species?

(4) Whether all the dimensions of Christ's body are in this sacrament?

(5) Whether the body of Christ is in this sacrament locally?

(6) Whether after the consecration, the body of Christ is moved when
the host or chalice is moved?

(7) Whether Christ's body, as it is in this sacrament, can be seen by
the eye?

(8) Whether the true body of Christ remains in this sacrament when He
is seen under the appearance of a child or of flesh?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 1]

Whether the Whole Christ Is Contained Under This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the whole Christ is not contained under
this sacrament, because Christ begins to be in this sacrament by
conversion of the bread and wine. But it is evident that the bread
and wine cannot be changed either into the Godhead or into the soul
of Christ. Since therefore Christ exists in three substances, namely,
the Godhead, soul and body, as shown above (Q. 2, A. 5; Q. 5, AA. 1,
3), it seems that the entire Christ is not under this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, Christ is in this sacrament, forasmuch as it is
ordained to the refection of the faithful, which consists in food and
drink, as stated above (Q. 74, A. 1). But our Lord said (John 6:56):
"My flesh is meat indeed, and My blood is drink indeed." Therefore,
only the flesh and blood of Christ are contained in this sacrament.
But there are many other parts of Christ's body, for instance, the
nerves, bones, and such like. Therefore the entire Christ is not
contained under this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, a body of greater quantity cannot be contained under
the measure of a lesser. But the measure of the bread and wine is
much smaller than the measure of Christ's body. Therefore it is
impossible that the entire Christ be contained under this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Officiis): "Christ is in this
sacrament."

_I answer that,_ It is absolutely necessary to confess according to
Catholic faith that the entire Christ is in this sacrament. Yet we
must know that there is something of Christ in this sacrament in a
twofold manner: first, as it were, by the power of the sacrament;
secondly, from natural concomitance. By the power of the sacrament,
there is under the species of this sacrament that into which the
pre-existing substance of the bread and wine is changed, as expressed
by the words of the form, which are effective in this as in the other
sacraments; for instance, by the words: "This is My body," or, "This
is My blood." But from natural concomitance there is also in this
sacrament that which is really united with that thing wherein the
aforesaid conversion is terminated. For if any two things be really
united, then wherever the one is really, there must the other also
be: since things really united together are only distinguished by an
operation of the mind.

Reply Obj. 1: Because the change of the bread and wine is not
terminated at the Godhead or the soul of Christ, it follows as a
consequence that the Godhead or the soul of Christ is in this
sacrament not by the power of the sacrament, but from real
concomitance. For since the Godhead never set aside the assumed body,
wherever the body of Christ is, there, of necessity, must the Godhead
be; and therefore it is necessary for the Godhead to be in this
sacrament concomitantly with His body. Hence we read in the
profession of faith at Ephesus (P. I., chap. xxvi): "We are made
partakers of the body and blood of Christ, not as taking common
flesh, nor as of a holy man united to the Word in dignity, but the
truly life-giving flesh of the Word Himself."

On the other hand, His soul was truly separated from His body, as
stated above (Q. 50, A. 5). And therefore had this sacrament been
celebrated during those three days when He was dead, the soul of
Christ would not have been there, neither by the power of the
sacrament, nor from real concomitance. But since "Christ rising from
the dead dieth now no more" (Rom. 6:9), His soul is always really
united with His body. And therefore in this sacrament the body indeed
of Christ is present by the power of the sacrament, but His soul from
real concomitance.

Reply Obj. 2: By the power of the sacrament there is contained under
it, as to the species of the bread, not only the flesh, but the
entire body of Christ, that is, the bones the nerves, and the like.
And this is apparent from the form of this sacrament, wherein it is
not said: "This is My flesh," but "This is My body." Accordingly,
when our Lord said (John 6:56): "My flesh is meat indeed," there the
word flesh is put for the entire body, because according to human
custom it seems to be more adapted for eating, as men commonly are
fed on the flesh of animals, but not on the bones or the like.

Reply Obj. 3: As has been already stated (Q. 75, A. 5), after the
consecration of the bread into the body of Christ, or of the wine
into His blood, the accidents of both remain. From which it is
evident that the dimensions of the bread or wine are not changed into
the dimensions of the body of Christ, but substance into substance.
And so the substance of Christ's body or blood is under this
sacrament by the power of the sacrament, but not the dimensions of
Christ's body or blood. Hence it is clear that the body of Christ is
in this sacrament _by way of substance,_ and not by way of quantity.
But the proper totality of substance is contained indifferently in a
small or large quantity; as the whole nature of air in a great or
small amount of air, and the whole nature of a man in a big or small
individual. Wherefore, after the consecration, the whole substance of
Christ's body and blood is contained in this sacrament, just as the
whole substance of the bread and wine was contained there before the
consecration.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 2]

Whether the Whole Christ Is Contained Under Each Species of This
Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the whole Christ is not contained under
both species of this sacrament. For this sacrament is ordained for
the salvation of the faithful, not by virtue of the species, but by
virtue of what is contained under the species, because the species
were there even before the consecration, from which comes the power
of this sacrament. If nothing, then, be contained under one species,
but what is contained under the other, and if the whole Christ be
contained under both, it seems that one of them is superfluous in
this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, it was stated above (A. 1, ad 1) that all the other
parts of the body, such as the bones, nerves, and the like, are
comprised under the name of flesh. But the blood is one of the parts
of the human body, as Aristotle proves (De Anima Histor. i). If,
then, Christ's blood be contained under the species of bread, just as
the other parts of the body are contained there, the blood ought not
to be consecrated apart, just as no other part of the body is
consecrated separately.

Obj. 3: Further, what is once _in being_ cannot be again _in
becoming._ But Christ's body has already begun to be in this
sacrament by the consecration of the bread. Therefore, it cannot
begin again to be there by the consecration of the wine; and so
Christ's body will not be contained under the species of the wine,
and accordingly neither the entire Christ. Therefore the whole Christ
is not contained under each species.

_On the contrary,_ The gloss on 1 Cor. 11:25, commenting on the word
"Chalice," says that "under each species," namely, of the bread and
wine, "the same is received"; and thus it seems that Christ is entire
under each species.

_I answer that,_ After what we have said above (A. 1), it must be
held most certainly that the whole Christ is under each sacramental
species yet not alike in each. For the body of Christ is indeed
present under the species of bread by the power of the sacrament,
while the blood is there from real concomitance, as stated above (A.
1, ad 1) in regard to the soul and Godhead of Christ; and under the
species of wine the blood is present by the power of the sacrament,
and His body by real concomitance, as is also His soul and Godhead:
because now Christ's blood is not separated from His body, as it was
at the time of His Passion and death. Hence if this sacrament had
been celebrated then, the body of Christ would have been under the
species of the bread, but without the blood; and, under the species
of the wine, the blood would have been present without the body, as
it was then, in fact.

Reply Obj. 1: Although the whole Christ is under each species, yet it
is so not without purpose. For in the first place this serves to
represent Christ's Passion, in which the blood was separated from the
body; hence in the form for the consecration of the blood mention is
made of its shedding. Secondly, it is in keeping with the use of this
sacrament, that Christ's body be shown apart to the faithful as food,
and the blood as drink. Thirdly, it is in keeping with its effect, in
which sense it was stated above (Q. 74, A. 1) that "the body is
offered for the salvation of the body, and the blood for the
salvation of the soul."

Reply Obj. 2: In Christ's Passion, of which this is the memorial, the
other parts of the body were not separated from one another, as the
blood was, but the body remained entire, according to Ex. 12:46: "You
shall not break a bone thereof." And therefore in this sacrament the
blood is consecrated apart from the body, but no other part is
consecrated separately from the rest.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above, the body of Christ is not under the
species of wine by the power of the sacrament, but by real
concomitance: and therefore by the consecration of the wine the body
of Christ is not there of itself, but concomitantly.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 3]

Whether Christ Is Entire Under Every Part of the Species of the Bread
and Wine?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ is not entire under every part of
the species of bread and wine. Because those species can be divided
infinitely. If therefore Christ be entirely under every part of the
said species, it would follow that He is in this sacrament an
infinite number of times: which is unreasonable; because the infinite
is repugnant not only to nature, but likewise to grace.

Obj. 2: Further, since Christ's is an organic body, it has parts
determinately distant. For a determinate distance of the individual
parts from each other is of the very nature of an organic body, as
that of eye from eye, and eye from ear. But this could not be so, if
Christ were entire under every part of the species; for every part
would have to be under every other part, and so where one part would
be, there another part would be. It cannot be then that the entire
Christ is under every part of the host or of the wine contained in
the chalice.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ's body always retains the true nature of a
body, nor is it ever changed into a spirit. Now it is the nature of a
body for it to be "quantity having position" (Predic. iv). But it
belongs to the nature of this quantity that the various parts exist
in various parts of place. Therefore, apparently it is impossible for
the entire Christ to be under every part of the species.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in a sermon (Gregory,
Sacramentarium): "Each receives Christ the Lord, Who is entire under
every morsel, nor is He less in each portion, but bestows Himself
entire under each."

_I answer that,_ As was observed above (A. 1, ad 3), because the
substance of Christ's body is in this sacrament by the power of the
sacrament, while dimensive quantity is there by reason of real
concomitance, consequently Christ's body is in this sacrament
substantively, that is, in the way in which substance is under
dimensions, but not after the manner of dimensions, which means, not
in the way in which the dimensive quantity of a body is under the
dimensive quantity of place.

Now it is evident that the whole nature of a substance is under every
part of the dimensions under which it is contained; just as the
entire nature of air is under every part of air, and the entire
nature of bread under every part of bread; and this indifferently,
whether the dimensions be actually divided (as when the air is
divided or the bread cut), or whether they be actually undivided, but
potentially divisible. And therefore it is manifest that the entire
Christ is under every part of the species of the bread, even while
the host remains entire, and not merely when it is broken, as some
say, giving the example of an image which appears in a mirror, which
appears as one in the unbroken mirror, whereas when the mirror is
broken, there is an image in each part of the broken mirror: for the
comparison is not perfect, because the multiplying of such images
results in the broken mirror on account of the various reflections in
the various parts of the mirror; but here there is only one
consecration, whereby Christ's body is in this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: Number follows division, and therefore so long as
quantity remains actually undivided, neither is the substance of any
thing several times under its proper dimensions, nor is Christ's body
several times under the dimensions of the bread; and consequently not
an infinite number of times, but just as many times as it is divided
into parts.

Reply Obj. 2: The determinate distance of parts in an organic body
is based upon its dimensive quantity; but the nature of substance
precedes even dimensive quantity. And since the conversion of the
substance of the bread is terminated at the substance of the body of
Christ, and since according to the manner of substance the body of
Christ is properly and directly in this sacrament; such distance of
parts is indeed in Christ's true body, which, however, is not
compared to this sacrament according to such distance, but according
to the manner of its substance, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3).

Reply Obj. 3: This argument is based on the nature of a body, arising
from dimensive quantity. But it was said above (ad 2) that Christ's
body is compared with this sacrament not by reason of dimensive
quantity, but by reason of its substance, as already stated.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 4]

Whether the Whole Dimensive Quantity of Christ's Body Is in This
Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the whole dimensive quantity of Christ's
body is not in this sacrament. For it was said (A. 3) that Christ's
entire body is contained under every part of the consecrated host.
But no dimensive quantity is contained entirely in any whole, and in
its every part. Therefore it is impossible for the entire dimensive
quantity of Christ's body to be there.

Obj. 2: Further, it is impossible for two dimensive quantities to be
together, even though one be separate from its subject, and the other
in a natural body, as is clear from the Philosopher (Metaph. iii).
But the dimensive quantity of the bread remains in this sacrament, as
is evident to our senses. Consequently, the dimensive quantity of
Christ's body is not there.

Obj. 3: Further, if two unequal dimensive quantities be set side by
side, the greater will overlap the lesser. But the dimensive quantity
of Christ's body is considerably larger than the dimensive quantity
of the consecrated host according to every dimension. Therefore, if
the dimensive quantity of Christ's body be in this sacrament together
with the dimensive quantity of the host, the dimensive quantity of
Christ's body is extended beyond the quantity of the host, which
nevertheless is not without the substance of Christ's body.
Therefore, the substance of Christ's body will be in this sacrament
even outside the species of the bread, which is unreasonable, since
the substance of Christ's body is in this sacrament, only by the
consecration of the bread, as stated above (A. 2). Consequently, it
is impossible for the whole dimensive quantity of Christ's body to be
in this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ The existence of the dimensive quantity of any
body cannot be separated from the existence of its substance. But in
this sacrament the entire substance of Christ's body is present, as
stated above (AA. 1, 3). Therefore the entire dimensive quantity of
Christ's body is in this sacrament.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), any part of Christ is in
this sacrament in two ways: in one way, by the power of the
sacrament; in another, from real concomitance. By the power of the
sacrament the dimensive quantity of Christ's body is not in this
sacrament; for, by the power of the sacrament that is present in this
sacrament, whereat the conversion is terminated. But the conversion
which takes place in this sacrament is terminated directly at the
substance of Christ's body, and not at its dimensions; which is
evident from the fact that the dimensive quantity of the bread
remains after the consecration, while only the substance of the bread
passes away.

Nevertheless, since the substance of Christ's body is not really
deprived of its dimensive quantity and its other accidents, hence it
comes that by reason of real concomitance the whole dimensive
quantity of Christ's body and all its other accidents are in this
sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: The manner of being of every thing is determined by
what belongs to it of itself, and not according to what is coupled
accidentally with it: thus an object is present to the sight,
according as it is white, and not according as it is sweet, although
the same object may be both white and sweet; hence sweetness is in
the sight after the manner of whiteness, and not after that of
sweetness. Since, then, the substance of Christ's body is present on
the altar by the power of this sacrament, while its dimensive
quantity is there concomitantly and as it were accidentally,
therefore the dimensive quantity of Christ's body is in this
sacrament, not according to its proper manner (namely, that the whole
is in the whole, and the individual parts in individual parts), but
after the manner of substance, whose nature is for the whole to be in
the whole, and the whole in every part.

Reply Obj. 2: Two dimensive quantities cannot naturally be in the
same subject at the same time, so that each be there according to the
proper manner of dimensive quantity. But in this sacrament the
dimensive quantity of the bread is there after its proper manner,
that is, according to commensuration: not so the dimensive quantity
of Christ's body, for that is there after the manner of substance, as
stated above (ad 1).

Reply Obj. 3: The dimensive quantity of Christ's body is in this
sacrament not by way of commensuration, which is proper to quantity,
and to which it belongs for the greater to be extended beyond the
lesser; but in the way mentioned above (ad 1, 2).
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 5]

Whether Christ's Body Is in This Sacrament As in a Place?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ's body is in this sacrament as in a
place. Because, to be in a place definitively or circumscriptively
belongs to being in a place. But Christ's body seems to be
definitively in this sacrament, because it is so present where the
species of the bread and wine are, that it is nowhere else upon the
altar: likewise it seems to be there circumscriptively, because it is
so contained under the species of the consecrated host, that it
neither exceeds it nor is exceeded by it. Therefore Christ's body is
in this sacrament as in a place.

Obj. 2: Further, the place of the bread and wine is not empty,
because nature abhors a vacuum; nor is the substance of the bread
there, as stated above (Q. 75, A. 2); but only the body of Christ is
there. Consequently the body of Christ fills that place. But whatever
fills a place is there locally. Therefore the body of Christ is in
this sacrament locally.

Obj. 3: Further, as stated above (A. 4), the body of Christ is in
this sacrament with its dimensive quantity, and with all its
accidents. But to be in a place is an accident of a body; hence
"where" is numbered among the nine kinds of accidents. Therefore
Christ's body is in this sacrament locally.

_On the contrary,_ The place and the object placed must be equal, as
is clear from the Philosopher (Phys. iv). But the place, where this
sacrament is, is much less than the body of Christ. Therefore
Christ's body is not in this sacrament as in a place.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1, ad 3; A. 3), Christ's body is
in this sacrament not after the proper manner of dimensive quantity,
but rather after the manner of substance. But every body occupying a
place is in the place according to the manner of dimensive quantity,
namely, inasmuch as it is commensurate with the place according to
its dimensive quantity. Hence it remains that Christ's body is not in
this sacrament as in a place, but after the manner of substance, that
is to say, in that way in which substance is contained by dimensions;
because the substance of Christ's body succeeds the substance of
bread in this sacrament: hence as the substance of bread was not
locally under its dimensions, but after the manner of substance, so
neither is the substance of Christ's body. Nevertheless the substance
of Christ's body is not the subject of those dimensions, as was the
substance of the bread: and therefore the substance of the bread was
there locally by reason of its dimensions, because it was compared
with that place through the medium of its own dimensions; but the
substance of Christ's body is compared with that place through the
medium of foreign dimensions, so that, on the contrary, the proper
dimensions of Christ's body are compared with that place through the
medium of substance; which is contrary to the notion of a located
body.

Hence in no way is Christ's body locally in this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ's body is not in this sacrament definitively,
because then it would be only on the particular altar where this
sacrament is performed: whereas it is in heaven under its own
species, and on many other altars under the sacramental species.
Likewise it is evident that it is not in this sacrament
circumscriptively, because it is not there according to the
commensuration of its own quantity, as stated above. But that it is
not outside the superficies of the sacrament, nor on any other part
of the altar, is due not to its being there definitively or
circumscriptively, but to its being there by consecration and
conversion of the bread and wine, as stated above (A. 1; Q. 15, A. 2,
sqq.).

Reply Obj. 2: The place in which Christ's body is, is not empty; nor
yet is it properly filled with the substance of Christ's body, which
is not there locally, as stated above; but it is filled with the
sacramental species, which have to fill the place either because of
the nature of dimensions, or at least miraculously, as they also
subsist miraculously after the fashion of substance.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (A. 4), the accidents of Christ's body
are in this sacrament by real concomitance. And therefore those
accidents of Christ's body which are intrinsic to it are in this
sacrament. But to be in a place is an accident when compared with the
extrinsic container. And therefore it is not necessary for Christ to
be in this sacrament as in a place.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 6]

