say that they have the power to see fairies as real spiritual beings.

In the evidence about to be presented there has been no selecting in
favour of any one theory; it is presented as discovered. The only
liberty taken with some of the evidence has been to put it into better
grammatical form, and sometimes to recast an ambiguous statement when I,
as collector, had in my own mind no doubt as to its meaning.
Translations have been made as literal as possible; though sometimes it
has been found better to offer the meaning rather than what in English
would be an obscure colloquialism or idiomatic expression. The method
pursued in seeking the evidence has been to penetrate as deeply and in
as natural a way as possible the thoughts of the people who believe in
fairies and like beings, by living among them and observing their
customs and ways of thought, and recording what seemed relevant to the
subject under investigation--chance expressions, and legends told under
various ordinary conditions--rather than to collect long legends or
literary fairy-stories. For these last the reader is referred to the
many excellent works on Celtic folk-lore. We have sought to bring
together, as perhaps has not been done before, the philosophy of the
belief in fairies, rather than the mere fairy-lore itself, though the
two cannot be separated. In giving the evidence concerning fairies, we
sometimes give evidence which, though akin to it and thus worthy of
record, is not strictly fairy-lore. All that we have omitted from the
materials in the form first taken down are stories and accounts of
things not sufficiently related to the world of Faerie to be of value
here.

In no case has testimony been admitted from a person who was known to be
unreliable, nor even from a person who was thought to be unreliable.
Accordingly, the evidence we are to examine ought to be considered good
evidence so far as it goes; and since it represents almost all known
elements of the Fairy-Faith and contains almost all the essential
elements upon which the advocates of the Naturalistic Theory, of the
Pygmy Theory, of the Druid Theory, of the Mythological Theory, as well
as of our own Psychological Theory, must base their arguments, we
consider it very adequate evidence. Nearly every witness is a Celt who
has been made acquainted with the belief in fairies through direct
contact with people who believe in them, or through having heard
fairy-traditions among his own kindred, or through personal
psychological experiences. And it is exceedingly fortunate for us that
an unusually large proportion of these Celtic witnesses are actual
percipients and natural seers, because the eliminations from the
Fairy-Faith to be brought about in chapter iii by means of an
anthropological analysis of evidence will be so extensive that,
scientifically and strictly speaking, there will remain as a residual or
unknown quantity, upon which our final conclusion must depend, solely
the testimony of reliable seer-witnesses. That is to say, no method of
anthropological dissection of the evidence can force aside consideration
of the ultimate truth which may or may not reside in the testimony of
sane and thoroughly reliable seer-witnesses.

Old and young, educated and uneducated, peasant and city-bred, testify
to the actual existence of the Celtic Fairy-Faith; and the evidence from
Roman Catholics stands beside that from Protestants, the evidence of
priests supports that of scholars and scientists, peasant seers have
testified to the same kind of visions as highly educated seers; and what
poets have said agrees with what is told by business men, engineers, and
lawyers. But the best of witnesses, like ourselves, are only human, and
subject to the shortcomings of the ordinary man, and therefore no claim
can be made in any case to infallibility of evidence: all the world over
men interpret visions pragmatically and sociologically, or hold beliefs
in accord with their own personal experiences; and are for ever
unconsciously immersed in a sea of psychological influences which
sometimes may be explainable through the methods of sociological
inquiry, sometimes may be supernormal in origin and nature, and hence to
be explained most adequately, if at all, through psychical research. Our
study is a study of human nature itself, and, moreover, often of human
nature in its most subtle aspects, which are called psychical; and the
most difficult problem of all is for human nature to interpret and
understand its own ultimate essence and psychological instincts. Our
whole aim is to discover what reasonableness may or may not stand behind
a belief so vast, so ancient, so common (contrary to popular non-Celtic
opinion) to all classes of Celts, and so fundamental a shaping force in
European history, religion, and social institutions.

When we state our conviction that the Fairy-Faith is common to all
classes of Celts, we do not state that it is common to all Celts. The
materialization of the age has affected the Fairy-Faith as it has
affected all religious beliefs the world over. This has been pointed out
by Dr. Hyde, by Dr. Carmichael, and by Mr. Jenner in their respective
introductions for Ireland, Scotland, and Cornwall. Nevertheless, the
Fairy-Faith as the folk-religion of the Celtic peoples is still able to
count its adherents by hundreds of thousands. Even in many cases where
Christian theology has been partially or wholly discarded by educated
Celts, in the country or in the city, as being to them in too many
details out of harmony with accepted scientific truths, the belief in
fairies has been jealously retained, and will, so it would seem, be
retained in the future.

We are now prepared to hear about the _Daoine Maithe_, the 'Good
People', as the Irish call their _Sidhe_ race; about the 'People of
Peace', the 'Still-Folk' or the 'Silent Moving Folk', as the Scotch call
their _Sith_ who live in green knolls and in the mountain fastnesses of
the Highlands; about various Manx fairies; about the _Tylwyth Teg_, the
'Fair-Family' or 'Fair-Folk', as the Welsh people call their fairies;
about Cornish Pixies; and about _Fees_ (fairies), _Corrigans_, and the
Phantoms of the Dead in Brittany. And along with these, for they are
very much akin, let us hear about ghosts--sometimes about ghosts who
discover hidden treasure, as in our story of the _Golden Image_--about
goblins, about various sorts of death-warnings generally coming from
apparitions of the dead, or from banshees, about death-candles and
phantom-funerals, about leprechauns, about hosts of the air, and all
kinds of elementals and spirits--in short, about all the orders of
beings who mingle together in that invisible realm called Fairyland.


II. IN IRELAND

     Introduction by DOUGLAS HYDE, LL.D., D. Litt., M.R.I.A. (_An
     Craoibhin Aoibhinn_), President of the Gaelic League; author of _A
     Literary History of Ireland_, &c.

Whatever may be thought of the conclusions drawn by Mr. Wentz from his
explorations into the Irish spirit-world, there can be no doubt as to
the accuracy of the data from which he draws them. I have myself been
for nearly a quarter of a century collecting, off and on, the folk-lore
of Western Ireland, not indeed in the shape in which Mr. Wentz has
collected it, but rather with an eye (partly for linguistic and literary
purposes) to its songs, sayings, ballads, proverbs, and _sgealta_, which
last are generally the equivalent of the German Maerchen, but sometimes
have a touch of the saga nature about them. In making a collection of
these things I have naturally come across a very large amount of
folk-belief conversationally expressed, with regard to the 'good people'
and other supernatural manifestations, so that I can bear witness to the
fidelity with which Mr. Wentz has done his work on Irish soil, for to a
great number of the beliefs which he records I have myself heard
parallels, sometimes I have heard near variants of the stories,
sometimes the identical stories. So we may, I think, unhesitatingly
accept his subject-matter, whatever, as I said, be the conclusions we
may deduce from them.

The folk-tale (_sean-sgeal_) or Maerchen, which I have spent so much time
in collecting, must not be confounded with the folk-belief which forms
the basis of Mr. Wentz's studies. The _sgeal_ or story is something much
more intricate, complicated, and thought-out than the belief. One can
quite easily distinguish between the two. One (the belief) is short,
conversational, chiefly relating to real people, and contains no great
sequence of incidents, while the other (the folk-tale) is long,
complicated, more or less conventional, and above all has its interest
grouped around a single central figure, that of the hero or heroine. I
may make this plainer by an example. Let us go into a cottage on the
mountain-side, as Mr. Wentz and I have done so often, and ask the old
man of the house if he ever heard of such things as fairies, and he will
tell you that 'there is fairies in it surely. Didn't his own father see
the "forth"[10] beyond full of them, and he passing by of a moonlight
night and a little piper among them, and he playing music that mortal
man never heard the like?' or he'll tell you that 'he himself wouldn't
say agin fairies for it's often he heard their music at the old bush
behind the house'. Ask what the fairies are like, and he will tell
you--well, pretty much what Mr. Wentz tells us. From this and the like
accounts we form our ideas of fairies and fairy music, of ghosts,
mermaids, _pucas_, and so on, but there is no sequence of incidents, no
hero, no heroine, no story.

Again, ask the old man if he knows e'er a _sean-sgeal_ (story or
Maerchen), and he will ask you at once, 'Did you ever hear the Speckled
Bull; did you ever hear the Well at the end of the world; did you ever
hear the Tailor and the Three Beasts; did you ever hear the Hornless
Cow?' Ask him to relate one of these, and if you get him in the right
vein, which may be perhaps one time in ten, or if you induce the right
vein, which you may do perhaps nine times out of ten, you will find him
begin with a certain gravity and solemnity at the very beginning, thus,
'There was once, in old times and in old times it was, a king in
Ireland'; or perhaps 'a man who married a second wife'; or perhaps 'a
widow woman with only one son': and the tale proceeds to recount the
life and adventures of the heroes or heroines, whose biographies told in
Irish in a sort of stereotyped form may take from ten minutes to half an
hour to get through. Some stories would burn out a dip candle in the
telling, or even last the whole night. But these stories have little or
nothing to say to the questions raised in this book.

The problem we have to deal with is a startling one, as thus put before
us by Mr. Wentz. Are these beings of the spirit world real beings,
having a veritable existence of their own, in a world of their own, or
are they only the creation of the imagination of his informants, and
the tradition of bygone centuries? The newspaper, the 'National' School,
and the _Zeitgeist_ have answered to their own entire satisfaction that
these things are imagination pure and simple. Yet this off-hand
condemnation does not always carry with it a perfect conviction. We do
not doubt the existence of tree-martins or kingfishers, although nine
hundred and ninety-nine people out of every thousand pass their entire
lives without being vouchsafed a glimpse of them in their live state;
and may it not be the same with the creatures of the spirit world, may
not they also exist, though to only one in a thousand it be vouchsafed
to behold them? The spirit creatures cannot be stuffed and put into
museums, like rare animals and birds, whose existence we might doubt of
if we had not seen them there; yet they may exist just as such animals
and birds do, though we cannot see them. I, at least, have often been
tempted to think so. But the following considerations, partly drawn from
comparative folk-lore, have made me hesitate about definitely accepting
any theory.

In the first place, then, viewing the Irish spirit-world as a whole, we
find that it contains, even on Mr. Wentz's showing, quite a number of
different orders of beings, of varying shapes, appearances, size, and
functions. Are we to believe that all those beings equally exist, and,
on the principle that there can be no smoke without a fire, are we to
hold that there would be no popular conception of the banshee, the
leprechaun, or the _Maighdean-mhara_ (sea-maiden, mermaid), and
consequently no tales told about them, if such beings did not exist, and
from time to time allow themselves to be seen like the wood-martin and
the kingfisher? This question is, moreover, further complicated by the
belief in the appearance of things that are or appear to be inanimate
objects, not living beings, such as the deaf coach or the phantom ship
in full sail, the appearance of which Mr. Yeats has immortalized in one
of his earliest and finest poems.

Again, although the _bean-sidhe_ (banshee), leprechaun, _puca_, and the
like are the most commonly known and usually seen creatures of the
spirit world, yet great quantities of other appearances are believed to
have been also sporadically met with. I very well remember sitting one
night some four or five years ago in an hotel in Indianapolis, U.S.A.,
and talking to four Irishmen, one or two of them very wealthy, and all
prosperous citizens of the United States. The talk happened to turn upon
spirits--the only time during my entire American experiences in which
such a thing happened--and each man of the four had a story of his own
to tell, in which he was a convinced believer, of ghostly manifestations
seen by him in Ireland. Two of these manifestations were of beings that
would fall into no known category; a monstrous rabbit as big as an ass,
which plunged into the sea (rabbits can swim), and a white heifer which
ascended to heaven, were two of them. I myself, when a boy of ten or
eleven, was perfectly convinced that on a fine early dewy morning in
summer when people were still in bed, I saw a strange horse run round a
seven-acre field of ours and change into a woman, who ran even swifter
than the horse, and after a couple of courses round the field
disappeared into our haggard. I am sure, whatever I may believe to-day,
no earthly persuasion would, at the time, have convinced me that I did
not see this. Yet I never saw it again, and never heard of any one else
seeing the same.

My object in mentioning these things is to show that if we concede the
real objective existence of, let us say, the apparently
well-authenticated banshee (_Bean-sidhe_, 'woman-fairy'), where are we
to stop? for any number of beings, more or less well authenticated, come
crowding on her heels, so many indeed that they would point to a far
more extensive world of different shapes than is usually suspected, not
to speak of inanimate objects like the coach and the ship. Of course
there is nothing inherently impossible in all these shapes existing any
more than in one of them existing, but they all seem to me to rest upon
the same kind of testimony, stronger in the case of some, less strong in
the case of others, and it is as well to point out this clearly.

My own experience is that beliefs in the _Sidhe_ (pronounced Shee)
folk, and in other denizens of the invisible world is, in many places,
rapidly dying. In reading folk-lore collections like those of Mr. Wentz
and others, one is naturally inclined to exaggerate the extent and depth
of these traditions. They certainly still exist, and can be found if you
go to search for them; but they often exist almost as it were by
sufferance, only in spots, and are ceasing to be any longer a power.
Near my home in a western county (County Roscommon) rises gently a
slope, which, owing to the flatness of the surrounding regions, almost
becomes a hill, and is a conspicuous object for many miles upon every
side. The old people called it in Irish _Mullach na Sidhe_. This name is
now practically lost, and it is called Fairymount. So extinct have the
traditions of the _Sidhe_-folk, who lived within the hill, become, that
a high ecclesiastic recently driving by asked his driver was there an
Irish name for the hill, and what was it, and his driver did not know.
There took place a few years ago a much talked of bog-slide in the
neighbouring townland of Cloon-Sheever (_Sidhbhair_ or _Siabhra_), 'the
Meadow of the Fairies,' and many newspaper correspondents came to view
it. One of the natives told a sympathetic newspaper reporter, 'Sure we
always knew it was going to move, that's why the place is named
Cloon-Sheever, the bog was always in a "shiver"!' I have never been able
to hear of any legends attached to what must have at one time been held
to be the head-quarters of the _Sidhe_ for a score of miles round it.

Of all the beings in the Irish mythological world the _Sidhe_ are,
however, apparently the oldest and the most distinctive. Beside them in
literature and general renown all other beings sink into insignificance.
A belief in them formerly dominated the whole of Irish life. The _Sidhe_
or Tuatha De Danann were a people like ourselves who inhabited the
hills--not as a rule the highest and most salient eminences, but I think
more usually the pleasant undulating slopes or gentle hill-sides--and
who lived there a life of their own, marrying or giving in marriage,
banqueting or making war, and leading there just as real a life as is
our own. All Irish literature, particularly perhaps the 'Colloquy of
the Ancients' (_Agallamh na Senorach_) abounds with reference to them.
To inquire how the Irish originally came by their belief in these
beings, the _Sidhe_ or Tuatha De Danann, is to raise a question which
cannot be answered, any more than one can answer the question, Where did
the Romans obtain their belief in Bacchus and the fauns, or the Greeks
their own belief in the beings of Olympus?

But granting such belief to have been indigenous to the Irish, as it
certainly seems to have been, then the tall, handsome fairies of Ben
Bulbin and the Sligo district, about whom Mr. Wentz tells us so much
interesting matter, might be accounted for as being a continuation of
the tradition of the ancient Gaels, or _a piece of heredity inherent in
the folk-imagination_. I mean, in other words, that the tradition about
these handsome dwellers within the hill-sides having been handed down
for ages, and having been perhaps exceptionally well preserved in those
districts, people saw just what they had always been told existed, or,
if I may so put it, they saw what they expected to see.

Fin Bheara, the King of the Connacht Fairies in Cnoc Meadha (or
Castlehacket) in the County Galway, his Queen Nuala, and all the
beautiful forms seen by Mr. Wentz's seer-witness (pp. 60 ff.), all the
banshees and all the human figures, white women, and so forth, who are
seen in raths and moats and on hill-sides, are the direct descendants,
so to speak, of the Tuatha De Danann or the _Sidhe_. Of this, I think,
there can be no doubt whatever.

But then how are we to account for the little red-dressed men and women
and the leprechauns? Yet, are they any more wonderful than the pygmies
of classic tradition? Is not the Mermaid to be found in Greece, and is
not the Lorelei as Germanic as the Kelpy is Caledonian. If we grant that
all these are creatures of primitive folk-belief, then how they come to
be so ceases to be a Celtic problem, it becomes a world problem. But
granted, as I say, that they were all creatures of primitive
folk-belief, then their occasional appearances, or the belief in such,
may be accounted for in exactly the same way as I have suggested to be
possible in the case of the Ben Bulbin fairies.

As for the belief in ghosts or _revenants_ (in Irish _tais_ or
_taidhbhse_), it seems to me that this may possibly rest to some extent
upon a different footing altogether. Here we are not confronted by a
different order of beings of different shapes and attributes from our
own, but only with the appearances, amongst the living, of men who were
believed or known to be dead or far away from the scene of their
appearances. Even those who may be most sceptical about the _Sidhe_-folk
and the leprechauns are likely to be convinced (on the mere evidence)
that the existence of 'astral bodies' or 'doubles', or whatever we may
call them, and the appearances of people, especially in the hour of
their death, to other people who were perhaps hundreds of miles away at
the time, is amply proven. Yet whatever may have been the case
originally when man was young, I do not think that this had in later
times any more direct bearing upon the belief in the _Sidhe_, the
leprechauns, the mermaid, and similar beings than upon the belief in the
Greek Pantheon, the naiads, the dryads, or the fauns; all of which
beliefs, probably arising originally from an animistic source, must have
differentiated themselves at a very early period. Of course every real
apparition, every 'ghost' apparition, tends now, and must have tended at
all times, to strengthen every spirit belief. For do not ghost
apparitions belong, in a way, to the same realm as all the others we
have spoken of, that is, to a realm equally outside our normal
experience?

Another very interesting point, and one hitherto generally overlooked,
is this, that different parts of the Irish soil cherish different bodies
of supernatural beings. The North of Ireland believes in beings unknown
in the South, and North-East Leinster has spirits unknown to the West.
Some places seem to be almost given up to special beliefs. Any outsider,
for instance, who may have read that powerful and grisly book, _La
Legende de la Mort_, by M. Anatole Le Braz, in two large volumes, all
about the awful appearances of _Ankou_ (Death), who simply dominates the
folk-lore of Brittany, will probably be very much astonished to know
that, though I have been collecting Irish folk-lore all my life, I have
never met Death figuring as a personality in more than two or three
tales, and these mostly of a trivial or humorous description, though the
Deaf Coach (_Coiste Bodhar_), the belief in which is pretty general,
does seem a kind of parallel to the creaking cart in which _Ankou_
rides.

I would suggest, then, that the restriction of certain forms of spirits,
if I may so call them, to certain localities, may be due to race
intermixture. I would imagine that where the people of a primitive tribe
settled down most strongly, they also most strongly preserved the memory
of those supernatural beings who were peculiarly their own. The
_Sidhe_-folk appear to be pre-eminently and distinctively Milesian, but
the _geancanach_ (name of some little spirit in Meath and portion of
Ulster) may have been believed in by a race entirely different from that
which believed in the _cluracaun_ (a Munster sprite). Some of these
beliefs may be Aryan, but many are probably pre-Celtic.

Is it not strange that while the names and exploits of the great
semi-mythological heroes of the various Saga cycles of Ireland,
Cuchulainn, Conor mac Nessa, Finn, Osgar, Oisin, and the rest, are at
present the inheritance of all Ireland, and are known in every part of
it, there should still be, as I have said, supernatural beings believed
in which are unknown outside of their own districts, and of which the
rest of Ireland has never heard? If the inhabitants of the limited
districts in which these are seen still think they see them, my
suggestion is that the earlier race handed down an account of the
primitive beings believed in by their own tribe, and later generations,
if they saw anything, saw just what they were told existed.

Whilst far from questioning the actual existence of certain spiritual
forms and apparitions, I venture to throw out these considerations for
what they may be worth, and I desire again to thank Mr. Wentz for all
the valuable data he has collected for throwing light upon so
interesting a question.

  RATRA, FRENCHPARK,
    COUNTY ROSCOMMON, IRELAND,
      _September_ 1910.


THE FAIRY FOLK OF TARA

On the ancient Hill of Tara, from whose heights the High Kings once
ruled all Ireland, from where the sacred fires in pagan days announced
the annual resurrection of the sun, the Easter Tide, where the magic of
Patrick prevailed over the magic of the Druids, and where the hosts of
the Tuatha De Danann were wont to appear at the great Feast of _Samain_,
to-day the fairy-folk of modern times hold undisputed sovereignty. And
from no point better than Tara, which thus was once the magical and
political centre of the Sacred Island, could we begin our study of the
Irish Fairy-Faith. Though the Hill has lain unploughed and deserted
since the curses of Christian priests fell upon it, on the calm air of
summer evenings, at the twilight hour, wondrous music still sounds over
its slopes, and at night long, weird processions of silent spirits march
round its grass-grown _raths_ and _forts_.[11] It is only men who fear
the curse of the Christians; the fairy-folk regard it not.

The Rev. Father Peter Kenney, of Kilmessan, had directed me to John
Graham, an old man over seventy years of age, who has lived near Tara
most of his life; and after I had found John, and he had led me from
_rath_ to _rath_ and then right through the length of the site where
once stood the banquet hall of kings and heroes and Druids, as he
earnestly described the past glories of Tara to which these ancient
monuments bear silent testimony, we sat down in the thick sweet grass on
the Sacred Hill and began talking of the olden times in Ireland, and
then of the 'good people':--

_The 'Good People's' Music._--'As sure as you are sitting down I heard
the pipes there in that wood (pointing to a wood on the north-west
slope of the Hill, and west of the banquet hall). I heard the music
another time on a hot summer evening at the Rath of Ringlestown, in a
field where all the grass had been burned off; and I often heard it in
the wood of Tara. Whenever the _good people_ play, you hear their music
all through the field as plain as can be; and it is the grandest kind of
music. It may last half the night, but once day comes, it ends.'

_Who the 'Good People' are._--I now asked John what sort of a race the
'good people' are, and where they came from, and this is his
reply:--'People killed and murdered in war stay on earth till their time
is up, and they are among the _good people_. The souls on this earth are
as thick as the grass (running his walking-stick through a thick clump),
and you can't see them; and evil spirits are just as thick, too, and
people don't know it. Because there are so many spirits knocking (going)
about they must appear to some people. The old folk saw the _good
people_ here on the Hill a hundred times, and they'd always be talking
about them. The _good people_ can see everything, and you dare not
meddle with them. They live in _raths_, and their houses are in them.
The opinion always was that they are a race of spirits, for they can go
into different forms, and can appear big as well as little.'


EVIDENCE FROM KILMESSAN, NEAR TARA

John Boylin, born in County Meath about sixty years ago, will be our
witness from Kilmessan, a village about two miles from Tara; and he,
being one of the men of the vicinity best informed about its folk-lore,
is able to offer testimony of very great value:--

_The Fairy Tribes._--'There is said to be a whole tribe of little red
men living in Glen Odder, between Ringlestown and Tara; and on long
evenings in June they have been heard. There are other breeds or castes
of fairies; and it seems to me, when I recall our ancient traditions,
that some of these fairies are of the Fir Bolgs, some of the Tuatha De
Danann, and some of the Milesians. All of them have been seen
serenading round the western slope of Tara, dressed in ancient Irish
costumes. Unlike the little red men, these fairy races are warlike and
given to making invasions. Long processions of them have been seen going
round the King's Chair (an earthwork on which the Kings of Tara are said
to have been crowned); and they then would appear like soldiers of
ancient Ireland in review.'

_The Fairy Procession._--'We were told as children, that, as soon as
night fell, the fairies from Rath Ringlestown would form in a
procession, across Tara road, pass round certain bushes which have not
been disturbed for ages, and join the _gangkena_ (?) or host of
industrious folk, the red fairies. We were afraid, and our nurses always
brought us home before the advent of the fairy procession. One of the
passes used by this procession happened to be between two mud-wall
houses; and it is said that a man went out of one of these houses at the
wrong time, for when found he was dead: the fairies had _taken_ him
because he interfered with their procession.'[12]

_Death through Cutting Fairy-Bushes._--'A man named Caffney cut as fuel
to boil his pot of potatoes some of these undisturbed bushes round which
the fairies pass. When he put the wood under the pot, though it spat
fire, and fire-sparkles would come out of it, it would not burn. The man
pined away gradually. In six months after cutting the fairy-bushes, he
was dead. Just before he died, he told his experiences with the wood to
his brother, and his brother told me.'

_The Fairies are the Dead._--'According to the local belief, fairies are
the spirits of the departed. Tradition says that Hugh O'Neil in the
sixteenth century, after his march to the south, encamped his army on
the _Rath_ or _Fort_ of Ringlestown, to be assisted by the spirits of
the mighty dead who dwelt within this _rath_. And it is believed that
Gerald Fitzgerald has been seen coming out of the Hill of Mollyellen,
down in County Louth, leading his horse and dressed in the old Irish
costume, with breastplate, spear, and war outfit.'

_Fairy Possession._--'Rose Carroll was possessed by a fairy-spirit. It
is known that her father held communion with evil spirits, and it
appears that they often assisted him. The Carrolls' house was built at
the end of a fairy _fort_, and part of it was scooped out of this
_fort_. Rose grew so peculiar that her folks locked her up. After two
years she was able to shake off the fairy possession by being taken to
Father Robinson's sisters, and then to an old witch-woman in Drogheda.'


IN THE VALLEY OF THE BOYNE

In walking along the River Boyne, from Slane to Knowth and New Grange, I
stopped at the cottage of Owen Morgan, at Ross-na-Righ, or 'the Wood of
the Kings', though the ancient wood has long since disappeared; and as
we sat looking out over the sunlit beauty of Ireland's classic river,
and in full view of the first of the famous _moats_, this is what Owen
Morgan told me:--

_How the Shoemaker's Daughter became the Queen of Tara._--'In olden
times there lived a shoemaker and his wife up there near Moat Knowth,
and their first child was taken by the queen of the fairies who lived
inside the moat, and a little leprechaun left in its place. The same
exchange was made when the second child was born. At the birth of the
third child the fairy queen came again and ordered one of her three
servants to take the child; but the child could not be moved because of
a great beam of iron, too heavy to lift, which lay across the baby's
breast. The second servant and then the third failed like the first, and
the queen herself could not move the child. The mother being short of
pins had used a needle to fasten the child's clothes, and that was what
appeared to the fairies as a beam of iron, for there was virtue in steel
in those days.

'So the fairy queen decided to bestow gifts upon the child; and advised
each of the three servants to give, in turn, a different gift. The first
one said, "May she be the grandest lady in the world"; the second one
said, "May she be the greatest singer in the world"; and the third one
said, "May she be the best mantle-maker in the world." Then the fairy
queen said, "Your gifts are all very good, but I will give a gift of my
own better than any of them: the first time she happens to go out of the
house let her come back into it under the form of a rat." The mother
heard all that the fairy women said, and so she never permitted her
daughter to leave the house.

'When the girl reached the age of eighteen, it happened that the young
prince of Tara, in riding by on a hunt, heard her singing, and so
entranced was he with the music that he stopped to listen; and, the song
ended, he entered the house, and upon seeing the wonderful beauty of the
singer asked her to marry him. The mother said that could not be, and
taking the daughter out of the house for the first time brought her back
into it in an apron under the form of a rat, that the prince might
understand the refusal.

'This enchantment, however, did not change the prince's love for the
beautiful singer; and he explained how there was a day mentioned with
his father, the king, for all the great ladies of Ireland to assemble in
the Halls of Tara, and that the grandest lady and the greatest singer
and the best mantle-maker would be chosen as his wife. When he added
that each lady must come in a chariot, the rat spoke to him and said
that he must send to her home, on the day named, four piebald cats and a
pack of cards, and that she would make her appearance, provided that at
the time her chariot came to the Halls of Tara no one save the prince
should be allowed near it; and, she finally said to the prince, "Until
the day mentioned with your father, you must carry me as a rat in your
pocket."

'But before the great day arrived, the rat had made everything known to
one of the fairy women, and so when the four piebald cats and the pack
of cards reached the girl's home, the fairies at once turned the cats
into the four most splendid horses in the world, and the pack of cards
into the most wonderful chariot in the world; and, as the chariot was
setting out from the Moat for Tara, the fairy queen clapped her hands
and laughed, and the enchantment over the girl was broken, so that she
became, as before, the prettiest lady in the world, and she sitting in
the chariot.

'When the prince saw the wonderful chariot coming, he knew whose it was,
and went out alone to meet it; but he could not believe his eyes on
seeing the lady inside. And then she told him about the witches and
fairies, and explained everything.

'Hundreds of ladies had come to the Halls of Tara from all Ireland, and
every one as grand as could be. The contest began with the singing, and
ended with the mantle-making, and the young girl was the last to appear;
but to the amazement of all the company the king had to give in (admit)
that the strange woman was the grandest lady, the greatest singer, and
the best mantle-maker in Ireland; and when the old king died she became
the Queen of Tara.'

After this ancient legend, which Owen Morgan heard from the old folks
when he was a boy, he told me many anecdotes about the 'good people' of
the Boyne, who are little men usually dressed in red.

_The 'Good People' at New Grange._--Between Knowth and New Grange I met
Maggie Timmons carrying a pail of butter-milk to her calves; and when we
stopped on the road to talk, I asked her, in due time, if any of the
'good people' ever appeared in the region, or about New Grange, which we
could see in the field, and she replied, in reference to New Grange:--'I
am sure the neighbours used to see the _good people_ come out of it at
night and in the morning. The _good people_ inherited the _fort_.'

Then I asked her what the 'good people' are, and she said:--'When they
disappear they go like fog; they must be something like spirits, or how
could they disappear in that way? I knew of people,' she added, 'who
would milk in the fields about here and spill milk on the ground for the
_good people_; and pots of potatoes would be put out for the _good
people_ at night.' (See chap. viii for additional New Grange folk-lore.)


THE TESTIMONY OF AN IRISH PRIEST

We now pass directly to West Ireland, in many ways our most important
field, and where of all places in the Celtic world the Fairy-Faith is
vigorously alive; and it seems very fitting to offer the first
opportunity to testify in behalf of that district to a scholarly priest
of the Roman Church, for what he tells us is almost wholly the result of
his own memories and experiences as an Irish boy in Connemara,
supplemented in a valuable way by his wider and more mature knowledge of
the fairy-belief as he sees it now among his own parishioners:--

_Knock Ma Fairies._--'Knock Ma, which you see over there, is said to
contain excavated passages and a palace where the fairies live, and with
them the people they have _taken_. And from the inside of the hill there
is believed to be an entrance to an underground world. It is a common
opinion that after consumptives die they are there with the fairies in
good health. The wasted body is not taken into the hill, for it is
usually regarded as not the body of the deceased but rather as that of a
changeling, the general belief being that the real body and the soul are
carried off together, and those of an old person from Fairyland
substituted. The old person left soon declines and dies.'

_Safeguards against Fairies._--'It was proper when having finished
milking a cow to put one's thumb in the pail of milk, and with the wet
thumb to make the sign of the cross on the thigh of the cow on the side
milked, to be safe against fairies. And I have seen them when churning
put a live coal about an inch square under the churn, because it was an
old custom connected with fairies.'

_Milk and Butter for Fairies._--'Whatever milk falls on the ground in
milking a cow is taken by the fairies, for fairies need a little milk.
Also, after churning, the knife which is run through the butter in
drying it must not be scraped clean, for what sticks to it belongs to
the fairies. Out of three pounds of butter, for example, an ounce or two
would be left for the fairies. I have seen this several times.'

_Crossing a Stream, and Fairies._--'When out on a dark night, if pursued
by fairies or ghosts one is considered quite safe if one can get over
some stream. I remember coming home on a dark night with a boy companion
and hearing a noise, and then after we had run to a stream and crossed
it feeling quite safe.'

_Fairy Preserves._--'A heap of stones in a field should not be
disturbed, though needed for building--especially if they are part of an
ancient tumulus. The fairies are said to live inside the pile, and to
move the stones would be most unfortunate. If a house happens to be
built on a fairy preserve, or in a fairy track, the occupants will have
no luck. Everything will go wrong. Their animals will die, their
children fall sick, and no end of trouble will come on them. When the
house happens to have been built in a fairy track, the doors on the
front and back, or the windows if they are in the line of the track,
cannot be kept closed at night, for the fairies must march through. Near
Ballinrobe there is an old _fort_ which is still the preserve of the
fairies, and the land round it. The soil is very fine, and yet no one
would dare to till it. Some time ago in laying out a new road the
engineers determined to run it through the _fort_, but the people rose
almost in rebellion, and the course had to be changed. The farmers
wouldn't cut down a tree or bush growing on the hill or preserve for
anything.'

_Fairy Control over Crops._--'Fairies are believed to control crops and
their ripening. A field of turnips may promise well, and its owner will
count on so many tons to the acre, but if when the crop is gathered it
is found to be far short of the estimate, the explanation is that the
fairies have extracted so much substance from it. The same thing is the
case with corn.'

_November Eve and Fairies._--'On November Eve it is not right to gather
or eat blackberries or sloes, nor after that time as long as they last.
On November Eve the fairies pass over all such things and make them
unfit to eat. If one dares to eat them afterwards one will have serious
illness. We firmly believed this as boys, and I laugh now when I think
how we used to gorge ourselves with berries on the last day of October,
and then for weeks after pass by bushes full of the most luscious fruit,
and with mouths watering for it couldn't eat it.'

_Fairies as Flies._--'There is an old abbey on the river, in County
Mayo, and people say the fairies had a great battle near it, and that
the slaughter was tremendous. At the time, the fairies appeared as
swarms of flies coming from every direction to that spot. Some came from
Knock Ma, and some from South Ireland, the opinion being that fairies
can assume any form they like. The battle lasted a day and a night, and
when it was over one could have filled baskets with the dead flies which
floated down the river.'

_Those who Return from Faerie._--'Persons in a short trance-state of two
or three days' duration are said to be away with the fairies enjoying a
festival. The festival may be very material in its nature, or it may be
purely spiritual. Sometimes one may thus go to Faerie for an hour or
two; or one may remain there for seven, fourteen, or twenty-one years.
The mind of a person coming out of Fairyland is usually a blank as to
what has been seen and done there. Another idea is that the person knows
well enough all about Fairyland, but is prevented from communicating the
knowledge. A certain woman of whom I knew said she had forgotten all
about her experiences in Faerie, but a friend who heard her objected,
and said she did remember, and wouldn't tell. A man may remain awake at
night to watch one who has been to Fairyland to see if that one holds
communication with the fairies. Others say in such a case that the
fairies know you are on the alert, and will not be discovered.'


THE TESTIMONY OF A GALWAY PIPER

_Fairies=Sidheoga._--According to our next witness, Steven Ruan, a piper
of Galway, with whom I have often talked, there is one class of fairies
'who are nobody else than the spirits of men and women who once lived
on earth'; and the banshee is a dead friend, relative, or ancestor who
appears to give a warning. 'The fairies', he says, 'never care about old
folks. They only _take_ babies, and young men and young women. If a
young wife dies, she is said to have been _taken_ by _them_, and ever
afterwards to live in Fairyland. The same things are said about a young
man or a child who dies. Fairyland is a place of delights, where music,
and singing, and dancing, and feasting are continually enjoyed; and its
inhabitants are all about us, as numerous as the blades of grass.'

_A Fairy Dog._--In the course of another conversation, Steven pointed to
a rocky knoll in a field not far from his home, and said:--'I saw a dog
with a white ring around his neck by that hill there, and the oldest men
round Galway have seen him, too, for he has been here for one hundred
years or more. He is a dog of the _good people_, and only appears at
certain hours of the night.'

_An Old Piper in Fairyland._--And before we had done talking, the
subject of fairy-music came up, and the following little story coming
from one of the last of the old Irish pipers himself, about a brother
piper, is of more than ordinary value:--'There used to be an old piper
called Flannery who lived in Oranmore, County Galway. I imagine he was
one of the old generation. And one time the _good people_ took him to
Fairyland to learn his profession. He studied music with them for a long
time, and when he returned he was as great a piper as any in Ireland.
But he died young, for the _good people_ wanted him to play for them.'


THE TESTIMONY OF 'OLD PATSY' OF ARANMORE

Our next witness is an old man, familiarly called 'Old Patsy', who is a
native of the Island of Aranmore, off the coast from Galway, and he
lives on the island amid a little group of straw-thatched fishermen's
homes called Oak Quarter. As 'Old Patsy' stood beside a rude stone cross
near Oak Quarter, in one of those curious places on Aranmore, where each
passing funeral stops long enough to erect a little memorial pile of
stones on the smooth rocky surface of the roadside enclosure, he told me
many anecdotes about the mysteries of his native island.

_Aranmore Fairies._--Twenty years or so ago round the _Bedd_ of Dermot
and Grania, just above us on the hill, there were seen many fairies,
'crowds of them,' said 'Old Patsy', and a single deer. They began to
chase the deer, and followed it right over the island. At another time
similar little people chased a horse. 'The rocks were full of them, and
they were small fellows.'

_A Fairy Beating--in a Dream._--'In the South Island,' he continued, 'as
night was coming on, a man was giving his cow water at a well, and, as
he looked on the other side of a wall, he saw many strange people
playing hurley. When they noticed him looking at them, one came up and
struck the cow a hard blow, and turning on the man cut his face and body
very badly. The man might not have been so badly off, but he returned to
the well after the first encounter and got five times as bad a beating;
and when he reached home he couldn't speak at all, until the cock crew.
Then he told about his adventures, and slept a little. When he woke up
in the daylight he was none the worse for his beating, for the fairies
had rubbed something on his face.' Patsy says he knew the man, who if
still alive is now in America, where he went several years ago.

_Where Fairies Live._--When I asked Patsy where the fairies live, he
