That is a very easy thing to say, but it is an uncommonly hard thing
honestly to apply. For there are plenty of people that are smitten with
very unusual humility whenever you begin to talk to them about work.
'It is not in my way,' 'I am not capable of that kind of service,' and
so on, and so on. One would believe in the genuineness of the excuse
more readily if there were anything about which such people said,
'Well, I _can_ do that, at all events'; but such an all-round modesty,
which is mostly observable when service is called for, is suspicious.
It might be well for some of these retiring and idle Christians to
remember the homely wisdom of 'You never know what you can do till you
try.' On the other hand, there are many Christians who, for want of
honest looking into their own power, for want of what I call sanctified
originality, are content to run in the ruts that other people's
vehicles have made, without asking themselves whether that is the gauge
that their wheels are fit for. Both these sets of people flagrantly
neglect the plain law that what we have settles what we should give.

The form as well as the measure of our service is determined thereby.
'She hath done what she could,' said Jesus Christ about Mary. We often
read that, as if it were a kind of apology for a sentimental and
useless gift, because it was the best that she could bestow. I do not
hear that tone in the words at all. I hear, rather, this, that duty is
settled by faculty, and that nobody else has any business to interfere
with that which a Christian soul, all aflame with the love of God,
finds to be the spontaneous and natural expression of its devotion to
the Master. The words are the vindication of the form of loving
service; but let us not forget that they are also a very stringent
requirement as to its measure, if it is to please Christ. 'What she
could'; the engine must be worked up to the last ounce of pressure that
it will stand. All must be got out of it that can be got out of it. Is
that the case about us? We talk about hard work for Christ. Have any of
us ever, worked up to the edge of our capacity? I am afraid that if the
principles that lie in this catalogue were applied to us, whether about
our gold and silver, or about our more precious spiritual and mental
possessions, _we_ could not say, 'Every man with whom was found' this,
that, and the other, 'brought it for the work.'

III. Notice, again, how in this list of offerings there comes out the
great thought of the infinite variety of forms of service and offering,
which are all equally needful and equally acceptable.

The list begins with 'bracelets, and earrings, and rings, and tablets,
all jewels of gold.' And then it goes on to 'blue, and purple, and
scarlet, and fine linen, and red skins of rams, and badgers' skins, and
shittim wood.' And then we read that the 'women did spin with their
hands, and brought that which they had spun'--namely, the same things
as have been already catalogued, 'the blue, and purple, and scarlet,
and fine linen.' That looks as if the richer gave the raw material, and
the women gave the labour. Poor women! they could not give, but they
could spin. They had no stores, but they had ten fingers and a distaff,
and if some neighbour found the stuff, the ten fingers joyfully set the
distaff twirling, and spun the yarn for the weavers. Then there were
others who willingly undertook the rougher work of spinning, not dainty
thread for the rich soft stuffs whose colours were to glow in the
sanctuary, but the coarse black goat's hair which was to be made into
the heavy covering of the roof of the tabernacle. No doubt it was less
pleasant labour than the other, but it got done by willing hands. And
then, at the end of the whole enumeration, there comes, 'And the rulers
brought precious stones, and spices, and oil,' and all the expensive
things that were needed. The large subscriptions are at the bottom of
the list, and the smaller ones are in the place of honour. All this
just teaches us this--what a host of things of all degrees of
preciousness in men's eyes go to make God's great building!

So various were the requirements of the work on hand. Each man's gift
was needed, and each in its place was equally necessary. The jewels on
the high-priest's breastplate were no more nor less essential than the
wood that made some peg for a curtain, or than the cheap goat's-hair
yarn that was woven into the coarse cloth flung over the roof of the
Tabernacle to keep the wet out. All had equal consecration, because all
made one whole. All was equally precious, if all was given with the
same spirit. So there is room for all sorts of work in Christ's great
house, where there are not only 'vessels of gold and of silver, but
also of wood and of earth,' and all 'unto honour ... meet for the
Master's use.' The smallest deed that co-operates to a great end is
great. 'The more feeble are necessary.' Every one may find a corner
where his special possession will work into the general design. If I
have no jewels to give, I can perhaps find some shittim wood, or, if I
cannot manage even that, I can at least spin some other person's yarn,
even though I have only a distaff, and not a loom to weave it in. Many
of us can do work only when associated with others, and can render best
service by helping some more highly endowed. But all are needed, and
welcomed, and honoured, and rewarded. The owner of all the slaves sets
one to be a water-carrier, and another to be his steward. It is of
little consequence whether the servant be Paul or Timothy, the Apostle
or the Apostle's helper. 'He worketh the work of the Lord, as I also
do,' said the former about the latter. All who are associated in the
same service are on one level.

I remember once being in the treasury of a royal palace. There was a
long gallery in which the Crown valuables were stored. In one
compartment there was a great display of emeralds, and diamonds, and
rubies, and I know not what, that had been looted from some Indian
rajah or other. And in the next case there lay a common quill pen, and
beside it a little bit of discoloured coarse serge. The pen had signed
some important treaty, and the serge was a fragment of a flag that had
been borne triumphant from a field where a nation's destinies had been
sealed. The two together were worth a farthing at the outside, but they
held their own among the jewels, because they spoke of brain-work and
bloodshed in the service of the king. Many strangely conjoined things
lie side by side in God's jewel-cases. Things which people vulgarly
call large and valuable, and what people still more vulgarly call small
and worthless, have a way of getting together there. For in that place
the arrangement is not according to what the thing would fetch if it
were sold, but what was the thought in the mind and the emotion in the
heart which gave it. Jewels and camel's hair yarn and gold and silver
are all massed together. Wood is wanted for the Temple quite as much as
gold and silver and precious stones.

So, whatever we have, let us bring that; and whatever we are, let us
bring that. If we be poor and our work small, and our natures limited,
and our faculties confined, it does not matter. A man is accepted
'according to that he hath, and not according to that he hath not.' God
does not ask how much we have given or done, if we have given or done
what we could. But He does ask how much we have kept back, and takes
strict account of the unsurrendered possessions, the unimproved
opportunities, the unused powers. He gives much who gives all, though
his all be little; he gives little who gives a part, though the part be
much. The motive sanctifies the act, and the completeness of the
consecration magnifies it. 'Great' and 'small' are not words for God's
Kingdom, in which the standard is not quantity but quality, and quality
is settled by the purity of the love which prompts the deed, and the
consequent thoroughness of self-surrender which it expresses. Whoever
serves God with a whole heart will render to Him a whole strength, and
will thus bring Him the gifts which He most desires.




THE COPIES OF THINGS IN THE HEAVENS


    'And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, 2. On the first
    day of the first month shalt thou set up the tabernacle
    of the tent of the congregation. 3. And thou shalt put
    therein the ark of the testimony, and cover the ark with
    the vail. 4. And thou shalt bring in the table, and set
    in order the things that are to be set in order upon it;
    and thou shalt bring in the candlestick, and light the
    lamps thereof. 5. And thou shalt set the altar of gold
    for the incense before the ark of the testimony, and put
    the hanging of the door to the tabernacle. 6. And thou
    shalt set the altar of the burnt offering before the
    door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation.
    7. And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of the
    congregation and the altar, and shalt put water therein.
    8. And thou shalt set up the court round about, and hang
    up the hanging at the court gate. 9. And thou shalt take
    the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all
    that is therein, and shalt hallow it, and all the vessels
    thereof: and it shall be holy. 10. And thou shalt anoint
    the altar of the burnt offering, and all his vessels,
    and sanctify the altar: and it shall be an altar most
    holy. 11. And thou shalt anoint the laver and his foot,
    and sanctify it. 12. And thou shalt bring Aaron and his
    sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
    and wash them with water. 13. And thou shalt put upon
    Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify
    him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.
    14. And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with
    coats: 15. And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst
    anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in
    the priest's office; for their anointing shall surely
    be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.
    16. Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord
    commanded him, so did he.'--EXODUS xl. 1-16.

The Exodus began on the night after the fourteenth day of the first
month. The Tabernacle was set up on the first day of the first month;
that is, one year, less a fortnight, after the Exodus. Exodus xix. 1
shows that the march to Sinai took nearly three months; and if to this
we add the eighty days of Moses' seclusion on the mountain, we get
about six months as occupied in preparing the materials for the
Tabernacle. 'Setting it up' was a short process, done in a day. The
time specified was ample to get ready a wooden framework of small
dimensions, with some curtains and coverings of woven stuffs. What a
glad stir there would be in the camp on that New Year's day, when the
visible token of God's dwelling in its midst first stood there! Our
present purpose is simply to try to bring out the meaning of the
Tabernacle and its furniture. It was both a symbol and a type; that is,
it expressed in material form certain great religious needs and truths;
and, just because it did so, it pointed onwards to the full expression
and satisfaction of these in Christ Jesus and His gifts. In other
words, it was a parable of the requisites for, and the blessings of,
communion with God.

Note, then, first, the general lesson of the Tabernacle as a whole. Its
name declares its meaning, 'the tent of meeting' (Rev. Ver.). It was
the meeting-place of God with man, as the name is explained in Exodus
xxix. 42, 'where I will meet with you, to speak there unto thee.' It is
also named simply 'the dwelling'; that is, of God. It was pitched in
the midst of the camp, like the tent of the king with his subjects
clustered round him. Other nations had temples, like the solemn
structures of Egypt; but this slight, movable sanctuary was a new
thing, and spoke of the continual presence of Israel's God, and of His
loving condescension in sharing their wandering lives, and, like them,
dwelling 'within curtains.' It was a visible representation of a
spiritual fact for the then present; it was a parable of the inmost
reality of communion between man and God; and it was, therefore, a
prophecy both of the full realisation of His presence among men, in the
temple of Christ's body, and of the yet future communion of Heaven,
which is set before us by the 'great voice ... saying, Behold, the
tabernacle of God is with men.'

The threefold division into court of the worshippers, holy place for
the priests, and holiest of all, was not peculiar to the Tabernacle. It
signifies the separation which, after all nearness, must still exist.
God is unrevealed after all revelation; afar off, however near;
shrouded in the utter darkness of the inmost shrine, and only
approached by the priestly intercessor with the blood of the sacrifice.
Like all the other arrangements of the Sanctuary, the division of its
parts declares a permanent truth, which has impressed itself on the
worship of all nations; and it reveals God's way of meeting the need by
outward rites for the then present, and by the mediation of the great
High-Priest in the time to come, whose death rent the veil, and whose
life will, one day, make the holiest place in the heavens patent to our
feet.

The enumeration of the furniture of the Tabernacle starts from the
innermost shrine, and goes outward. It was fit that it should begin
with God's special abode. The 'holy of holies' was a tiny chamber,
closed in from light, the form, dimensions, materials, and furniture of
which were all significant. It measured ten cubits, or fifteen feet,
every way, thereby expressing, in its cubical form and in the
predominance of the number ten, stability and completeness. It will be
remembered that the same cubical form is given to the heavenly city, in
the Apocalypse, for the same reason. There, in the thick darkness,
unseen by mortals except for the one approach of the high-priest on the
day of atonement, dwelt the 'glory' which made light in the darkness,
and flashed on the gold which covered all things in the small shrine.

Our lesson does not speak of cherubim or mercy-seat, but specifies only
the ark of the testimony. This was a small chest of acacia wood,
overlaid with gold, and containing the two tables of the law, which
were called the testimony, as bearing witness to Israel of God's will
concerning their duty, and as therein bearing witness, too, of what He
is. Nor must the other part of the witness-bearing of the law be left
out of view,--that it testifies against the transgressors of itself.
The ark was the centre-point of the divine revelation, the very throne
of God; and it is profoundly significant that its sole contents should
be the tables of stone. Egyptian arks contained symbols of their gods,
degrading, bestial, and often impure; but the true revelation was a
revelation, to the moral sense, of a Being who loves righteousness.
Other faiths had their mysteries, whispered in the inmost shrine, which
shunned the light of the outer courts; but here the revelation within
the veil was the same as that spoken on the house-tops. Our lesson does
not refer to the 'mercy seat,' which covered the ark above, and spoke
the need for, and the provision of, a means whereby the witness of the
law against the worshipper's sins should be, as it were, hid from the
face of the enthroned God. The veil which is referred to in verse 3 was
that which hung between the holy of holies and the holy place. It did
not 'cover the ark,' as the Authorised Version unfortunately renders,
but 'screened' it, as the Revised Version correctly gives it. It blazed
with colour and embroidered figures of cherubim. No doubt, the colours
were symbolical; but it is fancy, rather than interpretation, which
seeks meanings beyond splendour in the blue and purple and crimson and
white which were blended in its gorgeous folds. What is it which hangs,
in ever-shifting hues, between man and God? The veil of creation,
embroidered by His own hand with beauty and life, which are symbolised
in the cherubim, the types of the animate creation. The two divisions
of the Tabernacle, thus separated by the veil, correspond to earth and
heaven; and that application of the symbol is certainly intended,
though not exclusively.

We step, then, from the mystery of the inner shrine out to the
comparatively inferior sacredness of the 'holy place,' daily trodden by
the priests. Three articles stand in it: the table for the so-called
shew-bread, the great lampstand, and the golden altar of incense. Of
these, the altar was in the midst, right in the path to the holiest
place; and on the right, looking to the veil, the table of shew-bread;
while on the left was the lampstand. These three pieces of furniture
were intimately connected with each other, and represented various
aspects of the spiritual character of true worshippers. The holy place
was eminently the people's, just as the most holy place was eminently
God's. True, only the priests entered it; but they did so on behalf of
the nation. We may expect, therefore, to find special reference to the
human side of worship in its equipments; and we do find it. Of the
three articles, the altar of incense was in idea, as in locality, the
centre; and we consider it first, though it stands last in our list,
suggesting that, in coming from the most holy place, the other two
would be first encountered. The full details of its construction and
use are found in Exodus xxx. Twice a day sweet incense was burned on
it, and no other kind of sacrifice was permitted; but once a year it
was sprinkled, by the high priest, with expiatory blood. The meaning is
obvious. The symbolism of incense as representing prayer in frequent in
Scripture, and most natural. What could more beautifully express the
upward aspirations of the soul, or the delight of God in these, than
the incense sending up its wreaths of fragrant smoke? Incense gives no
fragrance nor smoke till it is kindled; and the censer has to be
constantly swung to keep up the glow, without which there will be no
'odour of a sweet smell.' So cold prayers are no prayers, but are
scentless, and unapt to rise. The heart must be as a coal of fire, if
the prayer is to come up before God with acceptance. Twice a day the
incense was kindled; and all day long, no doubt, it smouldered, 'a
perpetual incense before the Lord.' So, in the life of true communion,
there should be daily seasons of special devotion, and a continual
glow. The position of the altar of incense was right in the line
between the altar of burnt offering, in the outer court, and the
entrance to the holiest place; by which we are taught that acceptable
prayer follows on reconciliation by sacrifice, and leads into 'the
secret place of the Most High.' The yearly atonement for the altar
taught that evil imperfection cleaves to all our devotion, which needs
and receives the sprinkling of the blood of the great sacrifice.

The great seven-branched candlestick, or lampstand, stood on the right
of the altar, as the priest looked to the most holy place. Its meaning
is plain. It is an emblem of the Church as recipient and communicative
of light, in all the applications of that metaphor, to a dark world. As
the sacred lamps streamed out their hospitable rays into the desert all
the night, so God's servants are lights in the world. The lamps burned
with derived light, which had to be fed as well as kindled. So we are
lighted by the touch of the great Aaron, and His gentle hand tends the
smoking wick, and nourishes it to a flame. We need the oil of the
Spirit to sustain the light. The lamp was a clustered light,
representing in its metal oneness the formal and external unity of
Israel. The New Testament unity is of a better kind. The seven
candlesticks are made one because He walks in the midst, not because
they are welded on to one stem.

Consistency of symbolism requires that the table of shew-bread should,
like the altar and the candlestick, express some phase of true worship.
Its interpretation is less obvious than that of the other two. The name
means literally 'bread of the face'; that is, bread presented to, and
ever lying before, God. There are two explanations of the meaning. One
sees in the offering only a devout recognition of God as the author of
material blessing, and a rendering to Him of His gifts of outward
nourishment. In this case, the shew-bread would be anomalous, a
literality thrust into the midst of symbolism. The other explanation
keeps up the congruity, by taking the material bread, which is the
result of God's blessing on man's toil, as a symbol of the spiritual
results of God's blessing on man's spiritual toil, or, in other words,
of practical righteousness or good works, and conceives that these are
offered to God, by a strong metaphor, as acceptable food. It is a bold
representation, but we may quote 'I will sup with him' as proof that it
is not inadmissible; and it is not more bold than the declaration that
our obedience is 'an odour of a sweet smell.' So the three pieces of
furniture in the holy place spoke of the true Israel, when cleansed by
sacrifice and in communion with God, as instant in prayer, continually
raying out the light derived from Him, and zealous of good works,
well-pleasing to God.

We pass outwards, through another veil, and stand in the court, which
was always open to the people. There, before the door of the
Tabernacle, was the altar of burnt offering. The order of our chapter
brings us to it last, but the order of worship brought the worshipper
to it first. Its distinctive character was that on it the blood of the
slain sacrifices was offered. It was the place where sinful men could
begin to meet with God, the foundation of all the communion of the
inner sanctuary. We need not discuss mere details of form and the like.
The great lesson taught by the altar and its place, is that
reconciliation is needed, and is only possible by sacrifice. As a
symbol it taught every Israelite what his own conscience, once
awakened, endorsed, that sin must be expiated before the sinner and God
can walk in concord. As prophecy, it assured those whose hearts were
touched with longing, that God would Himself 'provide the lamb for the
burnt offering,' in some way as yet unknown. For us it is an intended
prefiguration of the great work of Jesus Christ. 'We have an altar.' We
need that altar at the beginning of our fellowship with God, as much as
Israel did. A Christianity which does not start from the altar of burnt
offering will never get far into the holy place, nor ever reach that
innermost shrine where the soul lives and adores, silent before the
manifest God between the cherubim.

The laver, or basin, was intended for the priests' use, in washing
hands and feet before ministering at the altar or entering the
tabernacle. It teaches the necessity for purity, in order to priestly
service.

Thus these three divisions of the Tabernacle and its court set forth
the stages in the approach of the soul to God, beginning with the
reconciling sacrifice and cleansing water, advancing to closer
communion by prayer, impartation of light received, and offering of
good works to God, and so entering within the veil into secret
sweetnesses of union with God, which attains its completeness only when
we pass from the holy place on earth to the most holy in the heavens.

The remainder of the text can only be glanced at in a sentence or two.
It consists of two parts: the consecration of the Tabernacle and its
vessels by the anointing oil which, when applied to inanimate objects,
simply devoted them to sacred uses, and the consecration of Aaron and
his sons. A fuller account is given in Leviticus viii., from which we
learn that it was postponed to a later period, and accompanied with a
more elaborate ritual than that prescribed here. That consists of three
parts: washing, as emblematic of communicated purity; robing, and
anointing,--the last act signifying, when applied to men, their
endowment with so much of the divine Spirit as fitted them for their
theocratic functions. These three things made the 'sanctifying,' or
setting apart for God's service, of Aaron and his sons. He is
consecrated alone, in order that his primacy may be clearly indicated.
He is consecrated by Moses as the higher; then the sons are consecrated
with the same ceremonial, to indicate the hereditary priesthood, and
the equality of Aaron's successors with himself. 'They truly were many
priests, because they were not suffered to continue by reason of
death,' and provision for their brief tenure of office was embodied in
the consecration of the sons by the side of the father. Their
priesthood was only 'everlasting' by continual succession of
short-lived holders of the office. But the prediction which closes the
text has had a fulfilment beyond these fleeting, shadowy priests, in
Him whose priesthood is 'everlasting' and 'throughout all generations.'
because 'He ever liveth to make intercession' (Heb. vii. 25).




THE BOOK OF LEVITICUS


THE BURNT OFFERING A PICTURE AND A PROPHECY

    'And the Lord called unto Moses, and spake unto him out
    of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, 2. Speak
    unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, If any
    man of you bring an offering unto the Lord, ye shall
    bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and
    of the flock. 3. If his offering be a burnt-sacrifice of
    the herd, let him offer a male without blemish: he shall
    offer it of his own voluntary will, at the door of the
    tabernacle of the congregation before the Lord. 4. And he
    shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt-offering;
    and it shall be accepted for him, to make atonement for
    him. 5. And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord:
    and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall bring the blood,
    and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that
    is by the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
    6. And he shall flay the burnt offering, and cut it into
    his pieces. 7. And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put
    fire upon the altar, and lay the wood in order upon the
    fire: 8. And the priests, Aaron's sons, shall lay the
    parts, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wood that
    is on the fire which is upon the altar: 9. But his inwards
    and his legs shall he wash in water: and the priest shall
    burn all on the altar, to be a burnt sacrifice, an
    offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord.'
    --LEV. i. 1-9.

In considering the Jewish sacrificial system, it is important to
distinguish the symbolical from the typical value of the sacrifices.
The former could scarcely be quite unnoticed by the offerers; but the
latter was only gradually made plain, was probably never very generally
seen, and is a great deal clearer to us, in the light of Christ, the
Antitype, than it could ever have been before His coming. As symbols,
the sacrifices expressed great eternal truths as to spiritual worship
and communion, its hindrances, requisites, manner, and blessings. They
were God's picture-book for these children in religious development. As
types, they shadowed the work of Jesus Christ and its results.

The value of the sacrifices in either aspect is independent of modern
questions as to their Mosaic origin; for at whatever period the
Priest's Code was promulgated, it equally bears witness to the ruling
ideas of the offerings, and, in any case, it was long before Christ
came, and therefore its prophecy of Him is as supernatural, whether
Moses or Ezra were its author. I make this remark, not as implying that
the new theory is not revolutionary, but simply as absolving a student
of the religious significance of the sacrificial system from entering
here on questions of date.

The 'burnt offering' stands first in Leviticus for several reasons. It
was derived from patriarchal times; it was offered twice daily, besides
frequently on other occasions; and in its significance it expressed the
complete consecration which should be the habitual state of the true
worshipper. Its name literally means 'that which ascends,' and refers,
no doubt, to the ascent of the transformed substance of the sacrifice
in fire and smoke, as to God. The central idea of this sacrifice, then,
as gathered from its name and confirmed by its manner, is that of the
yielding of the whole being in self-surrender, and borne up by the
flame of intense consecration to God. Very beautiful is the variety of
material which was permitted. The poor man's pair of pigeons went up
with as sweet an odour as the rich man's young bull. God delights in
the consecration to Him of ourselves and our powers, no matter whether
they be great or small, if only the consecration be thorough, and the
whole being be wrapped in the transforming blaze.

It is worth while to try to realise the strange and to our eyes
repulsive spectacle of the burnt offering, which is veiled from us by
its sacred associations. The worshipper leads up his animal by some
rude halter, and possibly resisting, to the front of the Tabernacle,
the courts of which he dared not tread, but which was to him the
dwelling-place of God. There by the altar he stands, and, first
pressing his hand with force on the victim's head, he then, with one
swift cut, kills it, and as the warm blood spouts from the mangled
throat, the attendant priest catches it in a basin, and, standing at
the two diagonally opposite corners of the altar in turn, dashes, with
one dexterous twist, half of the contents against each, so as to wet
two sides of the altar with one throw, and the other two with the
other. The offerer then flays the reeking carcase, tossing the gory
hide to the priest as his perquisite, and cuts up the sacrifice
according to a fixed method. His part of the work is done, and he
stands by with bloody hands while the priests arrange the pieces on the
pile on the altar; and soon the odour of burning flesh and the thick
smoke hanging over the altar tell that the rite is complete. What a
scene it must have been when, as on some great occasions, hundreds of
burnt offerings were offered in succession! The place and the
attendants would look to us liker shambles and butchers than God's
house and worshippers.

Now, if we inquire into the significance of the offering, it turns on
two points--expiation and burning. The former it has in common with
other bloody sacrifices, though it presents features of its own, even
in regard to expiation. But the latter is peculiar to it, and must
therefore be taken to be its special teaching. The stages in the whole
process are five: the presentation, laying on of hands, slaughter,
sprinkling of blood, and burning of the whole carcase. The first three
are alike in this and other sacrifices, the fourth is modified here,
and the last is found here only. Each has its lesson. The offerer has
himself to bring the animal to the door of the Tabernacle, that he may
show his willing surrender of a valuable thing. As he stands there with
his offering, his thoughts would pass into the inner shrine, where God
dwelt; and he would, if he were a true worshipper, feel that while God,
on His part, already dwelt in the midst of the people, he, on the other
hand, can only enter into the enjoyment of His presence by sacrifice.
The offering was to be 'a male without blemish'; for bodily defect
symbolising moral flaw could not be tolerated in the offerings to a
holy God, who requires purity, and will not be put off with less than a
man's best, be it ox or pigeon. 'The torn and the lame and the sick,'
which Malachi charged his generation with bringing, are neither worthy
of God to receive nor of us to offer. When he pressed his hand on the
head of the sacrifice, what was the worshipper meant to think? In all
other instances where hands are laid on, some transference or
communication of gifts or qualities is implied; and it is natural to
suppose that the same meaning attaches to the act here, with such
modifications as the case requires. We find that it was done in other
bloody sacrifices, accompanied with confession. Nothing is said of
confession here; but we cannot dismiss the idea that the offerer laid
his sins on the victim by that striking act, especially as the very
next clause says 'it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for
him.' The atonement was made, as we shall see, by the application of
the blood to the altar; but the possibility of the victim's blood
atoning for the offerer depended on his having laid his hands on its
head. We may perhaps go farther than 'transference of sins.' Might we
not widen the expression, and say 'identification,' or, to use a word
which has become so worn by religious controversy that it slips through
our fingers unnoticed, 'substitution'? Did not the offerer say in
effect, by that act, 'This is I? This animal life shall die, as I ought
to die. It shall go up as a sweet savour to Jehovah, as my being
should.'

The animal invested with this representative character is next to be
slain by the offerer, not by the priest, who only performed that part
of the ritual in the case of national or public sacrifices. That was
distinctly a vicarious death; and, as inflicted by the hand of the
person represented by the animal, he thereby acknowledged that its
death was the wages of his sin, and allowed the justice of his
condemnation, while he presented this innocent life--innocent because
not that of a moral being--as his substitute. So far the worshipper's
part goes. But now, when the act of expiation is to be symbolically
represented, and, so far as outward sacrifice could, is to be
accomplished, another actor appears. The priest comes forward as
mediator between God and man, and applies the blood to the altar. The
difference between the sprinkling of the blood, in the burnt offerings
and in the other sacrifices, which had expiation for their principal
object, in some of which it was smeared on the horns of the altar, and,
in the most solemn of all, was carried into the holiest place, and
sprinkled on the mercy-seat, suggests that the essential character of
the burnt offering was not expiatory, though expiation was the
foundation on which alone the essential character could be reared. The
application of the blood was the formal act by which atonement was
made. The word rendered 'to make atonement' means 'to cover'; and the
idea conveyed is that the blood, which is the life of the sacrifice,
covers the sins of the offerer, so as to make them powerless to dam
back the love or to precipitate the wrath of God.

With this act the expiatory portion of the ritual ends, and we may here
pause to look back for a moment on it as a whole. We have pointed out
the double bearings of the Mosaic ritual as symbolical and as typical
or prophetic. In the former aspect, the emphatic teaching of this rite
is that 'the wages of sin is death,' that 'without shedding of blood
there is no remission,' that God has appointed sacrifice as the means
of entering into fellowship with Him, and that substitution and
vicarious penalty are facts in His government. We may like or dislike
these thoughts; we may call them gross, barbarous, immoral, and the
like, but, at all events, we ought not to deny that they are ingrained
in the Mosaic sacrificial system, which becomes unmeaning elaboration
of empty and often repulsive ceremonies, if they are not recognised as
its very centre. Of course, the meaning of the sacrifices was hidden
from many a worshipper. They became opaque instead of transparent, and
hid the great truth which they were meant to reveal. All forms labour
under that disadvantage; but that they were significant in design, and
largely so to devout hearts in effect, admits of no reasonable doubt.
That which they signified was chiefly the putting away of sin by the
sacrifice of innocent life, which stood in the place of the guilty. Of
course, too, their benefit was symbolical, and the blood of bulls and
goats could never put away sin; but, under the shelter of the outward
forms, a more spiritual insight gradually grew up, such as breathes in
many a psalm, and such as, we cannot doubt, filled the heart of many a
worshipper, as he stood by the bleeding sacrifice on which his own
hands had laid the burden that had weighed so heavy on himself. How far
the prophetic aspect of the sacrifices was discerned, is a more
difficult question. But this at least we know--that the highest level
of evangelical prophecy, in Isaiah's wonderful fifty-third chapter, is
reached from this vantage-ground. It is the flower of which these
ordinances are the root. We need not enlarge upon the prophetic aspect
of the sacrifice. The mere negative sinlessness of the victim points to
the 'Lamb without blemish and without spot,' on whom, as Isaiah says,
in language dyed through and through with sacrificial references, 'the
Lord hath made to meet the iniquity of us all,' and who Himself makes
'His soul an offering for sin.' The modern tendency to bring down the
sacrificial system to a late date surely sins against the sacred and
all-explaining law of evolution, in the name of which it is attempted,
inasmuch as it is an unheard-of thing for the earlier stages of a
religion to be less clogged with ceremonial than the later. Psalmist
and prophet first, and priest afterwards, is not the order of
development.

The remaining part of the ritual was, as we have pointed out, peculiar
to the burnt offering. In it alone the whole of the sacrifice was
consumed on the altar, with the exceptions of the skin, which was given
to the priest, and of the contents of the intestines. Hence it was
sometimes called 'a whole burnt offering.' The meaning of this
provision may be apprehended if we note that the word rendered 'burn,'
in verse 9, is not that which simply implies destruction by fire, but
is a peculiar word, reserved for sacrificial burnings, and meaning 'to
cause to ascend in smoke or vapour.' The gross flesh was, as it were,
refined into vapour and odour, and went up to God as 'a sweet savour.'
It expressed, therefore, the transformation of the sinful human nature
of the worshipper, by the refining power of the fire of God, into
something more ethereal and kindred with the heaven to which it rose.
Or, to put the thought in plainer words, on the basis of expiation, the
glad surrender of the whole being is possible and will ensue; and when
a man yields himself in joyful self-surrender to the God who has
forgiven his sins, then the fire of the divine Spirit is shed abroad in
his heart, and kindles a flame which lays hold on all the gross,
earthly elements of his being, and changes them into fire, kindred with
itself, which aspires, in ruddy tongues of upward-leaping light, to the
God to whom the heart has been surrendered, and to whom the whole being
tends.

This is the purpose of expiation; this is the summit of all religion.
One man has realised to the full, in his life, what the burnt offering
taught as the goal for all worshippers. Jesus has lived in the constant
exercise of perfect self-surrender, and in the constant unmeasured
possession of 'the Spirit of burning,' with which He has come to
baptize us all. If we look to Him as our expiation, we should also find
in Him the power to yield ourselves 'living sacrifices,' and draw from
Him the sacred and refining fire, which shall transform our grossness
into His likeness, and make even us 'acceptable to God, through Jesus
Christ.'




STRANGE FIRE


    'And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, took either of
    them his censer, and put fire therein, and put incense
    thereon, and offered strange fire before the Lord, which
    He commanded them not. 2. And there went out fire from
    the Lord, and devoured them, and they died before the
    Lord. 3. Then Moses said unto Aaron, This is it that
    the Lord spake, saying, I will be sanctified in them
    that come nigh Me, and before all the people I will be
    glorified. And Aaron held his peace. 4. And Moses called
    Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of
    Aaron, and said unto them, Come near, carry your brethren
    from before the sanctuary out of the camp. 5. So they went
    near, and carried them in their coats out of the camp; as
    Moses had said. 6. And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto
    Eleazar and unto Ithamar, his sons. Uncover not your
    heads, neither rend your clothes; lest ye die, and lest
    wrath come upon all the people: but let your brethren,
    the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which the
    Lord hath kindled. 7. And ye shall not go out from the
    door of the tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die:
    for the anointing oil of the Lord is upon you. And they
    did according to the word of Moses. 8. And the Lord
    spake unto Aaron, saying, 9. Do not drink wine nor strong
    drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the
    tabernacle of the congregation, lest ye die: it shall be
    a statute for ever throughout your generations; 10. And
    that ye may put difference between holy and unholy, and
    between unclean and clean; 11. And that ye may teach the
    children of Israel all the statutes which the Lord hath
    spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.'--LEV. x. 1-11.

This solemn story of sin and punishment is connected with the preceding
chapter by a simple 'and.' Probably, therefore, Nadab and Abihu
'offered strange fire,' immediately after the fire from Jehovah had
consumed the appointed sacrifice. Their sin was aggravated by the time
of its being committed. But a week had passed since the consecration of
their father and themselves as priests. The first sacrifices had just
been offered, and here, in the very blossoming time, came a vile
canker. If such licence in setting aside the prescriptions of the newly
established sacrificial order asserted itself then, to what lengths
might it not run when the first impression of sanctity and of God's
commandment had been worn by time and custom? The sin was further
aggravated by the sinners being priests, who were doubly obliged to
punctilious adherence to the instituted ritual. If they set the example
of contempt, would not the people better (or, rather, worsen) their
instruction?

Unquestionably, their punishment was awfully severe. But we shall
entirely misconceive their sin if we judge it by our standards. We are
not dependent on forms as Israel was, but the spiritual religion of
Christianity was only made possible by the externalism of the older
system. The sweet kernel would not have softened and become juicy
without the shelter of the hard shell. Scaffolding is needed to erect a
building; and he is not a wise man who either despises or would keep
permanently standing the scaffold poles.

We draw a broad distinction between positive commandments and moral or
religious obligations. But in the Mosaic legislation that distinction
does not exist. There, all precepts are God's uttered will, and all
disobedience is rebellion against Him. Nor could it be otherwise at the
stage of development which Israel had reached.

What, then, was the crime of these two rash sons of Aaron? That
involves two questions: What did they do? and What was the sin of doing
it? The former question may be answered in various ways. Certainly the
designation of 'strange fire' seems best explained by the usual
supposition that it means fire not taken from the altar. The other
explanations, which make the sin to have been offering at an
unauthorised time, or offering incense not compounded according to the
prescription, give an unnatural meaning to the phrase. It was the
'fire' which was wrong,--that is, it was 'fire which they had kindled,'
caught up from some common culinary hearth, or created by themselves in
some way.

What was their sin in thus offering it? Plainly, the narrative points
to the essence of the crime in calling it 'fire which He had not
commanded.' So this was their crime, that they were tampering with the
appointed order which but a week before they had been consecrated to
conserve and administer; that they were thus thrusting in self-will and
personal caprice, as of equal authority with the divine commandment;
that they were arrogating the right to cut and carve God's
appointments, as the whim or excitement of the moment dictated; and
that they were doing their best to obliterate the distinction on the
preservation of which religion, morality, and the national existence
depended; namely, the distinction between holy and common, clean and
unclean. To plough that distinction deep into the national
consciousness was no small part of the purpose of the law; and here
were two of its appointed witnesses disregarding it, and flying in its
face. The flash of holy fire consuming the sacrifices had scarcely
faded off their eyeballs when they thus sinned.

They have had many successors, not only in Israel, while a ritual
demanding punctilious conformity lasted, but in Christendom since.
Alas! our censers are often flaming with 'strange fire.' How much
so-called Christian worship glows with self-will or with partisan zeal!
When we seek to worship God for what we can get, when we rush into His
presence with hot, eager desires which we have not subordinated to His
will, we are burning 'strange fire which He has not commanded.' The
only fire which should kindle the incense in our censers, and send it
up to heaven in fragrant wreaths, is fire caught from the altar of
sacrifice. God must kindle the flame in our hearts if we are to render
these else cold hearts to Him.

  'The prayers I bring will then be sweet indeed
   If Thou the Spirit give, by which I pray.'

The swift, terrible punishment does indeed bear marks of the severity
of that earlier stage of revelation. But it was not disproportioned to
the offence, and it was not the cruelty of a martinet who avenged
