nothing, when others are rejoicing in the slow result of winter
showers and of their toilsome hours. So, in all life, if the fitting
moments for preparation are neglected, late repentance avails nothing.
The student who dawdles when he should be working, will be sure to
fail when the examination comes on. It is useless to begin ploughing
when your neighbours are driving their reaping machines into the
fields. 'There is a time to sow, and a time to reap.' The law is
inexorable for this life, and not less certainly so for the life to
come. The virgins who cried in vain, 'Lord, Lord, open to us!' and
were answered, 'Too late, too late, ye cannot enter now!' are sisters
of the man who was hindered from ploughing because it was cold, and
asked in vain for bread when harvest time had come. 'To-day, if ye
will to hear His voice, harden not your hearts.'

The next proverb is a piece of shrewd common sense. It sets before us
two men, one reticent, and the other skilful in worming out designs
which he wishes to penetrate. The former is like a deep draw-well; the
latter is like a man who lets down a bucket into it, and winds it up
full. 'Still waters are deep.' The faculty of reading men may be
abused to bad ends, but is worth cultivating, and may be allied to
high aims, and serve to help in accomplishing these. It may aid good
men in detecting evil, in knowing how to present God's truth to hearts
that need it, in pouring comfort into closely shut spirits. Not only
astute business men or politicians need it, but all who would help
their fellows to love God and serve Him--preachers, teachers, and the
like. And there would be more happy homes if parents and children
tried to understand one another. We seldom dislike a man when we come
to know him thoroughly. We cannot help him till we do.

The proverb in verse 6 is susceptible of different renderings in the
first clause. Delitzsch and others would translate, 'Almost every man
meets a man who is gracious to him.' The contrast will then be between
partial 'grace' or kindness, and thoroughgoing reliableness or
trustworthiness. The rendering of the Authorised and Revised Versions,
on the other hand, makes the contrast between talk and reality,
professions of goodwill and acts which come up to these. In either
case, the saying is the bitter fruit of experience. Even charity,
which 'believeth all things,' cannot but admit that soft words are
more abundant than deeds which verify them. It is no breach of the law
of love to open one's eyes to facts, and so to save oneself from
taking paper money for gold, except at a heavy discount. Perhaps the
reticence, noted in the previous proverb, led to the thought of a
loose-tongued profession of kindliness as a contrast. Neither the one
nor the other is admirable. The practical conclusion from the facts in
this proverb is double--do not take much heed of men's eulogiums on
their own benevolence; do not trumpet your own praises. Caution and
modesty are parts of Christian perfection.

The last saying points to the hereditary goodness which sometimes, for
our comfort, we do see, as well as to the halo from a saintly parent
which often surrounds his children. Note that there may be more than
mere succession in time conveyed by the expression 'after him.' It may
mean following in his footsteps. Such children are blessed, both in
men's benedictions and in their own peaceful hearts. Weighty
responsibilities lie upon the children of parents who have transmitted
to them a revered name. A Christian's children are doubly bound to
continue the parental tradition, and are doubly criminal if they
depart from it. There is no sadder sight than that of a godly father
wailing over an ungodly son, unless it be that of the ungodly son who
makes him wail. Absalom hanging by his curls in the oak-tree, and
David groaning, 'My son, my son!' touch all hearts. Alas that the
tragedy should be so often repeated in our homes to-day!



THE SLUGGARD IN HARVEST

'The sluggard will not plow by reason of the cold; therefore shall he
beg in harvest, and have nothing.'--PROVERBS xx. 4.


Like all the sayings of this book, this is simply a piece of plain,
practical common sense, intended to inculcate the lesson that men
should diligently seize the opportunity whilst it is theirs. The
sluggard is one of the pet aversions of the Book of Proverbs, which,
unlike most other manuals of Eastern wisdom, has a profound reverence
for honest work.

He is a great drone, for he prefers the chimney-corner to the field,
even although it cannot have been very cold if the weather was open
enough to admit of ploughing. And he is a great fool, too, for he buys
his comfort at a very dear price, as do all men who live for to-day,
and let to-morrow look out for itself.

But like most of the other sayings of this book, my text contains
principles which are true in the highest regions of human life, for
the laws which rule up there are not different from those which
regulate the motions of its lower phases. Religion recognises the same
practical common-sense principles that daily business does. I venture
to take this as my text now, in addressing young people, because they
have special need of, and special facilities for, the wisdom which it
enjoins; and because the words only want to be turned with their faces
heavenwards in order to enforce the great appeal, the only one which
it is worth my while to make, and worth your while to come here to
listen to; the appeal to each of you, 'I beseech you, by the mercies
of God, that ye yield yourselves to God' _now_.

My object, then, will be perhaps best accomplished if I simply ask you
to look, first, at the principles involved in this quaint proverb;
and, secondly, to apply them in one or two directions.

I. First, then, let us try to bring out the principles which are
crystallised in this picturesque saying.

The first thought evidently is: present conduct determines future
conditions. Life is a series of epochs, each of which has its destined
work, and that being done, all is well; and that being left undone,
all is ill.

Now, of course, in regard to many of the accidents of a man's
condition, his conduct is only one, and by no means the most powerful,
of the factors which settle them. The position which a man fills, the
tasks which he has to perform, and the whole host of things which make
up the externals of his life, depend upon far other conditions than
any that he brings to them. But yet on the whole it is true that what
a man does, and is, settles how he fares. And this is the mystical
importance and awful solemnity of the most undistinguished moments and
most trivial acts of this awful life of ours, that each of them has an
influence on all that comes after, and may deflect our whole course
into altogether different paths. It is not only the moments that we
vulgarly and blindly call great which settle our condition, but it is
the accumulation of the tiny ones; the small deeds, the unnoticed
acts, which make up so large a portion of every man's life. It is
these, after all, that are the most powerful in settling what we shall
be. There come to each of us supreme moments in our lives. Yes! and if
in all the subordinate and insignificant moments we have not been
getting ready for them, but have been nurturing dispositions and
acquiring habits, and cultivating ways of acting and thinking which
condemn us to fail beneath the requirements of the supreme moment,
then it passes us by, and we gain nothing from it. Tiny mica flakes
have built up the Matterhorn, and the minute acts of life after all,
by their multiplicity, make up life to be what it is. 'Sand is heavy,'
says this wise book of Proverbs. The aggregation of the minutest
grains, singly so light that they would not affect the most delicate
balance, weighs upon us with a weight 'heavy as frost, and deep almost
as life.' The mystic significance of the trivialities of life is that
in them we largely make destiny, and that in them we wholly make
character.

And now, whilst this is true about all life, it is especially true
about youth. You have facilities for moulding your being which some of
us older men would give a great deal to have again for a moment, with
our present knowledge and bitter experience. The lava that has
solidified into hard rock with us is yet molten and plastic with you.
You can, I was going to say, be anything you make up your minds to;
and, within reasonable limits, the bold saying is true. 'Ask what thou
wilt and it shall be given to thee' is what nature and Providence,
almost as really as grace and Christ, say to every young man and
woman, because you are the arbiters, not wholly, indeed, of your
destiny, and are the architects, altogether, of your character, which
is more.

And so I desire to lay upon your hearts this threadbare old truth,
because you are living in the ploughing time, and the harvest is
months ahead. Whilst it is true that every day is the child of all the
yesterdays, and the parent of all the to-morrows, it is also true that
life has its predominant colouring, varying at different epochs, and
that for you, though you are largely inheriting, even now, the results
of your past, brief as it is, still more largely is the future, the
plastic future, in your hands, to be shaped into such forms as you
will. 'The child is father of the man,' and the youth has the blessed
prerogative of standing before the mouldable to-morrow, and possessing
a nature still capable of being cast into an almost infinite variety
of form.

But then, not only do you stand with special advantages for making
yourselves what you will, but you specially need to be reminded of the
terrible importance and significance of each moment. For this is the
very irony of human life, that we seldom awake to the sense of its
importance till it is nearly ended, and that the period when
reflection would avail the most is precisely the period when it is the
least strong and habitual. What is the use of an old man like me
thinking about what he could make of life if he had it to do over
again, as compared with the advantage of your doing it? Yet I dare say
that for once that you think thus, my contemporaries do it fifty
times. So, not to abate one jot of your buoyancy, not to cast any
shadow over joys and hopes, but to lift you to a sense of the blessed
possibilities of your position, I want to lay this principle of my
text upon your consciences, and to beseech you to try to keep it
operatively in mind--you are making yourselves, and settling your
destiny, by every day of your plastic youth.

There is another principle as clear in my text--viz., the easy road is
generally the wrong one. The sluggard was warmer at the fireside than
he would be in the field with his plough in the north wind, and so he
stopped there. There are always obstacles in the way of noble life. It
is always easier, as flesh judges, to live ignobly than to live as
Jesus Christ would have us live. 'Endure hardness' is the commandment
to all who would be soldiers of any great cause, and would not fling
away their lives in low self-indulgence. If a man is going to be
anything worth being, or to do anything worth doing, he must start
with, and adhere to this, 'to scorn delights and live laborious days.'
And only then has he a chance of rising above the fat dull weed that
rots in Lethe's stream, and of living anything like the life that it
becomes him to live.

Be sure of this, dear young friends, that self-denial and rigid
self-control, in its two forms, of stopping your ears to the
attractions of lower pleasures, and of cheerily encountering
difficulties, is an indispensable condition of any life which shall at
the last yield a harvest worth the gathering, and not destined to be

  'Cast as rubbish to the void,
  When God hath made the pile complete.'

Never allow yourselves to be turned away from the plain path of duty
by any difficulties. Never allow yourselves to be guided in your
choice of a road by the consideration that the turf is smooth, and the
flowers by the side of it sweet. Remember, the sluggard would have
been warmer, with a wholesome warmth, at the ploughtail than cowering
in the chimney corner. And the things that seem to be difficulties and
hardships only need to be fronted to yield, like the east wind in its
season, good results in bracing and hardening. Fix it in your minds
that nothing worth doing is done but at the cost of difficulty and
toil.

That is a lesson that this generation wants, even more than some that
have lived. I suppose it is one of the temptations of older men to
look askance upon the amusements of younger ones, but I cannot help
lifting up here one word of earnest appeal to the young men and women
of this congregation, and beseeching them, as they value the nobleness
of their own lives, and their power of doing any real good, to beware
of what seems to me the altogether extravagant and excessive love, and
following after, of mere amusement which characterises this day to so
large an extent. Better toil than such devotion to mere relaxation.

The last principle here is that the season let slip is gone for ever.
Whether my text, in its second picture, intends us to think of the
sluggard when the harvest came as 'begging' from his neighbours; or
whether, as is possibly the construction of the Hebrew, it simply
means to describe him as going out into his field, and looking at it,
and asking for the harvest and seeing nothing there but weeds, the
lesson it conveys is the same--the old, old lesson, so threadbare that
I should be almost ashamed of taking up your time with it unless I
believed that you did not lay it to heart as you should. Opportunity
is bald behind, and must be grasped by the forelock. Life is full of
tragic _might-have-beens_. No regret, no remorse, no
self-accusation, no clear recognition that I was a fool will avail one
jot. The time for ploughing is past; you cannot stick the share into
the ground when you should be wielding the sickle. 'Too late' is the
saddest of human words. And, my brother, as the stages of our lives
roll on, unless each is filled as it passes with the discharge of the
duties, and the appropriation of the benefits which it brings, then,
to all eternity, that moment will never return, and the sluggard may
beg in harvest, that he may have the chance to plough once more, and
have none. The student that has spent the term in indolence, perhaps
dissipation, has no time to get up his subject when he is in the
examination-room, with the paper before him. And life, and nature, and
God's law, which is the Christian expression for the heathen one of
_nature_, are stern taskmasters, and demand that the duty shall
be done in its season or left undone for ever.

II. In the second place, let me, just in a few words, carry the lamp
of these principles of my text and flash its rays upon one or two
subjects.

Let me say a word, first, about the lowest sphere to which my text
applies. I referred at the beginning of this discourse to this proverb
as simply an inculcation of the duty of honest work, and of the
necessity of being wide awake to opportunities in our daily work. Now,
the most of you young men, and many of you young women, are destined
for ordinary trades, professions, walks in commerce; and I do not
suppose it to be beneath the dignity of the pulpit to say this: Do not
trust to any way of getting on by dodges or speculation, or favour, or
anything but downright hard work. Don't shirk difficulties, don't try
to put the weight of the work upon some colleague or other, that you
may have an easier life of it. Set your backs to your tasks, and
remember that 'in all labour there is profit'; and whether the profit
comes to you in the shape of advancement, position, promotion in your
offices, partnerships perhaps, wealth, and the like, or no, the profit
lies in the work. Honest toil is the key to pleasure.

Then, let me apply the text in a somewhat higher direction. Carry
these principles with you in the cultivation of that important part of
yourself--your intellects. What would some of us old students give if
we had the flexibility, the power of assimilating new truth, the
retentive memories, that you young people have? Some of you, perhaps,
are students by profession; I should like all of you to make a
conscience of making the best of your brains, as God has given them to
you, a trust. 'The sluggard will not plough by reason of the cold.'
The dawdler will read no books that tax his intellect, therefore shall
he beg in harvest and have nothing. Amidst all the flood of feeble,
foolish, flaccid literature with which we are afflicted at this day, I
wonder how many of you young men and women ever set yourselves to some
great book or subject that you cannot understand without effort.
Unless you do you are not faithful stewards of the supreme gift of God
to you of that great faculty which apprehends and lives upon truth. So
remember the sluggard by his fireside; and do you get out with your
plough.

Again I say, apply these principles to a higher work still--that of
the formation of character. Nothing will come to you noble, great,
elevating, in that direction, unless it is sought, and sought with
toil.

  'In woods, in waves, in wars, she wont to dwell,
  And will be found with peril and with pain;
  Before her gate high Heaven did sweat ordain,
  And wakeful watches ever to abide.'

Wisdom and truth, and all their elevating effects upon human
character, require absolutely for their acquirement effort and toil.
You have the opportunity still. As I said a moment ago--you may mould
yourselves into noble forms. But in the making of character we have to
work as a painter in fresco does, with a swift brush on the plaster
while it is wet. It sets and hardens in an hour. And men drift into
habits which become tyrannies and dominant before they know where they
are. Don't let yourselves be shaped by accident, by circumstance.
Remember that you can build yourselves up into forms of beauty by the
help of the grace of God, and that for such building there must be the
diligent labour and the wise clutching at opportunity and
understanding of the times which my text suggests.

And, lastly, let these principles applied to religion teach us the
wisdom and necessity of beginning the Christian life at the earliest
moment. I am by no means prepared to say that the extreme tragedy of
my text can ever be wrought out in regard to the religious experience
of any man here on earth, for I believe that at any moment in his
career, however faultful and stained his past has been, and however
long and obstinate has been his continuance in evil, a man may turn
himself to Jesus Christ, and beg, and not in vain, nor ever find
'nothing' there.

But whilst all that is quite true, I want you, dear young friends, to
lay this to heart, that if you do not yield yourselves to Jesus Christ
now, in your early days, and take Him for your Saviour, and rest your
souls upon Him, and then take Him for your Captain and Commander, for
your Pattern and Example, for your Companion and your Aim, you will
lose what you can never make up by any future course. You lose years
of blessedness, of peaceful society with Him, of illumination and
inspiration. You lose all the sweetness of the days which you spend
away from Him. And if at the end you did come to Him, you would have
one regret, deep and permanent, that you had not gone to Him before.
If you put off, as some of you are putting off, what you know you
ought to do--namely, give your hearts to Jesus Christ and become
His--think of what you are laying up for yourselves thereby. You get
much that it would be gain to lose--bitter memories, defiled
imaginations, stings of conscience, habits that it will be very hard
to break, and the sense of having wasted the best part of your lives,
and having but the fag end to bring to Him. And if you put off, as
some of you are disposed to do, think of the risk you run. It is very
unlikely that susceptibilities will remain if they are trifled with.
You remember that Felix trembled once, and sent for Paul often; but we
never hear that he trembled any more. And it is quite possible, and
quite likely, more likely than not, that you will never be as near
being a Christian again as you are now, if you turn away from the
impressions that are made upon you at this moment, and stifle the
half-formed resolution.

But there is a more solemn thought still. This life as a whole is to
the future life as the ploughing time is to the harvest, and there are
awful words in Scripture which seem to point in the same direction in
reference to the irrevocable and irreversible issue of neglected
opportunities on earth, as this proverb does in regard to the
ploughing and harvests of this life.

I dare not conceal what seems to me the New Testament confirmation and
deepening of the solemn words of our text, 'He shall beg in harvest
and have nothing,' by the Master's words, 'Many shall say to me in
that day, Lord! Lord I and I will say, I never knew you.' The five
virgins who rubbed their sleepy eyes and asked for oil when the master
was at hand got none, and when they besought, 'Lord! Lord! open to
us,' all the answer was, 'Too late! too late! ye cannot enter now.'
Now, while it is called day, harden not your hearts.



BREAD AND GRAVEL

'"Bread of deceit" is sweet to a man; but afterwards his mouth shall
be filled with gravel.'--PROVERBS xx. 17.


'Bread of deceit' is a somewhat ambiguous phrase, which may mean
either of two things, and perhaps means both. It may either mean any
good obtained by deceit, or good which deceives in its possession. In
the former signification it would appear to have reference primarily
to unjustly gotten gain, while in the latter it has a wider meaning
and applies to all the worthless treasures and lying delights of life.
The metaphor is full of homely vigour, and the contrast between the
sweet bread and the gravel that fills the mouth and breaks the teeth,
carries a solemn lesson which is perpetually insisted upon in this
book of Proverbs, and confirmed in every man's experience.

I. The first lesson here taught is the perpetuity of the most
transient actions.

We are tempted to think that a deed done is done with, and to grasp at
momentary pleasure, and ignore its abiding consequences. But of all
the delusions by which men are blinded to the true solemnity of life
none is more fatal than that which ignores the solemn 'afterwards'
that has to be taken into account. For, whatever issues in outward
life our actions may have, they have all a very real influence on
their doers; each of them tends to modify character, to form habits,
to drag after itself a whole trail of consequences. Each strikes
inwards and works outwards. The whole of a life may be set forth in
the pregnant figure, 'A sower went forth to sow,' and 'Whatsoever a
man soweth, that shall he also reap.' The seed may lie long dormant,
but the green shoots will appear in due time, and pass through all the
stages of 'first the blade, and then the ear, and after that the full
corn in the ear.' The sower has to become the reaper, and the reaper
has to eat of the bread made from the product of the long past sowing.
Shall _we_ have to reap a harvest of poisonous tares, or of
wholesome wheat? 'If 'twere done when 'tis done, 'twere well it were
done quickly'; but since it begins to do when 'tis done, it were often
better that it were not done at all. A momentary pause to ask
ourselves when tempted to evil, 'And what then?' would burst not a few
of the painted bubbles after which we often chase.

Is there any reason to suppose that these permanent consequences of
our transient actions are confined in their operation to this life?
Does not such a present, which is mainly the continuous result of the
whole past, seem at least to prophesy and guarantee a similar future?
Most of us, I suppose, believe in the life continuous through and
after death retributive in a greater degree than life here. Whatever
changes may be involved in the laying aside of the 'earthly house of
this tabernacle,' it seems folly to suppose that in it we lay aside
the consequences of our past inwrought into our very selves. Surely
wisdom suggests that we try to take into view the whole scope of our
actions, and to carry our vision as far as the consequences reach. We
should all be wiser and better if we thought more of the 'afterwards,'
whether in its partial form in the present, or in its solemn
completion in the future beyond.

II. The bitterness of what is sweet and wrong.

There is no need to deny that 'bread of deceit is sweet to a man.'
There is a certain pleasure in a lie, and the taste of the bread
purchased by it is not embittered because it has been bought by
deceit. If we succeed in getting the good which any strong desire
hungers after, the gratification of the desire ministers pleasure. If
a man is hungry, it matters not to his hunger how he has procured the
bread which he devours. And so with all forms of good which appeal to
sense. The sweetness of the thing desired and obtained is more subtle,
but not less real, if it nourishes some inclination or taste of a
higher nature. But such sweetness in its very essence is momentary,
and even, whilst being masticated, 'bread of deceit' turns into
gravel; and a mouthful of it breaks the teeth, excoriates the gums,
interferes with breathing, and ministers no nourishment. The metaphor
has but too familiar illustrations in the experience of us all. How
often have we flattered ourselves with the thought, 'If I could but
get this or that, how happy I should be'? How often when we got it
have we been as happy as we expected? We had forgotten the voice of
conscience, which may be overborne for a moment, but begins to speak
more threateningly when its prohibitions have been neglected; we had
forgotten that there is no satisfying our hungry desires with 'bread
of deceit,' but that they grow much faster than it can be presented to
them; we had forgotten the evil that was strengthened in us when it
has been fed; we had forgotten that the remembrance of past delights
often becomes a present sorrow and shame; we had forgotten avenging
consequences of many sorts which follow surely in the train of sweet
satisfactions which are wrong.

So, even in this life nothing keeps its sweetness which is wrong, and
nothing which is sweet and wrong avoids a _tang_ of intensest
bitterness 'afterwards.' And all that bitterness will be increased in
another world, if there is another, when God gives us to read the book
of our lives which we ourselves have written. Many a page that records
past sweetness will then be felt to be written, 'within and without,'
with lamentation and woe.

All bitterness of what is sweet and wrong makes it certain that sin is
the stupidest, as well as the wickedest, thing that a man can do.

III. The abiding sweetness of true bread.

In a subordinate sense, the true bread may be taken as meaning our own
deeds inspired by love of God and approved by conscience. They may
often be painful to do, but the pain merges into calm pleasure, and
conscience whispers a foretaste of heaven's 'Well done! good and
faithful servant.' The roll may be bitter to the lips, but, eaten,
becomes sweet as honey; whereas the world's bread is sweet at first
but bitter at last. The highest wisdom and the most exacting
conscience absolutely coincide in that which they prescribe, and
Scripture has the warrant of universal experience in proclaiming that
sin in its subtler and more refined forms, as well as in its grosser,
is a gigantic mistake, and the true wisdom and reasonable regard for
one's own interest alike point in the same direction,--to a life based
on the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, as being the life which
yields the happiest results today and perpetual bliss hereafter. But
let us not forget that in the highest sense Christ Himself is the
'true bread that cometh down from heaven.' He may be bitter at first,
being eaten with tears of penitence and painful efforts at conquering
sin, but even in the first bitterness there is sweetness beyond all
the earth can give. He 'spreads a table before us in the presence of
our enemies,' and the bread which He gives tastes as the manna of old
did, like wafers made of honey. Only perverted appetites loathe this
light bread and prefer the strong-favoured leeks and garlics of Egypt.
They who sit at the table in the wilderness will finally sit at the
table prepared in the kingdom of the heavens.



A CONDENSED GUIDE FOR LIFE

'My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine.
16. Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things. 17.
Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the Lord
all the day long. 18. For surely there is an end; and thine
expectation shall not be cut off. 19. Hear thou, my son, and be wise,
and guide thine heart in the way. 20. Be not among winebibbers; among
riotous eaters of flesh: 21. For the drunkard and the glutton shall
come to poverty: and drowsiness shall clothe a man with rags. 22.
Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy mother
when she is old. 23. Buy the truth and sell it not; also wisdom, and
instruction, and understanding.'--PROVERBS xxiii. 15-23.


The precepts of this passage may be said to sum up the teaching of the
whole Book of Proverbs. The essentials of moral character are
substantially the same in all ages, and these ancient advices fit very
close to the young lives of this generation. The gospel has, no doubt,
raised the standard of morals, and, in many respects, altered the
conception and perspective of virtues; but its great distinction lies,
not so much in the novelty of its commandments as in the new motives
and powers to obey them. Reverence for parents and teachers, the
habitual 'fear of the Lord,' temperance, eager efforts to win and
retain 'the truth,' have always been recognised as duties; but there
is a long weary distance between recognition and practice, and he who
draws inspiration from Jesus Christ will have strength to traverse it,
and to do and be what he knows that he should.

The passage may be broken up into four parts, which, taken together,
are a young life's directory of conduct which is certain to lead to
peace.

I. There is, first, an appeal to filial affection, and an unveiling of
paternal sympathy (verses 15, 16). The paternal tone characteristic of
the Book of Proverbs is most probably regarded as that of a teacher
addressing his disciples as his children. But the glimpse of the
teacher's heart here given may well apply to parents too, and ought to
be true of all who can influence other and especially young hearts.
Little power attends advices which are not sweetened by manifest love.
Many a son has been kept back from evil by thinking, 'What would my
mother say?' and many a sound admonition has been nothing but sound,
because the tone of it betrayed that the giver did not much care
whether it was taken or not.

A true teacher must have his heart engaged in his lessons, and must
impress his scholars with the conviction that their failure drives a
knife into it, and their acceptance of them brings him purest joy. On
the other hand, the disciple, and still more the child, must have a
singularly cold nature who does not respond to loving solicitude and
does not care whether he wounds or gladdens the heart which pours out
its love and solicitude over him. May we not see shining through this
loving appeal a truth in reference to the heart of the great Father
and Teacher, who, in the depths of His divine blessedness, has no
greater joy than that His children should walk in the truth? God's
heart is glad when man's is wise.

Note, also, the wide general expression for goodness--a wise heart,
lips speaking right things. The former is source, the latter stream.
Only a pure fountain will send forth sweet waters. 'If thy heart
become wise' is the more correct rendering, implying that there is no
inborn wisdom, but that it must be made ours by effort. We _are_
foolish; we _become_ wise.

What the writer means by wisdom he will tell us presently. Here he
lets us see that it is a good to be attained by appropriate means. It
is the foundation of 'right' speech. Nothing is more remarkable than
the solemn importance which Scripture attaches to words, even more, we
might almost say than to deeds, therein reversing the usual estimate
of their relative value. Putting aside the cases of insincerity,
falsehood, and the like, a man's speech is a truer transcript of
himself than his deeds, because less hindered and limited by
externals. The most precious wine drips from the grapes by their own
weight in the vat, without a turn of the screw. 'By thy words thou
shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned.' 'God's
great gift of speech abused' is one of the commonest, least
considered, and most deadly sins.

II. We have next the one broad precept with its sure reward, which
underlies all goodness (verses 17, 18). The supplement 'be thou,' in
the second clause of verse 17, obscures the close connection of
clauses. It is better to regard the verb of the first clause as
continued in the second. Thus the one precept is set forth negatively
and positively: 'Strive not after [that is, seek not to imitate or be
associated with] sinners, but after the fear of the Lord.' The heart
so striving becomes wise. So, then, wisdom is not the result of
cultivating the intellect, but of educating the desires and
aspirations. It is moral and religious, rather than simply
intellectual. The magnificent personification of Wisdom at the
beginning of the book influences the subsequent parts, and the key to
understanding that great conception is, 'The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom.' The Greek goddess of Wisdom, noble as she is, is
of the earth earthy when contrasted with that sovereign figure. Pallas
Athene, with her clear eyes and shining armour, is poor beside the
Wisdom of the Book of Proverbs, who dwelt with God 'or ever the earth
was,' and comes to men with loving voice and hands laden with the
gifts of 'durable riches and righteousness.'

He is the wise man who fears God with the fear which has no torment
and is compact of love and reverence. He is on the way to become wise
whose seeking heart turns away from evil and evil men, and feels after
God, as the vine tendrils after a stay, or as the sunflower turns to
the light. For such wholehearted desire after the one supreme good
there must be resolute averting of desire from 'sinners.' In this
world full of evil there will be no vigorous longing for good and God,
unless there be determined abstention from the opposite. We have but a
limited quantity of energy, and if it is frittered away on
multifarious creatures, none will be left to consecrate to God. There
are lakes which discharge their waters at both ends, sending one
stream east to the Atlantic and one west to the Pacific; but the heart
cannot direct its issues of life in that fashion. They must be banked
up if they are to run deep and strong. 'All the current of my being'
must 'set to thee' if my tiny trickle is to reach the great ocean, to
be lost in which is blessedness.

And such energy of desire and direction is not to be occasional, but
'all the day long.' It is possible to make life an unbroken seeking
after and communion with God, even while plunged in common tasks and
small cares. It is possible to approximate indefinitely to that ideal
of continually 'dwelling in the house of the Lord'; and without some
such approximation there will be little realising of the Lord, sought
by fits and starts, and then forgotten in the hurry of business or
pleasure. A photographic plate exposed for hours will receive the
picture of far-off stars which would never show on one exposed for a
few minutes.

The writer is sure that such desires will be satisfied, and in verse
18 says so. The 'reward' (Rev. Ver.) of which he is sure is the
outcome of the life of such seekers after God. It does not necessarily
refer to the future after death, though that may be included in it.
But what is meant is that no seeking after the fear of the Lord shall
be in vain. There is a tacit emphasis on 'thy,' contrasting the sure
fulfilment of hopes set on God with the as sure 'cutting of' of those
mistakenly fixed upon creatures and vanities. Psalm xxxvii. 38, has
the same word here rendered 'reward' and declares that 'the future [or
reward] of the wicked shall be cut off.' The great fulfilment of this
assurance is reserved for the life beyond; but even here among all
disappointments and hopes of which fulfilment is so often
disappointment also, it remains true that the one striving which
cannot be fruitless is striving for more of God, and the one hope
which is sure to be realised, and is better when realised than
expected, is the hope set on Him. Surely, then, the certainty that if
we delight ourselves in God He will give us the desires of our hearts,
is a good argument, and should be with us an operative motive for
directing desire and effort away from earth and towards Him.

III. Special precepts as to the control of the animal nature follow in
verses 19-21. First, note that general one of verse 19, 'Guide thine
heart in the way.' In most general terms, the necessity of
self-government is laid down. There is a 'way' in which we should be
content to travel. It is a definite path, and feet have to be kept
from straying aside to wide wastes on either hand. Limitation, the
firm suppression of appetites, the coercing of these if they seek to
draw aside, are implied in the very conception of 'the way.' And a man
must take the upper hand of himself, and, after all other guidance,
must be his own guide; for God guides us by enabling us to guide
ourselves.

Temperance in the wider sense of the word is prominent among the
virtues flowing from fear of the Lord, and is the most elementary
instance of 'guiding the heart.' Other forms of self-restraint in
regard to animal appetites are spoken of in the context, but here the
two of drunkenness and gluttony are bracketed together. They are
similarly coupled in Deuteronomy xxi. 20, in the formula of accusation
which parents are to bring against a degenerate son. Allusion to that
passage is probable here, especially as the other crime mentioned in
it--namely, refusal to 'hear' parental reproof--is warned against in
verse 22. The picture, then, here is that of a prodigal son, and we
have echoes of it in the great parable which paints first riotous
living, and then poverty and misery.

Drunkenness had obviously not reached the dimensions of a national
curse in the date when this lesson was written. We should not put
over-eating side by side with it. But its ruinous consequences were
plain then, and the bitter experience of England and America repeats
on a larger scale the old lesson that the most productive source of
poverty, wretchedness, rags, and vice, is drink. Judges and social
reformers of all sorts concur in that now, though it has taken fifty
years to hammer it into the public conscience. Perhaps in another
fifty or so society may have succeeded in drawing the not very obscure
inference that total abstinence and prohibition are wise. At any rate,
they who seek after the fear of the Lord should draw it, and act on
it.

IV. The last part is in verses 22 and 23. The appeal to filial duty
cannot here refer to disciple and teacher, but to child and parents.
It does not stand as an isolated precept, but as underscoring the
important one which follows. But a word must be spared for it. The
habits of ancient days gave a place to the father and mother which
modern family life woefully lacks, and suffers in many ways for want
of. Many a parent in these days of slack control and precocious
independence might say, 'If I be a father, where is mine honour?'
There was perhaps not enough of confidence between parent and child in
former days, and authority on the one hand and submission on the other
too much took the place of love; but nowadays the danger is all the
other way--and it is a very real danger.

But the main point here is the earnest exhortation of verse 23, which,
like that to the fear of the Lord, sums up all duty in one. The
'truth' is, like 'wisdom,' moral and religious, and not merely
intellectual. 'Wisdom' is subjective, the quality or characteristic of
the devout soul; 'truth' is objective, and may also be defined as the
declared will of God. The possession of truth is wisdom. 'The entrance
of Thy words giveth light.' It makes wise the simple. There is, then,
such a thing as 'the truth' accessible to us. We can know it, and are
not to be for ever groping amid more or less likely guesses, but may
rest in the certitude that we have hold of foundation facts. For us,
the truth is incarnate in Jesus, as He has solemnly asserted. That
truth we shall, if we are wise, 'buy,' by shunning no effort,
sacrifice, or trouble needed to secure it.

In the lower meanings of the word, our passage should fire us all, and
especially the young, to strain every muscle of the soul in order to
make truth for the intellect our own. The exhortation is needed in
this day of adoration of money and material good. Nobler and wiser far
the young man who lays himself out to know than he who is engrossed
with the hungry desire to have! But in the highest region of truth,
the buying is 'without money and without price,' and all that we can
give in exchange is ourselves. We buy the truth when we know that we
cannot earn it, and forsaking self-trust and self-pleasing, consent to
receive it as a free gift. 'Sell it not,'--let no material good or
advantage, no ease, slothfulness, or worldly success, tempt you to
cast it away; for its 'fruit is better than gold,' and its 'revenue
than choice silver.' We shall make a bad bargain if we sell it for
anything beneath the stars; for 'wisdom is better than rubies,' and he
has been cheated in the transaction who has given up 'the truth' and
got instead 'the whole world.'



THE AFTERWARDS AND OUR HOPE

'Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long. 18. For surely
there is an end and thine expectation shall not be cut off.'--PROVERBS
xxiii. 17, 18.


The Book of Proverbs seldom looks beyond the limits of the temporal,
but now and then the mists lift and a wider horizon is disclosed. Our
text is one of these exceptional instances, and is remarkable, not
only as expressing confidence in the future, but as expressing it in a
very striking way. 'Surely there is an end,' says our Authorised
Version, substituting in the margin, for end, 'reward.' The latter
word is placed in the text of the Revised Version. But neither 'end'
nor 'reward' conveys the precise idea. The word so translated
literally means 'something that comes after.' So it is the very
opposite of 'end', it is really that which lies beyond the end--the
'sequel,' or the 'future'--as the margin of the Revised Version gives
alternatively, or, more simply still, the afterwards. Surely there is
an afterwards behind the end. And then the proverb goes on to specify
one aspect of that afterwards: 'Thine expectation'--or, better,
because more simply, thy hope--shall not be cut off. And then, upon
these two convictions that there is, if I might so say, an afterclap,
and that it is the time and the sphere in which the fairest hopes that
a man can paint to himself shall be surpassed by the reality, it
builds the plain partial exhortation: 'Be thou in the fear of the Lord
all the day long.'

So then, we have three things here, the certainty of the afterwards,
the immortality of hope consequent thereon, and the bearing of these
facts on the present.

I. The certainty of the hereafter.

Now, this Book of Proverbs, as I have said in the great collection of
popular sayings which makes the bulk of it, has no enthusiasm, no
poetry, no mysticism. It has religion, and it has a very pure and
lofty morality, but, for the most part, it deals with maxims of
worldly prudence, and sometimes with cynical ones, and represents, on
the whole, the wisdom of the market-place, and the 'man in the
street.' But now and then, as I have said, we hear strains of a higher
mood. My text, of course, might be watered down and narrowed so as to
point only to sequels to deeds realised in this life. And then it
would be teaching us simply the very much needed lessons that even in
this life, 'Whatever a man soweth that shall he also reap.' But it
seems to me that we are entitled to see here, as in one or two other
places in the Book of Proverbs, a dim anticipation of a future life
beyond the grave. I need not trouble you with quoting parallel
passages which are sown thinly up and down the book, but I venture to
take the words in the wider sense to which I have referred.

Now, the question comes to be, where did the coiners of Proverbs,
whose main interest was in the obvious maxims of a prudential
morality, get this conviction? They did not get it from any lofty
experience of communion with God, like that which in the seventy-third
Psalm marks the very high-water mark of Old Testament faith in regard
to a future life, where the Psalmist finds himself so completely
blessed and well in present fellowship with God, that he must needs
postulate its eternal continuance, and just because he has made God
the portion of his heart, and is holding fellowship with Him, is sure
that nothing can intervene to break that sweet communion. They did not
get it from any clear definite revelation, such as we have in the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, which has made that future life far more
than an inference for us, but they got it from thinking over the facts
of this present life as they appeared to them, looked at from the
standpoint of a belief in God, and in righteousness. And so they
represent to us the impression that is made upon a man's mind, if he
has the 'eye that hath kept watch o'er man's mortality,' that is made
by the facts of this earthly life--viz. that it is so full of
onward-looking, prophetic aspect, so manifestly and tragically, and
yet wonderfully and hopefully. Incomplete and fragmentary in itself,
that there must be something beyond in order to explain, in order to
vindicate, the life that now is. And that aspect of fragmentary
incompleteness is what I would insist upon for a moment now.

You sometimes see a row of houses, the end one of them has, in its
outer gable wall, bricks protruding here and there, and holes for
chimney-pieces that are yet to be put in. And just as surely as that
external wall says that the row is half built, and there are some more
tenements to be added to it, so surely does the life that we now live
here, in all its aspects almost, bear upon itself the stamp that it,
too, is but initial and preparatory. You sometimes see, in the
bookseller's catalogue, a book put down 'volume one; all that is
published.' That is our present life--volume one, all that is
published. Surely there is going to be a sequel, volume two. Volume
two is due, and will come, and it will be the continuation of volume
one.

What is the meaning of the fact that of all the creatures on the face
of the earth only you and I, and our brethren and sisters, do not find
in our environment enough for our powers? What is the meaning of the
fact that, whilst 'foxes have holes' where they curl themselves up,
and they are at rest, 'and the birds of the air have roosting-places,'
where they tuck their heads beneath their wings and sleep, the 'son of
man' hath not where to lay his head, but looks round upon the earth
and says, 'The earth, O Lord, is full of Thy mercy. I am a stranger on
the earth.' What is the meaning of it? Here is the meaning of it:
'Surely there is a hereafter.'

What is the meaning of the fact that lodged in men's natures there
lies that strange power of painting to themselves things that are not
as though they were? So that minds and hearts go out wandering through
Eternity, and having longings and possibilities which nothing beneath
the stars can satisfy, or can develop? The meaning of it is this:
Surely there is a hereafter. The man that wrote the book of
Ecclesiastes, in his sceptical moment ere he had attained to his last
conclusion, says, in a verse that is mistranslated in our rendering,
'He hath set Eternity in their hearts, therefore the misery of man is
great upon him.' That is true, because the root of all our unrest and
dissatisfaction is that we need God, and God in Eternity, in order
that we may be at rest. But whilst on the one hand 'therefore the
misery of man is great upon him,' on the other hand, because Eternity
is in our hearts, therefore there is the answer to the longings, the
