That love of Christ to us, received into our hearts, and there
producing an answering love to Him, will make us, in the measure in
which we live in it and let it rule us, love everything and every
person that He loves. That love of Jesus Christ, stealing into our
hearts and there sweetening the ever-springing 'issues of life,' will
make them flow out in glad obedience to any commandment of His. That
love of Jesus Christ, received into our hearts, and responded to by
our answering love, will work, as love always does, a magical
transformation. A great monastic teacher wrote his precious book about
_The Imitation of Christ_. 'Imitation' is a great word,
'Transformation' is a greater. 'We all,' receiving on the mirror of
our loving hearts the love of Jesus Christ, 'are changed into the same
likeness.' Thus, then, the love, which is our pattern, is also our
motive and our power for obedience, and the more we bring ourselves
under its influences, the more we shall love all those who are beloved
by, and lovers of, Jesus.

That is the one foundation for a world knit together in the bonds of
amity and concord. There have been attempts at brotherhood, and the
guillotine has ended what was begun in the name of 'fraternity.' Men
build towers, but there is no cement between the bricks, unless the
love of Christ holds them together, and therefore Babel after Babel
comes down about the ears of its builders. But notwithstanding all
that is dark to-day, and though the war-clouds are lowering, and the
hearts of men are inflamed with fierce passions, Christ's commandment
is Christ's promise; and though the vision tarry, it will surely come.
So even to-day Christian men ought to stand for Christ's peace, and
for Christ's love. The old commandment which we have had from the
beginning, is the new commandment that fits to-day as it fits all the
ages. It is a dream, say some. Yes, a dream; but a morning dream which
comes true. Let us do the little we can to make it true, and to bring
about the day when the flock of men will gather round the one
Shepherd, who loved them to the death, and who has bid them and helped
them to 'love one another as'--and since--'He has loved them.'




QUO VADIS?

'Peter said unto Him, Lord, why cannot I follow Thee now! I will lay
down my life for Thy sake. Jesus answered him, Wilt thou lay down thy
life for My sake? Verily, verily, I say unto thee, The cock shall not
crow, till thou hast denied Me thrice.'--JOHN xiii. 37, 38.

Peter's main characteristics are all in operation here; his eagerness
to be in the front, his habit of blurting out his thoughts and
feelings, his passionate love for his Master, and withal his inability
to understand Him, and his self-confident arrogance. He has broken in
upon Christ's solemn words, entirely deaf to their deep meaning, but
blindly and blunderingly laying hold of one thought only, that Jesus
is departing, and that he is to be left alone. So he asks the
question, 'Lord! thither goest Thou?'--not so much caring about that,
as meaning by his question--'tell me where, and then I will come too';
pledging himself to follow faithfully, as a dog behind his master,
wherever He went.

Our Lord answered the underlying meaning of the words, repeating with
a personal application what He had just before said as a general
principle--'Whither I go thou canst not follow Me now, but thou shall
follow Me afterwards.' Then followed this noteworthy dialogue.

The whole significance of the incident is preserved for us in the
beautiful legend which tells us how, near the city of Rome, on the
Appian Way, as Peter was flying for his life, he met the Lord, and
again said to Him: 'Lord, whither goest Thou?' The words of the
question, as given in the Vulgate, are the name of the site of the
supposed interview, and of the little church which stands on it. The
Master answered: 'I go to Rome, to be crucified again.' The answer
smote the heart of the Apostle, and turned the cowardly fugitive into
a hero; and he followed his Lord, and went gladly to his death. For it
was that death which had to be accomplished before Peter was able to
follow his Lord.

Now, as to the words before us, I think we shall best gather their
significance, and lay it upon our own hearts, if we simply follow the
windings of the dialogue. There are three points: the audacious
question, the rash vow, and the sad forecast.

I. The audacious question.

As Peter's first question, 'Lord, whither goest Thou?' meant not so
much what it said, as 'I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest;
tell me, that I may'; so the second question, in like manner, is
really not so much a question, 'Why cannot I follow Thee now?' as the
nearest possible approach to a flat contradiction of our Lord. Peter
puts his words into the shape of an interrogation; what he means is,
'Yes, I can follow Thee; and in proof thereof, I will lay down my life
for Thy sake.' The man's persistence, the man's love leading him to
lack of reverence, came out in this (as I have ventured to call it)
audacious question. Its underlying meaning was a refusal to believe
the Master's word. But yet there was in it a nobility of
resolution--broken afterwards, but never mind about that--to endure
anything rather than to be separate from the Lord. Yet, though it was
noble in its motive, but lacking in reverence in its form, there was a
deeper error than that in it. Peter did not know what 'following'
meant, and he had to be taught that first. One of the main reasons why
he could not follow was because he did not understand what was
involved. It was something more than marching behind his Master, even
to a Cross. There was a deeper discipline and a more strenuous effort
needed than would have availed for such a kind of following.

Let us look a little onwards into his life. Recall that scene on the
morning of the day by the banks of the lake, when he waded through the
shallow water, and cast himself, dripping, at his Master's feet, and,
having by his threefold confession obliterated his threefold denial,
was taken back to his Lord's love, and received the permission for
which he had hungered, and which he had been told, in the upper room,
could not 'now' be given: 'Jesus said to him, Follow thou Me.' What a
flood of remembrances must then have rushed over the penitent Peter!
how he must have thought to himself, 'So soon, so soon is the "canst
not" changed into a _canst_! So soon has the "afterwards" come to be
the present!'

And long years after that, when he was an old man, and experience had
taught him what _following_ meant, he shared his privilege with all
the dispersed strangers to whom he wrote, and said to them, with a
definite reference to this incident, and to the other after the
Resurrection, 'leaving us an example, that we (not only, as I used to
think, in my exuberant days of ignorance) should follow in His steps.'

So, brethren, this blundering, loving, audacious question suggests to
us that to follow Jesus Christ is the supreme direction for all
conduct. Men of all creeds, men of no creed, admit that. The

  'Loveliness of perfect deeds,
  More strong than all poetic thought,'

which is set forth in that life constitutes the living law to which
all conduct is to be conformed, and will be noble in proportion as it
is conformed.

_There_ is the great blessing, and solemn obligation, and lofty
prerogative of Christian morality, that for obedience to a precept it
substitutes following a Person, and instead of saying to men 'Be good'
it says to them 'Be Christlike.' It brings the conception of duty out
of the region of abstractions into the region of living realities. For
the cold statuesque ideal of perfection it substitutes a living Man,
with a heart to love, and a hand to help us. Thereby the whole aspect
of striving after the right is changed; for the work is made easier,
and companionship comes in to aid morality, when Jesus Christ says to
us, 'Be like Me; and then you will be good and blessed.' Effort will
be all but as blessed as attainment, and the sense of pressing hard
after Him will be only less restful than the consciousness of having
attained. To follow Him is bliss, to reach Him is heaven.

But in order that this following should be possible, there must be
something done that had not been done when Peter asked, 'Why cannot I
follow Thee now?' One reason why he could not was, as I said, because
he did not know yet what 'following' meant, and because he was yet
unfit for this assimilation of his character and of his conduct to the
likeness of his Lord. And another reason was because the Cross still
lay before the Lord, and until that death of infinite love and utter
self-sacrifice for others had been accomplished, the pattern was not
yet complete, nor the highest ideal of human life realised in life.
Therefore the 'following' was impossible. Christ must die before He
has completed the example that we are to follow, and Christ must die
before the impulse shall be given to us, which shall make us able to
tread, however falteringly and far behind, in His footsteps.

The essence of His life and of His death lies in the two things,
entire suppression of personal will in obedience to the will of the
Father, and entire self-sacrifice for the sake of humanity. And
however there is--and God forbid that I should ever forget in my
preaching that there is--a uniqueness in that sacrifice, in that life,
and in that death, which beggars all imitation, and needs and
tolerates no repetition whilst the world lasts, still along with this,
there is that which is imitable in the life and imitable in the death
of the Master. To follow Jesus is to live denying self for God, and to
live sacrificing self for men. Nothing less than these are included in
the solemn words, 'leaving us'--even in the act and article of death
when He 'suffered for us'--'an example that we should follow His
steps.'

The word rendered 'example' refers to the headline which the
writing-master gives his pupils to copy, line by line. We all know how
clumsy the pothooks and hangers are, how blurred the page with many a
blot. And yet there, at the top of it, stands the Master's fair
writing, and though even the last line on the page will be blotted and
blurred, when we turn it over and begin on the new leaf, the copy will
be like the original, 'and we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him
as He is.' 'Thou shalt follow Me afterwards' is a commandment; blessed
be God, it is also a promise. For let us not forget that the
'following' ends in an attaining; even as the Lord Himself has said in
another connection, when He spake: 'If any man serve Me, let him
follow Me, and where I am, there shall also My servant be.' Of course,
if we follow, we shall come to the same place one day. And so the
great promise will be fulfilled; 'they shall follow the Lamb,' in that
higher life, 'whithersoever He goeth'; and not as here imperfectly,
and far behind, but close beside Him, and keeping step for step, being
with Him first, and following Him afterwards.

But let us remember that with regard to that future following and its
completeness, the same present incapacity applies, as clogs and mars
the 'following,' which is conforming our lives to His. For, as He
Himself has said to us, 'I go to prepare a place for you,' and until
He had passed through death and into His glory, there was no
standing-ground for human feet on the golden pavements, and heaven was
inaccessible to man until Christ had died. Thus, as all life is
changed when it is looked upon as being a following of Jesus, so death
becomes altogether other when it is so regarded. The first martyr
outside the city wall, bruised and battered by the cruel stones,
remembered his Master's death, and shaped his own to be like it. As
Jesus, when He died, had said: 'Father, into Thy hands I commend My
spirit,' Stephen, dying, said: 'Lord Jesus, receive My spirit.' As the
Master had given His last breath to the prayer, 'Father, forgive them;
they know not what they do,' so Stephen shaped his last utterance to a
conformity with his Lord's, in which the difference is as significant
as the likeness, and said, 'Lord, lay not this sin to their charge.'
And then, as the record beautifully says, amidst all that wild hubbub
and cruel assault, 'he fell on sleep,' as a child on its mother's
breast. Death is changed when it becomes the following of Christ.

II. We have here a rash vow.

'I will lay down my life for Thy sake.' What a strange inversion of
parts is here! 'Lay down thy life for My sake'--with Calvary less than
four-and-twenty hours off, when Christ laid down His life for Peter's
sake. Peter was guilty of an anachronism in the words, for the time
did not come for the disciple to die for his Lord till after the Lord
had died for His disciple. But he was right in feeling, though he felt
it only in regard to an external and physical act, that to follow
Jesus, it was necessary to be ready to die for Him. And that is the
great truth which underlies and half redeems the rashness of this vow,
and needs to be laid upon our hearts, if we are ever to be the true
followers of the Master. Death for Christ is necessary if we are to
follow Him. There is nothing that a man can do deeply and truly, in a
manner worthy of a Christian, which has not underlying it, either the
death of self-will and all the godless nature, or if need be the
actual physical death, which is a much smaller matter. You cannot
follow Christ except you die daily. No man has ever yet trodden in His
footsteps except on condition of, moment by moment, slaying self,
suppressing self, abjuring self, breaking the connection of self with
the material world, and yielding up himself as a living sacrifice, in
a living death, to the Lord of life and death. Do not think that
'following Christ' is a mere sentimental expression for so much
morality as we can conveniently get into our daily life. But remember
that here, with all his rashness, with all his ignorance, with all his
superficiality, the Apostle has laid hold upon the great permanent,
but alas! much-forgotten principle, that to die is essential to
following Jesus.

This daily dying, which is a far harder thing to do than to go to a
cross once, and have done with it--was impossible for Peter then,
though he did not know it. His vow was a rash one, because the laying
down of Christ's life, for Peter's sake and for ours, had not yet been
accomplished. _There_ is the motive-power by which, and by which
alone, drawn in gratitude, and melted down from all our selfishness,
we, too, in our measure and our turn, are able to yield ourselves, in
daily crucifixion of our evil, and daily abnegation of self-trust, and
self-pleasing, and self-will, to the Lord that has died for us. He
must lay down His life for our sakes, and we must know He has done it,
and rest upon Him as our great Sacrifice and our atoning Priest, or
else we shall never be so loosed from the tyranny of self as to be
ready to live by dying, and to die that we may live for His sake. 'I
go to Rome to be crucified again' were the words in which the old
legend braced the fugitive and made a hero of him, and sent him back
to be crucified like his Lord and to offer up his physical life, as he
had long since offered up his self-will and his arrogance to the Lord
that had died for him.

O Lord our Father! help us, we beseech Thee, that we may be of the
sheep that hear the Shepherd's voice and follow Him. Strengthen our
faith in that dear Lord who has laid down His life for us, that we may
daily, by self-denial and self-sacrifice, lay down our lives for Him,
and follow Him here in all the footsteps of His love.




A RASH VOW

'Jesus answered him, Wilt them lay down thy life for My sake? Verily,
verily I say unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till thou hast denied
Me thrice.'--JOHN xiii. 38.

In the last sermon I partly considered the dialogue of which this is
the concluding portion, and found that it consisted of an audacious
question: 'Why cannot I follow Thee now?' which really meant a
contradiction of our Lord; of a rash vow; 'I will lay down my life for
Thy sake'--and of a sad forecast: 'The cock shall not crow till thou
hast denied Me thrice.' I paused in the middle of considering the
second of these three stages, the rash vow. I then pointed out that,
however ignorant the Apostle was of what 'following Christ' meant, he
had hit the mark, and stumbled unknowingly upon the very essence of
the Christian life, and an eternal truth, when he recognised that,
somehow or other, to 'follow Christ' meant to die for Him. That is so,
and is so always, for there is no following Christ which is not a
'dying daily,' by self-immolation and detachment from the world, and
from the life of sense and self. But this rash vow has to be looked at
from a somewhat different point of view, and we have to consider not
only the strangely blended right and wrong, error and deep truth, that
lie in its substance, but the strangely blended right and wrong in the
state of feeling and thought, on the part of the Apostle, which it
represents. And taking up the dropped thread, I first deal with that,
and then with the sad forecast which follows.

So then, looking at these words as being like all our words, even the
best of them, strangely mingled of right and wrong, good and evil, I
find in them--

I. A noble, sincere, but transient emotion and impulse.

'I will lay down my life for Thy sake.' Peter meant it, every word of
it; and he would have done it too, if only a gibbet or cross could
have been set up then and there in the upper room. But unfortunately
the moments of elevation and high-wrought enthusiasm, and the calls to
martyrdom, do not always coincide. In the upper room, with its sacred
atmosphere, it was easy to feel, and would have been easy to do,
nobly. But it was not so easy, lying drowsily in Gethsemane, in the
cold spring night, waiting for the Master's coming out from beneath
the trembling shadows of the olive trees, or huddled up by the fire at
the lower end of the hall in the grey morning, when vitality is at its
lowest.

So the sincere, noble utterance was but the expression of impulse and
emotion which lifted Peter for a moment, and did him good, but which
likewise, running through him, left him dry, and all the weaker
because of the gush of feeling which had foamed itself away in empty
words. For let us never forget that however high, noble, or divinely
inspired emotion may be, in its nature it is transient and is sure to
be followed by reaction. Like the winter torrents in some parched
land, the more they foam, the more speedily does the bed of them dry
up again, and the more they carry down the very soil in which growth
and fertility would be possible. A rush of feeling is apt to leave
behind hard, insensitive rock. There is a close connection between a
predominantly emotional Christianity and a very imperfect life.
Feeling is apt to be a substitute for action. Is it not a very
remarkable thing that the word 'benevolence,' which means 'kindly
feeling,' has come to take on the meaning rightly belonging to
'beneficence,' which means 'kindly doing'? The emotional man blinds
and hoodwinks himself, by thinking that his quick sensibility and
lofty enthusiasm and warmth of emotion are action or as good as
action. 'Be thou warmed and filled,' he says to his brother, and, in a
lazy expansion of heart, forgets that he has never lifted a finger to
help.

God forbid that I should seem to deprecate emotional religion or
religious emotion! that is the last thing that needs to be done in
this generation. If the Churches want one thing more than another, it
is that their Christianity should become far more emotional than it
is, and their impulses stronger, swifter, more spontaneous, more
overmastering, and that they should be urged by these, and not merely
by the reluctant recognition that such and such a piece of sacrifice
or effort is a debt that they are obliged to clear off. Their service
will be glad service, only when it is impulsive service and emotional
service. Dear brethren, a Christian man whose life is not influenced
by the deepest and most fervid emotion of love to the great Love that
died for him, is a monster. 'The Lord's fire is in Jerusalem, and His
furnace in Zion'--is that a description of the fervour of this Church,
or of any Church in Christendom? A furnace? An ice-house! Think of
some deserted cottage, with the roof fallen in, and in the cold
chimney-place a rusty grate with some dead embers in it, and the snow
lying upon the top of it--that is a truer description of a great many
of our churches than 'the Lord's furnace.'

But the lesson to be taken from this incident before us is not the
danger of emotion; it is rather the necessity of emotion, but with two
provisoes, that it shall be emotion based upon a clear recognition of
the great truth that He has laid down His life for me; and that it
shall be emotion harnessed to work, and not wasted in words. The
mightier the plunge of the fall, the more electrical energy you can
get out of it, and set that to work to drive the wheels of life. Do
not be afraid of emotion; you will make little of your Christianity
unless you have it. But be sure that it is under the guidance of a
clear perception of the truth that evokes it, and that it is all used
to turn the wheels of life. 'Better is it that thou shouldest not vow,
than that thou shouldest vow and not pay.' Better is it that emotion
should be reticent and active than that it should be voluble and idle.
It is a good servant, but a bad master. A man that trusts to impulse
and emotion to further his Christian course, is like a ship in that
belt of variable winds that lies near the Equator, where there will be
a fine ten-knot breeze for an hour or two, and then a sickly,
stagnating calm. Push further south, and get into the steady 'trades,'
where the wind blows with equable and persistent force all the year
round in the same direction. Convert impulses and emotions into
steadfast principle, warmed by emotion and borne on by impulse.

II. Again, this rash vow is an illustration of a confidence, also
strangely blended of good and evil.

'I will lay down my life for Thy sake.' As I have said, Peter meant
it. His words are paralleled by other words, in which two of the
Lord's disciples answered His solemn question: 'Are ye able to drink
of the cup that I drink of?' with the unhesitating answer, 'We are
able.' A great teacher has regarded that saying as one of 'the
ventures of faith.' Perhaps it was. Perhaps there was as much
self-confidence as faith in it. Certainly there was more
self-confidence than faith in Peter's answer, and his self-confidence
collapsed when the trial came.

The world and the Church hold entirely antagonistic notions about the
value of self-reliance. The world says that it is a condition of
power. The Church says that it is the root of weakness.
Self-confidence shuts a man out from the help of God, and so shuts him
out from the source of power. For if you will think for a moment, you
will see that the faith which the New Testament, in conformity with
all wise knowledge of one's self, preaches as the one secret of power,
has for its obverse--its other side--diffidence and self-distrust. No
man trusts God as God ought to be trusted, who does not distrust
himself as himself ought to be distrusted. To level a mountain is the
only way to carry the water across where it stood. You can, by
mechanism and locks, take a canal up to the top of a hill, but you
cannot take a river up to the top, and the river of God's help flows
through the valley and seeks the lowest levels. Faith and self-despair
are the upper and the under sides of the same thing, like some
cunningly-woven cloth, the one side bearing a different pattern from
the other, and yet made of the same yarn, and the same threads passing
from the upper to the under sides. So faith and self-distrust are but
two names for one composite whole.

I was once shown an old Jewish coin which had on the one side the
words 'sackcloth and ashes,' and on the other side the words 'a crown
of gold.' The coin meant to contrast what Israel had been with what
Israel then was. The crown had come first; the sackcloth and ashes
last. But we may use it for illustrating this point, on which I am now
dwelling. Wherever, and only where, there are the sackcloth and ashes
of self-despair there will be the crown of gold of an answering faith.
When thus, as Wesley has it, in his great hymn: 'Confident in
self-despair,' we cling to God, then we can say: 'When I am weak then
am I strong,' 'Behold! we have no might, but our eyes are upon Thee.'
If Peter had only said, 'By Thy help I will lay down my life for Thy
sake,' his confidence would have been reasonable and blessed
self-confidence, because it would have been confidence in a self
inspired by divine power.

And so, brethren, whilst utter diffidence is right for us, and is the
condition of all our reception of energy according to our need, the
most absolute confidence--a confidence which, to the eye of the man
that measures only visible things, will seem sheer insanity--is
sobriety for a Christian. The world is perfectly right when it says:
'If you believe you can do a thing, you have gone a long way towards
doing it.' The expectation of success has often the knack of
fulfilling itself. But the world does not know our secret, and our
secret is that our humble faith brings into the field the reserves
with the Captain of our salvation at their head. Therefore a
self-distrusting Christian can say, and say without exaggeration or
presumption, 'I can do all things in Christ, strengthening me from
within.'

The Church's ideals are possibilities, when you bring God into the
account, and they look like insanity when you do not. Take, for
instance, missions. What an absurdity to talk about a handful of
Christian people--for we are only a handful as compared with the whole
world--carrying their Gospel into every corner of the earth, and
finding everywhere a response to it. Yes; it is absurd; but, wise Mr.
Calculator, counter of heads, you have forgotten God in your estimate
of whether it is reasonable or unreasonable. Again, take the Christian
ideal of absolute perfection of character. 'What nonsense to talk as
if any man could ever come to that.' Yes!--as if any _man_ could come
to that, I grant you. But if God is with him, the nonsense is to
suppose that he will not come to it. Here is a row of cyphers as long
as your arm. They mean nothing. Put a 1 at the left-hand end of the
row; and what does it mean then? So the faith that brings Christ into
the life, and into the Church, makes 'nobodies' into mighty
men--'laughs at impossibilities, and cries, It shall be done!'

Still further, here, in this rash vow, we have an underestimate of
difficulties. There was another incident in the life of the Apostle, a
strange replica of this one, into which he pushed himself, just as he
did into the high priest's hall, partly out of curiosity and a wish to
be prominent; partly out of love to his Master. Without a moment's
consideration of the peril into which he was thrusting himself, he sat
in the boat, and said, 'Bid me come to Thee on the water.' He forgot
that He was heavy, and that water was not solid, and that the wind was
high and the lake rough, and when he put his foot over the side and
felt the cold waves creeping up his knees, his courage ebbed out with
his faith, and he began to sink. Then he cried, 'Lord! help me!' If he
had thought for a moment of the reality of the case, he would have sat
still in the boat. If he had thought of what would be in his way in
following Jesus to death, he would have hesitated to vow. But it is so
much easier to resolve heroisms in a quiet corner than to do them when
the strain comes, and it is so much easier to do some one great thing
that has in it enthusiasm and nobility, and conspicuousness of
sacrifice, especially if it can be got over in a moment, like having
one's head cut off with an axe, than it is to 'die daily.' Ah!
brethren, it is the little difficulties that make _the_ difficulty.
You read in the newspapers in the autumn, every now and then, of
trains, in that wonderful country across the water, being stopped by
caterpillars. The Christian train is stopped by an army of
caterpillars, far oftener than it is by some solid and towering
barrier. Our Christian lives are a great deal likelier to come to
failure, because we do not take into account the multiplied small
antagonisms than because we are not ready to face the greater ones.
What would you think of a bridge builder, who built a bridge across
some mountain torrent and made no allowance for freshets and floods
when the ice melted? His bridge and his piers would be gone the first
winter. You remember who it was that said that he went into the
Franco-German War 'with a light heart,' and in seven weeks came Sedan
and the dethronement of an Emperor, and the surrender of an army.
'Blessed is he that feareth always.' There is no more fatal error than
an underestimate of our difficulties.

III. Let me say a word about the sad forecast here.

'Thou shalt deny me thrice.'

We cannot say that poor Peter's fall was at all an anomalous or
uncommon thing. He did exactly what a great many of us are doing. He
could--and I have no doubt he would--have gone to the death for Jesus
Christ; but he could not stand being laughed at for Him. He would have
been ready to meet the executioner's sharp sword, but the
servant-girl's sharp tongue was more than he could bear. And so he
denied Jesus, not because he was afraid of his skin--for I do not
suppose that the servants had any notion of doing anything more than
amusing themselves with a few clumsy gibes at his expense--but because
he could not bear to be made sport of.

Now, dear brethren, I suppose we are all of us more or less movers in
circles in which it sometimes is not considered 'good form' to show
that we are Christian people. You young men in your warehouses, you
students at the University, where it is a sign of being 'fossils' and
'behind the times' and 'not up to date' to say 'I am a Christian,' and
all of us in our several places have sometimes to gather our courage
together, and not be afraid to declare whose we are. No doubt life is
a better witness than words, but no doubt also life is not so good a
witness as it might be, unless it sometimes has the commentary of
words as well. Thus, to confess Christ means two things; to say
sometimes--in the face of a smile of scorn, which is often harder to
bear than something much more dangerous--'I am His,' and to live
Christ, and to say by conduct 'I am His,' 'Whosoever shall confess Me
before men, him will I also confess before My Father, and whosoever
shall deny Me, him will I also deny.' Do not button your coats over
your uniform. Do not take the cockade out of your hats when you go
amongst 'the other side.' Live Jesus, and, when advisable, preach
Jesus.

But Peter's fall, which is typical of what we are all tempted to do,
has in it a gracious message; for it proclaims the possibility of
recovery from any depth of descent, and of coming back again from any
distance of wandering. Did you ever notice how Peter's fall was burnt
in upon his memory, so as that when he began to preach after
Pentecost, the shape that his indictment of his hearers takes is, 'Ye
denied the Holy One and the Just,' and how, long after--if the second
Epistle which goes by his name is his--in summing up the crimes of the
heretics whom he is branding, he speaks of their 'denying the Lord
that bought them.' He never forgot his denial, and it remained with
him as the expression for all that was wrong in a man's relation to
Jesus Christ. And I suppose not only was it burnt in upon his memory,
but it burnt out all his self-confidence.

It is beautiful to see how, in his letter, he speaks over and over
again of 'fear' as being a wise temper of mind for a Christian. As
George Herbert has it, 'A sad, wise valour is the true complexion.'
Thus the man that had been so confident in himself learned to say 'Be
ready to give to every man that asketh you a reason for the hope that
is in you, with meekness and fear.'

And do you not think that his fall drew him closer to Jesus Christ
than ever he had been before, as he learned more of His pardoning love
and mercy? Was he not nearer the Lord on that morning when the two
together, alone, talked after the Resurrection? Was he not nearer Him
when he struggled to his feet from the boat on the lake, on that
morning when he was received back into his office as Christ's Apostle?
Did he ever forget how he had sinned? Did he ever forget how Christ
had pardoned? Did he ever forget how Christ loved and would keep him?
Ah, no! The rope that is broken is strongest where it is spliced, not
because it was broken, but because a cunning hand has strengthened it.
We may be the stronger for our sins, not because sin strengthens, for
it weakens, but because God restores. It is possible that we may build
a fairer structure on the ruins of our old selves. It is possible that
we may turn every field of defeat into a field of victory. It is
possible that we may

    'Fall to rise; be beaten, to fight better.'

If only we cling to the Lord our Strength, the promise shall be
ours--whatever our failures, denials, backslidings,
inconsistencies--'though he fall he shall not be utterly cast down, for
the Lord upholdeth him with His hand.'




FAITH IN GOD AND CHRIST

'Let not your heart be troubled ... believe in God, believe also in
Me.'--JOHN xiv. 1.

The twelve were sitting in the upper chamber, stupefied with the
dreary, half-understood prospect of Christ's departure. He, forgetting
His own burden, turns to comfort and encourage them. These sweet and
great words most singularly blend gentleness and dignity. Who can
reproduce the cadence of soothing tenderness, soft as a mother's hand,
in that 'Let not your heart be troubled'? And who can fail to feel the
tone of majesty in that 'Believe in God, believe also in Me'?

The Greek presents an ambiguity in the latter half of the verse, for
the verb may be either indicative or imperative, and so we may read
four different ways, according as we render each of the two 'believes'
in either of these two fashions. Our Authorised and Revised Versions
concur in adopting the indicative 'Ye believe' in the former clause
and the imperative in the latter. But I venture to think that we get a
more true and appropriate meaning if we keep both clauses in the same
mood, and read them both as imperatives: 'Believe in God, believe also
in Me.' It would be harsh, I think, to take one as an affirmation and
the other as a command. It would be irrelevant, I think, to remind the
disciples of their belief in God. It would break the unity of the
verse and destroy the relation of the latter half to the former, the
former being a negative precept: 'Let not your heart be troubled'; and
the latter being a positive one: 'Instead of being troubled, believe
in God, and believe in Me.' So, for all these reasons, I venture to
adopt the reading I have indicated.

I. Now in these words the first thing that strikes me is that Christ
here points to Himself as the object of precisely the same religious
trust which is to be given to God.

It is only our familiarity with these words that blinds us to their
wonderfulness and their greatness. Try to hear them for the first
time, and to bring into remembrance the circumstances in which they
were spoken. Here is a man sitting among a handful of His friends, who
is within four-and-twenty hours of a shameful death, which to all
appearance was the utter annihilation of all His claims and hopes, and
He says, 'Trust in God, and trust in Me'! I think that if we had heard
that for the first time, we should have understood a little better
than some of us do the depth of its meaning.

What is it that Christ asks for here? Or rather let me say, What is it
that Christ offers to us here? For we must not look at the words as a
demand or as a command, but rather as a merciful invitation to do what
it is life and blessing to do. It is a very low and inadequate
interpretation of these words which takes them as meaning little more
than 'Believe in God, believe that He is; believe in Me, believe that
I am.' But it is scarcely less so to suppose that the mere assent of
the understanding to His teaching is all that Christ is asking for
here. By no means; what He invites us to goes a great deal deeper than
that. The essence of it is an act of the will and of the heart, not of
the understanding at all. A man may believe in Him as a historical
person, may accept all that is said about Him here, and yet not be
within sight of the trust in Him of which He here speaks. For the
essence of the whole is not the intellectual process of assent to a
proposition, but the intensely personal act of yielding up will and
heart to a living person. Faith does not grasp a doctrine, but a
heart. The trust which Christ requires is the bond that unites souls
with Him; and the very life of it is entire committal of myself to Him
in all my relations and for all my needs, and absolute utter
confidence in Him as all-sufficient for everything that I can require.
Let us get away from the cold intellectualism of 'belief' into the
warm atmosphere of 'trust,' and we shall understand better than by
many volumes what Christ here means and the sphere and the power and
the blessedness of that faith which Christ requires.

Further, note that, whatever may be this believing in Him which He
asks from us or invites us to render, it is precisely the same thing
which He bids us render to God. The two clauses in the original bring
out that idea even more vividly than in our version, because the order
of the words in the latter clause is inverted; and they read literally
thus: 'Believe in God, in Me also believe.' The purpose of the
inversion is to put these two, God and Christ, as close together as
possible; and to put the two identical emotions at the beginning and
at the end, at the two extremes and outsides of the whole sentence.
Could language be more deliberately adopted and moulded, even in its
consecution and arrangement, to enforce this thought, that whatever it
is that we give to Christ, it is the very same thing that we give to
God? And so He here proposes Himself as the worthy and adequate
recipient of all these emotions of confidence, submission,
resignation, which make up religion in its deepest sense.

That tone is by no means singular in this place. It is the uniform
tone and characteristic of our Lord's teaching. Let me remind you just
in a sentence of one or two instances. What did He think of Himself
who stood up before the world and, with arms outstretched, like that
great white Christ in Thorwaldsen's lovely statue, said to all the
troop of languid and burdened and fatigued ones crowding at His feet:
'Come unto Me all ye that are weary and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest'? That surely is a divine prerogative. What did He think
of Himself who said, 'All men should honour the Son even as they
honour the Father'? What did He think of Himself who, in that very
Sermon on the Mount (to which the advocates of a maimed and mutilated
Christianity tell us they pin their faith, instead of to mystical
doctrines) declared that He Himself was the Judge of humanity, and
that all men should stand at His bar and receive from Him 'according
to the deeds done in their body'? Upon any honest principle of
interpreting these Gospels, and unless you avowedly go picking and
choosing amongst His words, accepting this and rejecting that, you
cannot eliminate from the scriptural representation of Jesus Christ
the fact that He claimed as His own the emotions of the heart to which
only God has a right and only God can satisfy.

I do not dwell upon that point, but I say, in one sentence, we have to
take that into account if we would estimate the character of Jesus
Christ as a Teacher and as a Man. I would not turn away from Him any
imperfect conceptions, as they seem to me, of His nature and His
work--rather would I foster them, and lead them on to a fuller
recognition of the full Christ--but this I am bound to say, that for
my part I believe that nothing but the wildest caprice, dealing with
the Gospels according to one's own subjective fancies, irrespective
altogether of the evidence, can strike out from the teaching of Christ
this its characteristic difference. What signalises Him, and separates
Him from all other religious teachers, is not the clearness or the
tenderness with which He reiterated the truths about the divine
Father's love, or about morality, and justice, and truth, and
goodness; but _the_ peculiarity of His call to the world is, 'Believe
in Me.' And if He said that, or anything like it, and if the
representations of His teaching in these four Gospels, which are the
only source from which we get any notion of Him at all, are to be
accepted, why, then, one of two things follows. Either He was wrong,
and then He was a crazy enthusiast, only acquitted of blasphemy
because convicted of insanity; or else--or else--He was 'God, manifest
in the flesh.' It is vain to bow down before a fancy portrait of a bit
of Christ, and to exalt the humble sage of Nazareth, and to leave out
the very thing that makes the difference between Him and all others,
namely, these either audacious or most true claims to be the Son of
God, the worthy Recipient and the adequate Object of man's religious
emotions. 'Believe in God, in Me also believe.'

II. Now, secondly, notice that faith in Christ and faith in God are
not two, but one.

These two clauses on the surface present juxtaposition. Looked at more
closely they present interpenetration and identity. Jesus Christ does
not merely set Himself up by the side of God, nor are we worshippers
of two Gods when we bow before Jesus and bow before the Father; but
faith in Christ is faith in God, and faith in God which is not faith
in Christ is imperfect, incomplete, and will not long last. To trust
in Him is to trust in the Father; to trust in the Father is to trust
in Him.

What is the underlying truth that is here? How comes it that these two
objects blend into one, like two figures in a stereoscope; and that
the faith which flows to Jesus Christ rests upon God? This is the
underlying truth, that Jesus Christ, Himself divine, is the divine
Revealer of God. I need not dwell upon the latter of these two
thoughts: how there is no real knowledge of the real God in the depth
of His love, the tenderness of His nature or the lustrousness of His
holiness; how there is no certitude; how the God that we see outside
of Jesus Christ is sometimes doubt, sometimes hope, sometimes fear,
always far-off and vague, an abstraction rather than a person, 'a
stream of tendency' without us, that which is unnameable, and the
like. I need not dwell upon the thought that Jesus Christ has showed
us a Father, has brought a God to our hearts whom we can love, whom we
can know really though not fully, of whom we can be sure with a
certitude which is as deep as the certitude of our own personal being;
that He has brought to us a God before whom we do not need to crouch
far off, that He has brought to us a God whom we can trust. Very
significant is it that Christianity alone puts the very heart of
religion in the act of trust. Other religions put it in dread,
worship, service, and the like. Jesus Christ alone says, the bond
between men and God is that blessed one of trust. And He says so
because He alone brings us a God whom it is not ridiculous to tell men
to trust.

And, on the other hand, the truth that underlies this is not only that
Jesus Christ is the Revealer of God, but that He Himself is divine.
Light shines through a window, but the light and the glass that makes
it visible have nothing in common with one another. The Godhead shines
through Christ, but _He_ is not a mere transparent medium. It is
Himself that He is showing us when He is showing us God. 'He that hath
seen Me hath seen'--not the light that streams through Me--but 'hath
seen,' in Me, 'the Father.' And because He is Himself divine and the
divine Revealer, therefore the faith that grasps Him is inseparably
one with the faith that grasps God. Men could look upon a Moses, an
