'THE GOD OF THE AMEN'

'He who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of
truth; and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of
truth.'--ISAIAH lxv. 16.


The full beauty and significance of these remarkable words are only
reached when we attend to the literal rendering of a part of them which
is obscured in our version. As they stand in the original they have, in
both cases, instead of the vague expression, 'The God of truth,' the
singularly picturesque one, 'The God of the Amen.'

I. Note the meaning of the name. Now, _Amen_ is an adjective, which
means literally firm, true, reliable, or the like. And, as we know, its
liturgical use is that, in the olden time, and to some extent in the
present time, it was the habit of the listening people to utter it at
the close of prayer or praise. But besides this use at the end of some
one else's statement, which the sayer of the 'Amen' confirms by its
utterance, we also find it used at the beginning of a statement, by the
speaker, in order to confirm his own utterance by it.

And these two uses of the expression reposing on its plain meaning, in
the first instance signifying, 'I tell you that it is so'; and in the
second instance signifying, 'So may it be!' or, 'So we believe it is,'
underlie this grand title which God takes to Himself here, 'the God of
the Amen,' both His Amen and ours. So that the thought opens up very
beautifully and simply into these two, His truth and our faith.

First, it emphasises the absolute truthfulness of every word that comes
from His lips. There is implied in the title that He really _has_
spoken, and declared to man something of His will, something of His
nature, something of His purposes, something of our destiny. And now He
puts, as it were, the broad seal upon the charter and says, 'Amen!
Verily it is so, and My word of Revelation is no man's imagination, and
My word of command is the absolute unveiling of human duty and human
perfectness, and My word of promise is that upon which a man may rest
all his weight and be safe for ever.' God's word is 'Amen!' man's word
is 'perhaps.' For in regard to the foundation truths of man's belief
and experience and need, no human tongue can venture to utter its own
asseverations with nothing behind them but itself, and expect men to
accept them; but that is exactly what God does, and alone has the right
to do. His word absolutely, and through and through, in every fibre of
it, is reliable and true.

Now do not forget that there was one who came to us and said, 'Amen!
Amen! I say unto you.' Jesus Christ, in all His deep and wonderful
utterances, arrogated to Himself the right which God here declares to
be exclusively His, and He said, 'I too have, and I too exercise, the
right and the authority to lay My utterances down before you, and
expect you to take them because of nothing else than because I say
them.' God is the God of the Amen! The last book of Scripture, when it
draws back the curtain from the mysteries of the glorified session of
Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, makes Him say to us, 'These
things saith the Amen!' And if you want to know what that means, its
explanation follows in the next clause, 'the faithful and true witness.'

But then, on the other hand, necessarily involved in this title, though
capable of being separately considered, is not only the absolute
truthfulness of the divine word, but also the thorough-going reliance,
on our parts, which that word expects and demands. God's 'Amen,' and
'Verily,' of confirmation, should ever cause the 'Amen' of acceptance
and assent to leap from our lips. If He begins with that mighty word,
so soon as the solemn voice has ceased its echo should rise from our
hearts. The city that cares for the charter which its King has given it
will prepare a fitting, golden receptacle in which to treasure it. And
the men who believe that God in very deed has spoken laws that
illuminate, and commandments that guide, and promises that calm and
strengthen and fulfil themselves, will surely prepare in their hearts
an appropriate receptacle for those precious and infallible words.
God's truth has corresponding to it our trust. God's faithfulness
demands, and is only adequately met by, our faith. If He gives us the
sure foundation to build upon, it will be a shame for us to bring wood,
hay, stubble, and build these upon the Rock of Ages. The building
should correspond with its foundation, and the faith which grasps the
sure word should have in it something of the unchangeableness and
certainty and absoluteness of that word which it grasps. If His
revelation of Himself is certain, you and I ought to be certain of His
revelation of Himself. Our certitude should correspond to its certainty.

Ah! my friend, what a miserable contrast there is between the firm,
unshaken, solid security of the divine word upon which we say that we
trust, and the poor, feeble, broken trust which we build upon it. 'Let
not that man think that He shall receive anything of the Lord'; but let
us expect, as well as 'ask, in faith, nothing wavering'; and let our
'Amen!' ring out in answer to God's.

The Apostle Paul has a striking echo of the words of my text in the
second Epistle to the Corinthians: 'All the promises of God in Him are
yea! and through Him also is the Amen!' The assent, full, swift,
frank--the assent of the believing heart to the great word of God comes
through the same channel, and reaches God by the same way, as God's
word on which it builds comes to us. The 'God of the Amen,' in both
senses of the word, is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
is the seal as well as the substance of the divine promises, and whose
voice in us is the answer to, and the grasp of, the promises of which
He is the substance and soul.

II. Now notice, next, how this God of the Amen is, by reason of that
very characteristic, the source of all blessing.

'He who blesseth himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of
Truth.' That phrase of _blessing oneself in_, which is a frequent Old
Testament expression, is roughly equivalent to invoking, and therefore
receiving, blessing from. You find it, for instance, in the
seventy-second Psalm, in that grand burst which closes one of the books
of the Psalter and hails the coming of the Messianic times, of which my
text also is a prediction. 'Men shall be blessed in Him,' or rather,
'shall bless themselves in Him,' which is a declaration, that all
needful benediction shall come down upon humanity through the coming
Messias, as well as that men shall recognise in that Messias the source
of all their blessing and good. So the text declares that, in those
days that are yet to come, the whole earth shall be filled with men
whose eyes have been purged from ignorance and sin, and from the
illusions of sense and the fascinations of folly, and who have learned
that only in the God of the Amen is the blessing of their life to be
found.

Of course it is so. For only on Him can I lean all my weight and be
sure that the stay will not give. All other bridges across the great
abysses which we have to traverse or be lost in them, are like those
snow-cornices upon some Alp, which may break when the climber is on the
very middle of them, and let him down into blackness out of which he
will never struggle. There is only one path clear across the deepest
gulf, which we poor pilgrims can tread with absolute safety that it
will never yield beneath our feet. My brother! there is one support
that is safe, and one stay upon which a man can lean his whole weight
and be sure that the staff will never either break or pierce his palm,
and that is the faithful God, in whose realm are no disappointments,
amongst whose trusters are no heart-broken and deceived men, but who
gives bountifully, and over and above all that we are able to ask or
think. They who have made experience, as we have all made experience,
of the insufficiency of earthly utterances, of the doubtfulness of the
clearest words of men, of the possible incapacity of the most loving,
to be what they pledge themselves to be, and of the certainty that even
if they are so for a while they cannot be so always--have surely
learned one half, at least, of the lesson that life is meant to teach
us; and it is our own fault if we have not bettered it with the better
half, having uncoiled the tendrils of our hearts from the rotten props
round which they have been too apt to twine themselves, and wreathed
them about the pillars of the eternal throne, which can never shake nor
fail. 'He that blesseth himself in the earth shall bless
himself'--unless he is a fool--'in the God of the Amen!' and not in the
_man_ of the 'peradventure.'

III. Lastly, note how the God of the Amen should be the pattern of His
servants.

'He that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth,' or,
'of the Amen.' The prophet deduces from the name the solemn thought
that those who truly feel its significance will shape _their_ words
accordingly, and act and speak so that they shall not fear to call His
pure eyes to witness that there are neither, hypocrisy, nor
insincerity, nor vacillation, nor the 'hidden things of dishonesty' nor
any of the skulking meannesses of craft and self-seeking in them. 'I
swear by the God of the Amen, and call Thy faithfulness to witness that
I am trying to be like Thee,' that is what we ought to do if we call
ourselves Christians. If we have any hold at all of Him, and of His
love, and of the greatness and majesty of His faithfulness, we shall
try to make our poor little lives, in such measure as the dewdrops may
be like the sun, radiant like His, and of the same shape as His, for
the dewdrop and the sun are both of them spheres. That is exactly what
the apostle does, in that same chapter in 2 Cor., to which I already
referred. He takes these very thoughts of my text, and in their double
aspect too, and says, 'Just because God is faithful, do you Corinthians
think that, when I told you that I was coming to see you, I did not
mean it?' He brings the greatest thought that He can find about God and
God's truth, down to the settlement of this very little matter, the
vindication of Himself from the charge, on the one hand, of facile and
inconsiderate vacillation, and, on the other hand, of insincerity. So,
we may say, the greatest thoughts should regulate the smallest acts.
Though our maps be but a quarter of an inch to a hundred miles, let us
see that they are drawn to scale. Let us see that He is our Pattern;
and that the truthfulness, the simplicity, and faithfulness, which we
rest upon as the very foundation of our intellectual as well as our
moral and religious being, are, in our measure, copied in ourselves.
'As God is faithful,' said Paul, 'our word to you was not yea! and
nay!' And they who are trusting to the God of the Amen! will live in
all simplicity and godly sincerity; their yea will be yea, and their
nay, nay.



THE BOOK OF JEREMIAH


GOD'S LAWSUIT


'Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the Lord, and with your
children's children will I plead.'--JER. ii. 9.

Point out that 'plead' is a forensic term. There is a great lawsuit in
which God is plaintiff and men defendants. The word is frequent in
Isaiah.

I. The reason for God's pleading.

The cause--'wherefore.' Our transgression does not make Him turn away
from us. It does profoundly modify the whole relation between us. It
does give an aspect of antagonism to His dealings.

II. The manner.

The whole history of the world and of each individual. All outward
providences. All the voice of Conscience. Christ. Spirit, who convinces
the world of Sin.

III. The purpose.

Wholly our being drawn from our evil. The purely reformatory character
of all punishment here. The sole object to win us back to Himself. He
conquers in this lawsuit when we come to love Him.

IV. The patience.

That merciful pleading--'I will _yet_'--runs on through all sin, and is
only made more earnest by deepening hostility. After rejections still
lingers. Extends over a thousand generations. Is exercised even where
He foresees failure.




STIFF-NECKED IDOLATERS AND PLIABLE CHRISTIANS

'Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods? but My people
have changed their glory for that which doth not profit.'--JER. ii. 11.


The obstinacy of the adherents of idolatry is in striking contrast with
Israel's continual tendency to forsake Jehovah. It reads a scarcely
less forcible lesson to many nominal and even to some real Christians.

I. That contrast carries with it a disclosure of the respective origins
of the two kinds of Religion.

The strangeness of the contrasted conduct is intensified when we take
into account the tremendous contrast between the two Objects of
worship. Israel's God was Israel's 'Glory'; the idol-worshipper bowed
down before 'that which doth not profit,' and yet no experience of God
could bind His fickle worshippers to Him, and no experience of the
impotence of the idol could shake its votaries' devotion. They cried
and were not heard. They toiled and had no results. They broke their
teeth on 'that which is not bread,' and filled their mouths with gritty
ashes that mocked them with a semblance of nourishment and left them
with empty stomachs and excoriated gums, yet by some strange
hallucination they clung to 'vanities,' while Israel was always
hankering after opportunity to desert Jehovah. The stage of
civilisation partly accounts for the strange fascination of idolatry
over the Israelites. But the deeper solution lies in the fact that the
one religion rises from the hearts of men, corresponds to their moral
condition, and is largely moulded by their lower nature; while the
other is from above, corresponds, indeed, with the best and deepest
longings and needs of souls, but contravenes many of their most clamant
wishes, and necessarily sets before them a standard high and difficult
to reach. Men make their gods in their own image, and are conscious of
no rebuke nor stimulus to loftier living when they gaze on them. The
God of Revelation bids men remake themselves in His image, and that
command requires endless effort. The average man has to put a strain on
his intellect in order to rise to the apprehension of God, and a still
more unwelcome strain on his moral nature to rise to the imitation of
God. No wonder, then, if the dwellers on the low levels should cleave
to them, and the pilgrims to the heights should often weary of their
toil and be distressed with the difficulty of breathing the thin air up
there, and should give up climbing and drop down to the flats once more.

II. That contrast carries with it a rebuke.

Many voices echo the prophet's contrast nowadays. Our travelling
countrymen, especially those of them who have no great love for earnest
religion, are in the habit of drawing disparaging contrasts between
Buddhists, Brahmins, Mohammedans, any worshippers of other gods and
Christians. One may not uncharitably suspect that a more earnest
Christianity would not please these critics much better than does the
tepid sort, and that the pictures they draw both of heathenism and of
Christianity are coloured by their likes and dislikes. But it is well
to learn from an enemy, and caricatures may often be useful in calling
attention to features which would escape notice but for exaggeration.
So we may profit by even the ill-natured and distorted likenesses of
ourselves as contrasted with the adherents of other religions which so
many 'liberal-minded' writers of travels delight to supply.

Think, then, of the rebuke which the obstinate adherence of idolaters
to their idols gives to the slack hold which so many professing
Christians have on their religion.

Think of the way in which these lower religions pervade the whole life
of their worshippers, and of how partial is the sway over a little
territory of life and conduct which Christianity has in many of its
adherents. The absorption in worship shown by Mohammedans, who will
spread their prayer carpets anywhere and perform their drill of prayers
without embarrassment or distraction in the sight of a crowd, or the
rapt 'devotion' of fakirs, are held up as a rebuke to us 'Christians'
who are ashamed to be caught praying. One may observe, in mitigation,
that the worship which is of the heart is naturally more sensitive to
surrounding distractions than that which is a matter of posturing and
repetition by rote. But there still remains substance enough in the
contrast to point a sharp arrow of rebuke.

And there is no denying that in these 'heathen' religions, religion is
intertwined with every act of life in a fashion which may well put to
shame many of us. Remember how Paul had to deal at length with the duty
of the Corinthians in view of the way in which every meal was a
sacrifice to some god, and how the same permeation of life with
religion is found in all these 'false faiths.' The octopus has coiled
its tentacles round the whole body of its victim. Bad and sad and mad
as idolatry is, it reads a rebuke to many of us, who keep life and
religion quite apart, and lock up our Christianity in our pews with our
prayer-books and hymnaries.

Think of the material sacrifices made by idolaters, in costly
offerings, in painful self-tortures, and in many other ways, and the
niggardliness and self-indulgence of so many so-called Christians.

III. The contrast suggests the greatness of the power which can
overcome even such obstinate adherence to idols.

There is one, and only one, solvent for that rock-like obstinacy--the
Gospel. The other religions have seldom attempted to encroach on each
other's territory, and where they have, their instrument of conversion
has generally been the sword. The Gospel has met and mastered them all.
It, and it only, has had power to draw men to itself out of every
faith. The ancient gods who bewitched Israel, the gods of Greece, the
gods of our own ancestors, the gods of the islands of the South Seas,
lie huddled together, in undistinguished heaps, like corpses on a
battlefield, and the deities of India and the East are wounded and
slowly bleeding out their lives. 'Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth, the
idols are upon the beasts,' all packed up, as it were, and ready to be
carried off.

The rate of progress in dethroning them varies with the varying
national conditions. It is easier to cut a tunnel through chalk than
through quartz.

IV. That contrast carries with it a call for Christian effort to spread
the conquering Gospel.


FOUNTAIN AND CISTERNS

'They have forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them
out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water'--JER. ii. 13.


The proclivity of the Jews to idolatry is an outstanding fact all
through their history. That persistent national tendency surely compels
us to recognise a divine inspiration as the source of the prophetic
teaching and of the lofty spiritual theology of the Old Testament,
which were in sharpest unlikeness and opposition to the whole trend of
the people's thoughts.

It is this apostasy which is referred to here. The false gods made by
men are the broken cisterns. But the text embodies a general truth.

I. The irksomeness of a godless life.

The contrast is between the springing fountain, there in the desert,
with the lush green herbage round about, where a man has only to stoop
and drink, and the painful hewing of cisterns.

This emblem of the fountain beautifully suggests the great thought of
God's own loving will as the self-originated impulse by which He pours
out all good. Apart from all our efforts, the precious gift is provided
for us. Our relation is only that of receivers.

We have the contrast with this in the laborious toils to which they
condemn themselves who seek for created sources of good. 'Hewn out
cisterns'--think of a man who, with a fountain springing in his
courtyard, should leave it and go to dig in the arid desert, or to hew
the live rock in hopes to gain water. It was already springing and
sparkling before him. The conduct of men, when they leave God and seek
for other delights, is like digging a canal alongside a navigable
river. They condemn themselves to a laborious and quite superfluous
task. The true way to get is to take.

Illustrations in religion. Think of the toil and pains spent in
idolatry and in corrupt forms of Christianity.

Illustrations in common life. Your toils--aye, and even your
pleasures--how much of them is laboriously digging for the water which
all the while is flowing at your side.

II. The hopelessness of a godless life.

The contrast further is between living waters and broken cisterns. God
is the fountain of living waters; in other words, in fellowship with
God there is full satisfaction for all the capacities and desires of
the soul; heart--conscience--will--understanding--hope and fear.

The contrast of the empty cisterns. What a deep thought that with all
their work men only make 'cisterns,' _i.e._ they only provide
circumstances which _could hold_ delights, but cannot secure that water
should be in them! The men-made cisterns must be God-filled, if filled
at all. The true joys from earthly things belong to him who has made
God his portion.

Further, they are 'broken cisterns,' and all have in them some flaw or
crack out of which the water runs. That is a vivid metaphor for the
fragmentary satisfaction which all earthly good gives, leaving a deep
yearning unstilled. And it is temporary as well as partial. 'He that
drinketh of this water shall thirst again'--nay, even as with those who
indulge in intoxicating drinks, the appetite increases while the power
of the draught to satisfy it diminishes. But the crack in the cistern
points further to the uncertain tenure of all earthly goods and the
certain leaving of them all.

All godless life is a grand mistake.

III. The crime of a godless life.

It is right to seek for happiness. It is sin to go away from God. You
are thereby not merely flinging away your chances, but are
transgressing against your sacredest obligations. Our text is not only
a remonstrance on the grounds of prudence, showing God-neglecting men
that they are foolish, but it is an appeal to conscience, convincing
them that they are sinful. God loves us and cares for us. We are bound
to Him by ties which do not depend on our own volition. And so there is
punishment for the sin, and the evils experienced in a godless life are
penal as well as natural.

We recall the New Testament modification of this metaphor, 'The water
that I shall give him shall be _in_ him a fountain of water.' Arabs in
desert round dried--up springs. Hagar. Shipwrecked sailors on a reef.
Christ opens 'rivers in the wilderness and streams in the desert.'




FORSAKING JEHOVAH

'Know therefore, and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that
thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God, and that My fear is not in thee,
saith the Lord God of hosts.'--JER. ii. 19.


Of course the original reference is to national apostasy, which was
aggravated by the national covenant, and avenged by national disasters,
which are interpreted and urged by the prophet as God's merciful
pleading with men. But the text is true in reference to individuals.

I. The universal indictment.

This is not so much a charge of isolated overt acts, as of departure
from God. That departure, itself a sin, is the fountain of all other
sins. Every act which is morally wrong is religiously a departure from
God; it could not be done, unless heart and will had moved away from
their allegiance to Him. So the solemn mystery of right and wrong
becomes yet more solemn, when our personal relation to the personal God
is brought in.

Then--consider what this forsaking is-at bottom aversion of will, or
rather of the whole nature, from Him.

How strange and awful is that power which a creature possesses of
closing his heart against God, and setting up a quasi-independence!

How universal it is-appeal to each man's own consciousness.

II. The special aggravation.

'_Thy God_ '---the original reference is to Israel, whom God had taken
for His and to whom He had given Himself as theirs, by His choice from
of old, by redemption from Egypt, by covenant, and by centuries of
blessings. But the designation is true in regard to God and each of us.
It points to the personal relation which we each sustain to Him, and so
is a pathetic appeal to affection and gratitude.

III. The bitter fruit.

6 Evil' may express rather the moral character of forsaking God, while
'bitter' expresses rather the consequences of it, which are sorrows.

So the prophet appeals to experience. As the Psalmist confidently
invites to 'taste and see that God is good,' so Jeremiah boldly bids
the apostates know and see that departing is bitter.

It is so, for it leaves the soul unsatisfied.

It leads to remorse.

It drags after it manifold bitter fruits. 'The wages of sin is death.'

Sin without consequent sorrow is an impossibility if there is a God.

IV. The loving appeal.

The text is not denunciation, but tender, though indignant, pleading,
in hope of winning back the wanderers. The prophet has just been
pointing to the sorrowful results which necessarily follow on the
nation's apostasy, and tells Israel that its own wickedness shall
correct it, and then, in the text, he beseeches them not to be blind to
the meaning of their miseries, but to let these teach them how sinful
and how sorrowful their apostasy is. Men's sorrows are a mystery, but
that sinners should not have sorrows were a sadder mystery still. And
God pleads with us all not to lose the good of our experiences of the
bitterness of sin by our levity or our blindness to their meaning. By
His providences, by His Spirit working on us, by the plain teachings
and loving pleadings of His word, He is ever striving to open our eyes
that we may see Good and Evil, and recognise that all Good is bound up
for us with cleaving to God, and all Evil with departing from Him. When
we turn our backs on Him we are full front with the deformed figure of
Evil; when we turn away from it, we are face to face with Him, and in
Him, with all Good.




A COLLOQUY BETWEEN A PENITENT AND GOD

'A voice was heard upon the high places, weeping and supplications of
the children of Israel: for they have perverted their way, and they
have forgotten the Lord their God. Return, ye backsliding children, and
I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we come unto Thee; for Thou art
the Lord our God.'---JER. iii. 21, 22.


We have here a brief dramatic dialogue. First is heard a voice from the
bare heights, the sobs and cries of penitence, produced by the
prophet's earnest remonstrance. The penitent soul is absorbed in the
thought of its own evil. Its sin stands clear before it. Israel sees
its sin in its two forms. 'They have perverted their way,' or have led
a wrong outward life of action, and the reason is that 'they have
forgotten God,' or have been guilty of inward alienation and departure
from Him. Here is the consciousness of sin in its essential character,
and that produces godly sorrow. The distinction between mere remorse
and repentance is here already, in the 'weeping and supplication.'

I. So we have here a consciousness of sin in its true nature, as
embracing both deeds and heart, as originating in departure from God,
and manifested in perverted conduct.

Further, we have here sorrow. There may be consciousness of sin in its
true nature without any sorrow of heart. It is fatal when a man looks
upon his evil, gets a more or less clear sight of it, and is not sorry
and penitent. It is conceivable that there should be perfect knowledge
of sin and perfect insensibility in regard to it.

A sinful man's true mood should be sorrow--not flinging the blame on
others, or on fate, or circumstances; not regarding his sin as
misfortune or as inevitable or as disease.

Conscience is meant to produce that consciousness and that sorrow: but
conscience may be dulled or silenced. It cannot be anyhow induced to
call evil good, but it may be mistaken in what is evil. The gnomon is
true, but a veil of cloud may be drawn over the sky.

Further, we have here supplication. These two former may both be
experienced, without this third. There may be consciousness of sin and
sorrow which lead to no blessing. 'My bones waxed old through my
roaring.' Sorrow after a godly sort may be hindered by false notions of
God's great love, or by false notions of what a man ought to do when he
finds he has gone wrong. It may be hindered by cleaving, subtle love of
sin, or by self-trust. But where all these have been overcome there is
true repentance.

II. The loving divine answer.

Another ear than the prophet's has heard the plaint from the bare
heights. Many a frenzied shriek had gone up from these shrines of
idolatrous worship, and as with Baal's prophets, it had brought no
answer, nor had there been any that regarded. But this weeping reaches
the ear that is never closed. Contrast with verse 23: 'Truly in vain is
the help that is looked for from the hills, the shouting (of
idol-worshippers) on the mountains.'

The instantaneousness of God's answer is very beautiful. It is like the
action of the father in the parable of the prodigal son, who saw his
repentant boy afar off and ran and kissed him.

There seems to be, in both the invitation to return and in the promise
to hear the backslidings, a quotation from Hosea xiv. (1-4). We see
here how God meets the penitent with a love that recognises all his sin
and yet is love. It is not rebuke or reproach that lies in that
designation, 'backsliding children.' It is tenderest mercy that lets us
see that He knows exactly what we are, and yet promises His love and
forgiveness. He loves us sinners with a love that beckons us back to
Himself, with a love that promises healing. The truth which should be
taken into the mind and heart of the man conscious of sin is God's
knowledge of it all already and yet His undiminished love, God's
welcome of him back, God's ready pardon. All this is true for the world
in Christ, and is true for every individual soul.

The answer and the invitation here are immediate.

There is often a long period of painful struggle. It looks as if the
answer were not immediate. But that is because we do not listen to it.

III. The happy response of the returning soul.

That too is immediate. The soul believes God's promises. It recognises
God's claim. It returns to Him. We are attracted by His grace. The
sunflower turns to the sun. The penitent is not driven only, but
drawn--God's own loving self-revelation in Christ is His true power.
'I, if I am lifted up, will draw all men unto Me.'

The consciousness of sin remains and is even deepened (subsequent
verses), and yet is different. A light of hope is in it. The very sense
of sin brings us to Him, to hide our faces on His heart like a child in
its mother's lap.

This response of the soul may be instantaneous. If it is not immediate,
it too probably will never be at all.




A QUESTION FOR THE BEGINNING

'What will ye do in the end?'--JER. v. 31.


I find that I preached to the young from this text just thirty years
since--nearly a generation ago. How few of my then congregation are
here to-night! how changed they and I are! and how much nearer the
close we have drifted! How many of the young men and women of that
evening have gone to meet the end, and how many of them have wrecked
their lives because they would not face and answer this question!

Ah, dear young friends, if I could bring some of the living and some of
the dead, and set them to witness here instead of me, they would burn
in on you, as my poor words never can do, the insanity of living
without a satisfactory and sufficient reply to the question of my text,
'What will ye do in the end?'

In its original application these words referred to a condition of
religious and moral corruption in which a whole nation was involved.
The men that should have spoken for God were 'prophesying lies.' The
priests connived at profitable falsehoods because by these their rule
was confirmed. And the deluded populace, as is always the case,
preferred smooth falsehoods to stern truths. So the prophet turns round
indignantly, and asks what can be the end of such a welter and carnival
of vice and immorality, and beseeches his contemporaries to mend their
ways by bethinking themselves of what their course led to.

But we may dismiss the immediate application of the words for the sake
of looking at the general principle which underlies them. It is a very
familiar and well-worn one. It is simply this, that a large part of the
wise conduct of life depends on grave consideration of consequences. It
is a sharp-pointed question, that pricks many a bubble, and brings much
wisdom down into the category of folly. There would be less misery in
the world, and fewer fair young lives cast away upon grim rocks, if the
question of my text were oftener asked and answered.

I. I note, first, that here is a question which every wise man will ask
himself.

I do not mean to say that the consideration of consequences is the
highest guide, nor that it is always a sufficient one; nor that it is,
by any means, in every case, an easily applied one. For we can all
conceive of circumstances in which it is the plainest duty to take a
certain course of action, knowing that, as far as this life is
concerned, it will bring down disaster and ruin. Do right! and face
_any_ results therefrom. He who is always forecasting possible issues
has a very leaden rule of conduct, and will be so afraid of results
that he will not dare to move; and his creeping prudence will often
turn out to be the truest imprudence.

But whilst all that is true, and many deductions must be made from the
principle which I have laid down, that the consideration of
circumstances is a good guide in life, yet there are regions in which
the question comes home with direct and illuminating force. Let me just
illustrate one or two of these.

Take the lower application of the question to nearer ends in life. Now
this awful life that we live is so strangely concatenated of causes and
effects, and each little deed drags after it such a train of eternal
and ever-widening consequences, that a man must be an idiot if he never
looks an inch beyond his nose to see the bearing of his actions. I
believe that, in the long-run, and in the general, condition is the
result of character and of conduct; and that, whatsoever deductions may
be necessary, yet, speaking generally, and for the most part, men are
the architects of their own condition, and that they make the houses
that they dwell in to fit the convolutions of the body that dwells
within them. And, that being so, it being certain that 'whatsoever a
man soweth, that shall he also reap,' and that no deed, be it ever so
small, be it ever so evanescent, be it ever so entirely confined within
our own inward nature, and never travelling out into visibility in what
men call actions--that every one of such produces an eternal, though it
may be an all but imperceptible effect, upon ourselves; oh, surely
there can be nothing more ridiculous than that a man should refrain
from forecasting the issue of his conduct, and saying to himself? 'What
am I to do in the end?'

If you would only do that in regard to hosts of things in your daily
life you _could_ not be the men and women that you are. If the lazy
student would only bring clearly before his mind the examination-room,
and the unanswerable paper, and the bitter mortification when the
pass-list comes out and his name is not there, he would not trifle and
dawdle and seek all manner of diversions as he does, but he would bind
himself to his desk and his task. If the young man who begins to tamper
with purity, and in the midst of the temptations of a great city to
gratify the lust of the eye and the lust of the flesh, because he is
away from the shelter of his father's house, and the rebuke of his
mother's purity, could see, as the older of us have seen, men with
their bones full of the iniquity of their youth, or drifted away from
the city to die, down in the country like a rat in a hole, do you think
the temptations of the streets and low places of amusement would not be
stripped of their fascination? If the man beginning to drink were to
say to himself, 'What am I to do in the end?' when the craving becomes
physical, and volition is suspended, and anything is sacrificed in
order to still the domineering devil within, do you think he would
begin? I do not believe that all sin comes from ignorance, but sure I
am that if the sinful man saw what the end is he would, in nine cases
out of ten, be held back. 'What will ye do in the end?' Use that
question, dear friends, as the Ithuriel spear which will touch the
squatting tempter at your ear, and there will start up, in its own
shape, the fiend.

But the main application that I would ask you to make of the words of
my text is in reference to the final end, the passing from life. Death,
the end, is likewise Death, the beginning. If it were an absolute end,
as coarse infidelity pretends to believe it is, then, of course, such a
question as my text would have no kind of relevance. 'What will ye do
in the end?' 'Nothing! for I shall be nothing. I shall just go back to
the nonentity that I was. I do not need to trouble myself.' Ah, but
Janus has two faces, one turned to the present and one to the future.
His temple has two gates, one which admits from this lower level, and
one, at the back, which launches us out on to the higher level. The end
is a beginning, and the beginning is retribution. The end of sowing is
the beginning of harvest. The man finishes his work and commences to
live on his wages. The brewing is over, and the drinking of the brewst
commences.

And so, brother, 'What will ye do in the end--which is not an end, but
which is a beginning? 'Surely every wise man will take that question
into consideration. Surely, if it be true that we all of us are
silently drifting to that one little gateway through which we have to
pass one by one, and then find ourselves in a region all full of
consequences of the present, he has a good claim to be counted a prince
of fools who 'jumps the life to come,' and, in all his calculations of
consequences, which he applies wisely and prudently to the trifles of
the present, forgets to ask himself, 'And, after all that is done, what
shall I do then?' You remember the question in the old ballad:

  "'What good came of it at last?' ...
  'Nay, that I cannot tell,' quoth he;
  But 'twas a famous victory.'"

Ay, but what came of it at the last? Oh brother, that one question,
pushed to its issues, condemns the wisdom of this world as folly, and
pulverises into nothingness millions of active lives and successful
schemes. What then? What then? 'I have much goods laid up for many
years.' Well and good, what then? 'I will say to my soul, Take thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry.' Yes, what then? 'This night thy soul
shall be required of thee.' He never thought of that! And so his
epitaph was 'Thou fool!'

II. So, secondly, mark, here is a question which a great many of us
never think about.

I do not mean, now, so much in reference to the nearer ends compassed
in this life, though even in regard to them it is only too true; I mean
rather in regard to that great and solemn issue to which we are all
tending. But in regard of both, it seems to me one of the strangest
things in all the world that men should be content so commonly to be
ignorant of what they perfectly well know, and never to give attention
to that of which, should they bethink themselves, they are absolutely
certain.

'What will ye do in the end?' Why! half of us put away that question
with the thought in our minds, if not expressed, at least most
operative, 'There is not going to be any end; and it is always going to
be just like what it is to-day.' Did you ever think that there is no
good ground for being sure that the sun will rise to-morrow; that it
rose for the first time once; that there will come a day when it will
rise for the last time? The uniformity of Nature may be a postulate,
but you cannot find any logical basis for it. Or, to come down from
heights of that sort, have you ever laid to heart, brother, that the
only unchangeable thing in this world is change, and the only thing
certain, that there is no continuance of anything; and that, therefore,
you and I are bound, if we are wise, to look that fact in the face, and
