Tell me, Celine, is it for the peach's own sake that God created
that colour so fair to the eye, that velvety covering so soft to
the touch? Is it for itself that He made it so sweet? Nay, it is
for us; the only thing that is all its own and is essential to its
being, is the stone; it possesses nothing beyond.

Thus also it pleases Jesus to lavish His gifts on certain souls in
order to draw yet others to Himself; in His Mercy He humbles them
inwardly and gently compels them to recognise their nothingness
and His Almighty Power. Now this sentiment of humility is like a
kernel of grace which God hastens to develop against that blessed
day, when, clothed with an imperishable beauty, they will be
placed, without danger, on the banqueting-table of Paradise. Dear
little sister, sweet echo of my soul, Therese is far from the
heights of fervour at this moment; but when I am in this state of
spiritual dryness, unable to pray, or to practise virtue, I look
for little opportunities, for the smallest trifles, to please my
Jesus: a smile or a kind word, for instance, when I would wish to
be silent, or to show that I am bored. If no such occasion offer,
I try at least to say over and over again that I love Him. This is
not hard, and it keeps alive the fire in my heart. Even should the
fire of love seem dead, I would still throw my tiny straws on the
ashes, and I am confident it would light up again.

It is true I am not always faithful, but I never lose courage. I
leave myself in the Arms of Our Lord. He teaches me to draw profit
from everything, from the good and from the bad which He finds in
me.[33] He teaches me to speculate in the Bank of Love, or rather
it is He Who speculates for me, without telling me how He does
it--that is His affair, not mine. I have but to surrender myself
wholly to Him, to do so without reserve, without even the
satisfaction of knowing what it is all bringing to me. . . . After
all, I am not the prodigal child, and Jesus need not trouble about
a feast for me, _because I am always with Him._[34]

I have read in the Gospel that the Good Shepherd leaves the
faithful ones of His flock in the desert to hasten after the lost
sheep. This confidence touches me deeply. You see He is sure of
them. How could they stray away? They are prisoners of Love. In
like manner does the Beloved Shepherd of our souls deprive us of
the sweets of His Presence, to give His consolations to sinners;
or if He lead us to Mount Thabor it is but for one brief moment
. . . the pasture land is nearly always in the valleys, "it is
there
that He takes His rest at mid-day."[35]


XVII

October 20, 1893.

MY DEAR SISTER,--I find in the Canticle of Canticles this passage
which may be fitly applied to you: "What dost thou see in thy
beloved but a band of musicians in an armed camp?"[36] Through
suffering, your life has in truth become a battle-field, and there
must be a band of musicians, so you shall be the little harp of
Jesus. But no concert is complete without singing, and if Jesus
plays, must not Celine make melody with her voice? When the music
is plaintive, she will sing the songs of exile; when the music is
gay, she will lilt the airs of her Heavenly Home. . . .

Whatever may happen, all earthly events, be they happy or sad,
will be but distant sounds, unable to awake a vibration from the
harp of Jesus. He reserves to Himself alone the right of lightly
touching its strings.

I cannot think without delight of that sweet saint, Cecilia. What
an example she gives us! In the midst of a pagan world, in the
very heart of danger, at the moment when she was to be united to a
man whose love was so utterly of earth, it seems to me as if she
should have wept and trembled with fear. But instead, "during the
music of the marriage-feast Cecilia kept singing in her
heart."[37] What perfect resignation! No doubt she heard other
melodies than those of this world; her Divine Spouse too was
singing, and the Angels repeated in chorus the refrain of
Bethlehem's blessed night: "Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth peace to men of goodwill."[38]

The Glory of God! St. Cecilia understood it well, and longed for
it with all her heart. She guessed that her Jesus was thirsting
for souls . . . and that is why her whole desire was to bring to
Him quickly the soul of the young Roman, whose only thought was of
human glory. This wise Virgin will make of him a Martyr, and
multitudes will follow in his footsteps. She knows no fear: the
Angels in their song made promise of peace. She knows that the
Prince of Peace is bound to protect her, to guard her virginity,
and to make her recompense. . . . "Oh, how beautiful is the chaste
generation!"[39]

Dearest sister, I hardly know what I write; I let my pen follow
the dictates of my heart. You tell me that you feel your weakness,
but that is a grace. It is Our Lord Who sows the seeds of distrust
of self in your soul. Do not be afraid! If you do not fail to give
Him pleasure in small things, he will be obliged to help you in
great ones.

The Apostles laboured long without Him, they toiled a whole night
and caught no fish. Their labours were not inacceptable to him,
but He wished to prove that He is the Giver of all things. So an
act of humility was asked of the Apostles, and Our loving Lord
called to them: "Children, have you anything to eat?"[40] St.
Peter, avowing his helplessness, cried out: "Lord, we have
laboured all the night, and have taken nothing."[41] It is enough,
the Heart of Jesus is touched. . . . Had the Apostle caught some
small fish, perhaps our Divine Master would not have worked a
miracle; but he had caught _nothing,_ and so through the power and
goodness of God his nets were soon filled with great fishes. Such
is Our Lord's way. He gives as God--with divine largesse--but He
insists on humility of heart.


XVIII

July 7, 1894.

MY DEAR LITTLE SISTER,--I do not know if you are still in the same
frame of mind as when you last wrote to me; I presume that you
are, and I answer with this passage of the Canticle of Canticles,
which explains so well the state of a soul in utter dryness, a
soul which cannot find joy or consolation in anything: "I went
down into the garden of nut-trees to see the fruits of the
valleys, and to look if the vineyard had flourished, and the
pomegranates were in bud. I no longer knew where I was: my soul
was troubled because of the chariots of Aminadab."[42]

There is the true picture of our souls. Often we go down in the
fertile valleys where our heart loves to find its nourishment; and
the vast fields of Holy Scripture, which have so often opened to
yield us richest treasures, now seem but an arid and waterless
waste. We no longer even know where we stand. In place of peace
and light, all is sorrow and darkness. But, like the Spouse in the
Canticles, we know the cause of this trial: "My soul was troubled
because of the chariots of Aminadab." We are not as yet in our
true country, and as gold is tired in the fire so must our souls
be purified by temptation. We sometimes think we are abandoned.
Alas! _the chariots_--that is to say, the idle clamours which
beset and disturb us--are they within the soul or without? We
cannot tell, but Jesus knows; He sees all our grief, and in the
night, on a sudden, His Voice is heard: "Return, return, O
Sulamitess: return, return, that we may behold thee."[43]

O gracious call! We dared no longer even look upon ourselves, the
sight filled us with horror, and Jesus calls us that He may look
upon us at leisure. He wills to see us; He comes, and with Him
come the other two Persons of the Adorable Trinity to take
possession of our soul.

Our Lord had promised this, when, with unspeakable tenderness, He
had said of old: "If anyone love Me he will keep My word, and My
Father will love him, and We will come to him, and will make Our
abode with him."[44] To keep the word of Jesus, then, is one
condition of our happiness, the proof of our love for Him; and
this word seems to me to be His very Self, for He calls Himself
the Uncreated _Word_ of the Father.

In the same Gospel of St. John He makes the sublime prayer:
"Sanctify them by Thy word, Thy word is truth."[45] And in another
passage Jesus teaches us that He is "the Way and the Truth and the
Life."[46] We know, then, what is this word which must be kept; we
cannot say, like Pilate: "What is truth?"[47] We possess the
Truth, for our Beloved dwells in our hearts.

Often _this Beloved is to us a bundle of myrrh._[48] We share the
chalice of His sufferings; but how sweet it will be to us one day
to hear these gentle words: "You are they who have continued with
Me in My temptations, and I dispose to you, as My Father hath
disposed to Me, a kingdom."[49]


XIX

August 19, 1894.

This is perhaps the last time that I need have recourse to writing
in order to talk to you, my dear little sister. God in His
goodness has granted my dearest wish. Come, and we will suffer
together . . . Then Jesus will take one of us, and the others will
remain in exile yet a little longer. Now, listen well to what I am
going to say: God will never, never separate us; and if I die
before you, do not think that I shall be far away--never shall we
have been more closely united. You must not be grieved at my
childish prophecy. I am not ill, I have an iron constitution; but
the Lord can break iron as if it were clay.

Our dear Father makes his presence felt in a way which touches me
deeply. After a death lasting for five long years, what joy to
find him as he used to be, nay, more a father than ever! How well
he is going to repay you for the care you so generously bestowed
on him! You were his Angel, now he will be yours. He has only been
one month in heaven, and already, through the power of his
intercession, all your plans are succeeding. It is easy for him
now to arrange matters for us, and he has had less to suffer on
Celine's account than he had for his poor little Queen.

For a long time you have been asking me for news about the
noviciate, especially about my work, and now I am going to satisfy
you. In my dealings with the novices I am like a setter on the
scent of game. The role gives me much anxiety because it so very
exacting. You shall decide for yourself if this be not the case.
All day long, from morn till night, I am in pursuit of game.
Mother Prioress and the Novice Mistress play the part of
sportsmen--but sportsmen are too big to be creeping through the
cover, whereas a little dog can push its way in anywhere . . . and
then its scent is so keen! I keep a close watch upon my little
rabbits; I do not want to do them any harm, but I tell them
gently: "You must keep your fur glossy, and must not look
foolishly about as does a rabbit of the warren." In fact, I try to
make them such as the Hunter of Souls would have them, simple
little creatures that go on browsing heedless of everything else.

I laugh now, but seriously I am quite convinced that one of these
rabbits--you know which one I mean--is worth a hundred times more
than the setter; it has run through many a danger, and I own that,
had I been in its place, I should have long since been lost for
ever in the great forest of the world.


XX

I am so glad, dearest Celine, that you do not feel any particular
attraction at the thought of entering the Carmel. This is really a
mark of Our Lord's favour, and shows that He looks for a gift from
your hands. He knows that it is so much sweeter to give than to
receive. What happiness to suffer for Him Who loves us even unto
folly, and to pass for fools in the eyes of the world! We judge
others by ourselves, and, as the world will not hearken to reason,
it calls us unreasonable too.

We may console ourselves, we are not the first. Folly was the only
crime with which Herod could reproach Our Lord . . . and, after
all, Herod was right. Yes, indeed, it was folly to come and seek
the poor hearts of mortal men to make them thrones for Him, the
King of Glory, Who sitteth above the Cherubim! Was He not
supremely happy in the company of His Father and the Holy Spirit
of Love? Why, then, come down on earth to seek sinners and make of
them His closest friends? Nay, our folly could never exceed His,
and our deeds are quite within the bounds of reason. The world may
leave us alone. I repeat, it is the world that is _insane,_
because it heeds not what Jesus has done and suffered to save it
from eternal damnation.

We are neither idlers nor spendthrifts. Our Divine Master has
taken our defence upon Himself. Remember the scene in the house of
Lazarus: Martha was serving, while Mary had no thought of food but
only of how she could please her Beloved. And "she broke her
alabaster box, and poured out upon her Saviour's Head the precious
spikenard,[50] and the house was filled with the odour of the
ointment."[51]

The Apostles murmured against Magdalen. This still happens, for so
do men murmur against us. Even some fervent Catholics think our
ways are exaggerated, and that--with Martha--we ought to wait upon
Jesus, instead of pouring out on Him the odorous ointment of our
lives. Yet what does it matter if these ointment-jars--our
lives--be broken, since Our Lord is consoled, and the world in
spite of itself is forced to inhale the perfumes they give forth?
It has much need of these perfumes to purify the unwholesome air
it breathes.

For a while only, good-bye, dearest sister. Your barque is near to
port. The breezes filling its sails are the zephyrs of
Love--breezes that speed more swiftly than the lightning-flash.
Good-bye! in a few days we shall be together within these Carmel
walls . . . and in the after days together in Paradise. Did not
Jesus say during His Passion: "Hereafter you shall see the Son of
Man sitting on the right hand of the power of God and coming in
the clouds of heaven"?[52] . . . We shall be there!

THERESE.
_____________________________

[1] Matt. 3:10.

[2] Matt. 5:48.

[3] Apoc. 21:4.

[4] St. John of the Cross.

[5] Mme. Swetchine.

[6] Exodus 4:25.

[7] I Cor. 7:31.

[8] Cf. Ps. 136:2.

[9] Cf. Ps. 136:1, 4.

[10] I Cor. 2:9.

[11] It is remarkable that Soeur Therese applied this name to her
sister Celine, who, under her inspiration, was later to reproduce
so faithfully the true likeness of Our Lord, from the Holy Winding
Sheet of Turin. [Ed.] [Remainder of long footnote, discussing this
likeness, its reproduction, and related matters, omitted from this
electronic edition.]

[12] Isa. 63:3.

[13] Cf. Isa. 63:5.

[14] Isa. 53:3.

[15] Cant. 5:2.

[16] Is. 53:4.

[17] Soeur Therese received the veil on September 24, 1890.

[18] St. John of the Cross: _The Night of the Soul,_ 8th stanza.

[19] John 4:35.

[20] Matt. 9:37, 38.

[21] St. John of the Cross.

[22] Luke 19:5.

[23] John 1:38.

[24] Luke 9:58.

[25] Cant. 2:1.

[26] Malachias 4:2.

[27] Matt. 26:23.

[28] Matt. 25:34-36.

[29] _Imit.,_ Bk. I, ch. ii. 3.

[30] _Ib.,_ Bk. II, ch. xi. 4.

[31] _Ib.,_ Bk. III, ch. xlix. 7.

[32] Ps. 126[127]:1.

[33] St. John of the Cross.

[34] Cf. Luke 15:31.

[35] Cant. 1:6.

[36] Cf. Cant. 7:1.

[37] Office of St. Cecilia.

[38] Luke 2:14.

[39] Wisdom 4:1.

[40] John 21:5.

[41] Luke 5:5. Soeur Therese joins in one the two miraculous
draughts of fishes. [Ed.]

[42] Cf. Cant. 6:10, 11.

[43] Cant. 6:12.

[44] John 14:23.

[45] Cf. John 17:17.

[46] John 14:6.

[47] John 18:38.

[48] Cf. Cant. 1:12.

[49] Luke 22:28, 29.

[50] Cf. Mark 14:3.

[51] John 12:3.

[52] Matt. 26:64.

_____________________________


LETTERS TO MOTHER AGNES OF JESUS

Selections


I

(Written in 1887, shortly before Therese entered the Carmel.)

MY DARLING LITTLE MOTHER,--You are right when you tell me that
every cup must contain its drop of gall. I find that trials are a
great help towards detachment from the things of earth: they make
one look higher than this world. Nothing here can satisfy, and we
can find rest only in holding ourselves ready to do God's will.

My frail barque has great difficulty in reaching port. I sighted
it long since, and still I find myself afar off. Yet Jesus steers
this little barque, and I am sure that on His appointed day it
will come safely to the blessed haven of the Carmel. O Pauline!
when Jesus shall have vouchsafed me this grace, I wish to give
