On the contrary, Luke asserts that Joseph and the mother of Jesus lived
peaceably during six weeks in the place where their child Jesus was
born; that He was circumcised according to the law of the Jews, eight
days after His birth; and when the time prescribed by the law for the
purification of His mother had arrived, she and Joseph, her husband,
carried Him to Jerusalem in order to present Him to God in His temple,
and to offer at the same time a sacrifice which was ordained by God's
law; after which they returned to Galilee, into their town of Nazareth,
where their child Jesus grew every day in grace and in wisdom. Luke goes
on to say that His father and His mother went every year to Jerusalem on
the solemn days of their Easter feast, but makes no mention of their
flight into Egypt, nor of the cruelty of Herod toward the children of
the province of Bethlehem. In regard to the cruelty of Herod, as neither
the historians of that time speak of it, nor Josephus, the historian who
wrote the life of this Herod, and as the other Evangelists do not
mention it, it is evident that the journey of those wise men, guided by
a star, this massacre of little children, and this flight to Egypt, were
but absurd falsehoods. For it is not credible that Josephus, who blamed
the vices of this king, could have been silent on such a dark and
detestable action, if what the Evangelist said had been true.

In regard to the duration of the public life of Jesus Christ, according
to what the first three Evangelists say, there could be scarcely more
than three months from the time of His baptism until His death,
supposing He was thirty years old when He was baptized by John,
according to Luke, and that He was born on the 25th of December. For,
from this baptism, which was in the year 15 of Tiberius Caesar, and in
the year when Anne and Caiaphas were high-priests, to the first Easter
following, which was in the month of March, there was but about three
months; according to what the first three Evangelists say, He was
crucified on the eve of the first Easter following His baptism, and the
first time He went to Jerusalem with His disciples; because all that
they say of His baptism, of His travels, of His miracles, of His
preaching, of His death and passion, must have taken place in the same
year of His baptism, for the Evangelists speak of no other year
following, and it appears even by the narration of His acts that He
performed them consecutively immediately after His baptism, and in a
very short time, during which we see but an interval of six days before
his Transfiguration; during these six days we do not see that He did
anything. We see by this that He lived but about three months after His
baptism, from which, if we subtract the forty days and forty nights
which He passed in the desert immediately after His baptism, it would
follow that the length of His public life from His first preaching till
His death, would have lasted but about six weeks; and according to what
John says, it would have lasted at least three years and three months,
because it appears by the Gospel of this apostle, that, during the
course of His public life He might have been three or four times at
Jerusalem at the Easter feast which happened but once a year.

Now if it is true that He had been there three or four times after His
baptism, as John testifies, it is false that He lived but three months
after His baptism, and that He was crucified the first time He went to
Jerusalem.

If it is said that these first three Evangelists really mean but one
year, but that they do not indicate distinctly the others which elapsed
since His baptism; or that John understood that there was but one
Easter, although he speaks of several, and that he only anticipated the
time when he repeatedly tells us that the Easter feast of the Jews was
near at hand, and that Jesus went to Jerusalem, and, consequently, that
there is but an apparent contradiction upon this subject between the
Evangelists, I am willing to accept this; but it is certain that this
apparent contradiction springs from the fact, that they do not explain
themselves in all the circumstances that are noted in the narration
which they make. Be that as it may, there will always be this inference
made, that they were not inspired by God when they wrote their
biographies of Christ.

Here is another contradiction in regard to the first thing which Jesus

Christ did immediately after His baptism; for the first three
Evangelists state, that He was transported immediately by the Spirit
into the desert, where He fasted forty days and forty nights, and where
He was several times tempted by the Devil; and, according to what John
says, He departed two days after His baptism to go into Galilee, where
He performed His first miracle by changing water into wine at the
wedding of Cana, where He found Himself three days after His arrival in
Galilee, more than thirty leagues from the place in which He had been.

In regard to the place of His first retreat after His departure from the
desert, Matthew says that He returned to Galilee, and that leaving the
city of Nazareth, He went to live at Capernaum, a maritime city; and
Luke says, that He came at first to Nazareth, and afterward went to
Capernaum.

They contradict each other in regard to the time and manner in which the
apostles followed Him; for the first three say that Jesus, passing on
the shore of the Sea of Galilee, saw Simon and Andrew his brother, and
that He saw at a little distance James and his brother John with their
father, Zebedee. John, on the contrary, says that it was Andrew, brother
of Simon Peter, who first followed Jesus with another disciple of John
the Baptist, having seen Him pass before them, when they were with their
Master on the shores of the Jordan.

In regard to the Lord's Supper, the first three Evangelists note that
Jesus Christ instituted the Sacrament of His body and His blood, in the
form of bread and wine, the same as our Roman Christ-worshipers say; and
John does not mention this mysterious sacrament. John says that after
this supper, Jesus washed His apostles' feet, and commanded them to do
the same thing to each other, and relates a long discourse which He
delivered then. But the other Evangelists do not speak of the washing of
the feet, nor of the long discourse He gave them then. On the contrary,
they testify that immediately after this supper, He went with His
apostles upon the Mount of Olives, where He gave up His Spirit to
sadness, and was in anguish while His apostles slept, at a short
distance. They contradict each other upon the day on which they say the
Lord's Supper took place; because on one side, they note that it took
place Easter-eve, that is, the evening of the first day of Azymes, or of
the feast of unleavened bread; as it is noted (1) in Exodus, (2) in
Leviticus, and (3) in Numbers; and, on the other hand, they say that He
was crucified the day following the Lord's Supper, about midday after
the Jews had His trial during the whole night and morning. Now,
according to what they say, the day after this supper took place, ought
not to be Easter-eve. Therefore, if He died on the eve of Easter, toward
midday, it was not on the eve of this feast that this supper took place.
There is consequently a manifest error.

They contradict each other, also, in regard to the women who followed
Jesus from Galilee, for the first three Evangelists say that these
women, and those who knew Him, among whom were Mary Magdalene, and Mary,
mother of James and Joseph, and the mother of Zebedee's children, were
looking on at a distance when He was hanged and nailed upon the cross.
John says, on the contrary, that the mother of Jesus and His mother's
sister, and Mary Magdalene were standing near His cross with John, His
apostle. The contradiction is manifest, for, if these women and this
disciple were near Him, they were not at a distance, as the others say
they were.

They contradict each other upon the pretended apparitions which they
relate that Jesus made after His pretended resurrection; for Matthew
speaks of but two apparitions: the one when He appeared to Mary
Magdalene and to another woman, also named Mary, and when He appeared to
His eleven disciples who had returned to Galilee upon the mountain where
He had appointed to meet them. Mark speaks of three apparitions: The
first, when He appeared to Mary Magdalene; the second, when He appeared
to His two disciples, who went to Emmaus; and the third, when He
appeared to His eleven disciples, whom He reproaches for their
incredulity. Luke speaks of but two apparitions the same as Matthew; and
John the Evangelist speaks of four apparitions, and adds to Mark's
three, the one which He made to seven or eight of His disciples who were
fishing upon the shores of the Tiberian Sea.

They contradict each other, also, in regard to the place of these
apparitions; for Matthew says that it was in Galilee, upon a mountain;
Mark says that it was when they were at table; Luke says that He brought
them out of Jerusalem as far as Bethany, where He left them by rising to
Heaven; and John says that it was in the city of Jerusalem, in a house
of which they had closed the doors, and another time upon the borders of
the Tiberian Sea.

Thus is much contradiction in the report of these pretended apparitions.
They contradict each other in regard to His pretended ascension to
heaven; for Luke and Mark say positively that He went to heaven in
presence of the eleven apostles, but neither Matthew nor John mentions
at all this pretended ascension. More than this, Matthew testifies
sufficiently that He did not ascend to heaven; for he said positively
that Jesus Christ assured His apostles that He would be and remain
always with them until the end of the world. "Go ye," He said to them,
in this pretended apparition, "and teach all nations, and be assured
that I am with you always, even unto the end of the world." Luke
contradicts himself upon the subject; for in his Gospel he says that it
was in Bethany where He ascended to heaven in the presence of His
apostles, and in his Acts of the Apostles (supposing him to have been
the author) he says that it was upon the Mount of Olives. He contradicts
himself again about this ascension; for he notes in his Gospel that it
was the very day of His resurrection, or the first night following, that
He ascended to heaven; and in the Acts of the Apostles he says that it
was forty days after His resurrection; this certainly does not
correspond. If all the apostles had really seen their Master gloriously
rise to heaven, how could it be possible that Matthew and John, who
would have seen it as well as the others, passed in silence such a
glorious mystery, and which was so advantageous to their Master,
considering that they relate many other circumstances of His life and of
His actions which are much less important than this one? How is it that
Matthew does not mention this ascension? And why does Christ not explain
clearly how He would live with them always, although He left them
visibly to ascend to heaven? It is not easy to comprehend by what secret
He could live with those whom He left.

I pass in silence many other contradictions; what I have said is
sufficient to show that these books are not of Divine Inspiration, nor
even of human wisdom, and, consequently, do not deserve that we should
put any faith in them.




II.--OF MIRACLES.

But by what privilege do these four Gospels, and some other similar
books, pass for Holy and Divine more than several others, which bear no
less the title of Gospels, and which have been published under the name
of some other apostles? If it is said that the reputed Gospels are
falsely attributed to the apostles, we can say the same of the first
ones; if we suppose the first ones to be falsified and changed, we can
think the same of the others. Thus there is no positive proof to make us
discern the one from the other; in spite of the Church, which assumes to
deride the matter, it is not credible.

In regard to the pretended miracles related in the Old Testament, they
could have been performed but to indicate on the part of God an unjust
and odious discrimination between nations and between individuals;
purposely injuring the one in order to especially favor the other. The
vocation and the choice which God made of the Patriarchs, Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, in order to make for Himself of their posterity a
people which He would sanctify and bless above all other peoples of the
earth, is a proof of it. But it will be said God is the absolute master
of His favors and of His benefits; He can grant them to whomsoever He
pleases, without any one having the right to complain or to accuse Him
of injustice. This reason is useless; for God, the Author of nature, the
Father of all men, ought to love them all alike as His own work, and,
consequently, He ought to be equally their protector and their
benefactor; giving them life, He ought to give all that is necessary for
the well-being of His creatures.

If all these pretended miracles of the Old and of the New Testament were
true, we could say that God would have had more care in providing for
the least good of men than for their greatest and principal good; that
He would have punished more severely trifling faults in certain persons
than He would have punished great crimes in others; and, finally, that
He would not have desired to show Himself as beneficent in the most
pressing needs as in the least. This is easy enough to show as much by
the miracles which it is pretended that He performed, as by those which
He did not perform, and which He would have performed rather than any
other, if it is true that He performed any at all. For example, it is
claimed that God had the kindness to send an angel to console and to
assist a simple maid, while He left, and still leaves every day, a
countless number of innocents to languish and starve to death; it is
claimed that He miraculously preserved during forty years the clothes
and the shoes of a few people, while He will not watch over the natural
preservation of the vast quantities of goods which are useful and
necessary for the subsistence of great nations, and that are lost every
day by different accidents. It is claimed that He sent to the first
beings of the human race, Adam and Eve, a devil, or a simple serpent, to
seduce them, and by this means ruin all men. This is not credible! It is
claimed, that by a special providence, He prevented the King of Gerais,
a Pagan, from committing sin with a strange woman, although there would
be no results to follow; and yet He did not prevent Adam and Eve from
offending Him and falling into the sin of disobedience--a sin which,
according to our Christ-worshipers was to be fatal, and cause the
destruction of the human race. This is not credible!

Let us come to the pretended miracles of the New Testament. They
consist, as is pretended, in this: that Jesus Christ and His apostles
cured, through the Deity, all kinds of diseases and infirmities, giving
sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, speech to the dumb, making the
lame to walk, curing the paralytics, driving the devils from those who
were possessed, and bringing the dead to life.

We find several of these miracles in the Gospels, but we see a good many
more of them in the books that our Christ-worshipers have written of the
admirable lives of their saints; for in these lives we nearly everywhere
read that these pretended blessed ones cured diseases and infirmities,
expelled the devils wherever they encountered them, solely in the name
of Jesus or by the sign of the cross; that they controlled the elements;
that God favored them so much that He even preserved to them His Divine
power after their death, and that this Divine power could be
communicated even to the least of their clothing, even to their shadows,
and even to the infamous instruments of their death. It is said that the
shoe of St. Honorius raised a dead man on the sixth of January; that the
staff of St. Peter, that of St. James, and that of St. Bernard performed
miracles. The same is said of the cord of St. Francis, of the staff of
St. John of God, and of the girdle of St. Melanie. It is said that St.
Gracilien was divinely instructed as to what he ought to believe and to
teach, and that he, by the influence of his prayer, removed a mountain
which prevented him from building a church; that from the sepulchre of
St. Andrew flowed incessantly a liquor which cured all sorts of
diseases; that the soul of St. Benedict was seen ascending to Heaven
clothed with a precious cloak and surrounded by burning lamps; that St.
Dominic said that God never refused him anything he asked; that St.
Francis commanded the swallows, swans, and other birds to obey him, and
that often the fishes, rabbits, and the hares came and placed themselves
on his hands and on his lap; that St. Paul and St. Pantaleon, having
been beheaded, there flowed milk instead of blood; that the blessed
Peter of Luxembourg, in the first two years after his death (1388 and
1389), performed two thousand four hundred miracles, among which
forty-two dead were brought to life, not including more than three
thousand other miracles which he has performed since; that the fifty
philosophers whom St. Catherine converted, having all been thrown into a
great fire, their whole bodies were afterward found and not a single
hair was scorched; that the body of St. Catherine was carried off by
angels after her death, and buried by them upon Mount Sinai; that the
day of the canonization of St. Antoine de Padua, all the bells of the
city of Lisbon rang of themselves, without any one knowing how it was
done; that this saint being once near the sea-shore, and calling the
fishes, they came to him in a great multitude, and raised their heads
out of the water and listened to him attentively. We should never come
to an end if we had to report all this idle talk; there is no subject,
however vain, frivolous, and even ridiculous, on which the authors of
these "LIVES OF THE SAINTS" do not take pleasure in heaping miracles
upon miracles, for they are skillful in forging absurd falsehoods.

It is certainly not without reason that we consider these things as
lies; for it is easy to see that all these pretended miracles have been
invented but by imitating the fables of the Pagan poets. This is
sufficiently obvious by the resemblance which they bear one to another.




III.--SIMILARITY BETWEEN ANCIENT AND MODERN MIRACLES.

