decalogue, first of all, to direct man to God; since the contrary to
this is most grievous. Thus also, in an army, which is ordained to
the commander as to its end, it is requisite first that the soldier
should be subject to the commander, and the opposite of this is most
grievous; and secondly it is requisite that he should be in
coordination with the other soldiers.

Now among those things whereby we are ordained to God, the first is
that man should be subjected to Him faithfully, by having nothing in
common with His enemies. The second is that he should show Him
reverence: the third that he should offer Him service. Thus, in an
army, it is a greater sin for a soldier to act treacherously and make
a compact with the foe, than to be insolent to his commander: and
this last is more grievous than if he be found wanting in some point
of service to him.

As to the precepts that direct man in his behavior towards his
neighbor, it is evident that it is more repugnant to reason, and a
more grievous sin, if man does not observe the due order as to those
persons to whom he is most indebted. Consequently, among those
precepts that direct man in his relations to his neighbor, the first
place is given to that one which regards his parents. Among the other
precepts we again find the order to be according to the gravity of
sin. For it is more grave and more repugnant to reason, to sin by
deed than by word; and by word than by thought. And among sins of
deed, murder which destroys life in one already living is more
grievous than adultery, which imperils the life of the unborn child;
and adultery is more grave than theft, which regards external goods.

Reply Obj. 1: Although our neighbor is better known than God by the
way of the senses, nevertheless the love of God is the reason for the
love of our neighbor, as shall be declared later on (II-II, Q. 25, A.
1; Q. 26, A. 2). Hence the precepts ordaining man to God demanded
precedence of the others.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as God is the universal principle of being in
respect of all things, so is a father a principle of being in respect
of his son. Therefore the precept regarding parents was fittingly
placed after the precepts regarding God. This argument holds in
respect of affirmative and negative precepts about the same kind of
deed: although even then it is not altogether cogent. For although in
the order of execution, vices should be uprooted before virtues are
sown, according to Ps. 33:15: "Turn away from evil, and do good," and
Isa. 1:16, 17: "Cease to do perversely; learn to do well"; yet, in
the order of knowledge, virtue precedes vice, because "the crooked
line is known by the straight" (De Anima i): and "by the law is the
knowledge of sin" (Rom. 3:20). Wherefore the affirmative precept
demanded the first place. However, this is not the reason for the
order, but that which is given above. Because in the precepts
regarding God, which belongs to the first table, an affirmative
precept is placed last, since its transgression implies a less
grievous sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Although sin of thought stands first in the order of
execution, yet its prohibition holds a later position in the order of
reason.
________________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 7]

Whether the Precepts of the Decalogue Are Suitably Formulated?

Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts of the decalogue are
unsuitably formulated. Because the affirmative precepts direct man to
acts of virtue, while the negative precepts withdraw him from acts of
vice. But in every matter there are virtues and vices opposed to one
another. Therefore in whatever matter there is an ordinance of a
precept of the decalogue, there should have been an affirmative and a
negative precept. Therefore it was unfitting that affirmative
precepts should be framed in some matters, and negative precepts in
others.

Obj. 2: Further, Isidore says (Etym. ii, 10) that every law is based
on reason. But all the precepts of the decalogue belong to the Divine
law. Therefore the reason should have been pointed out in each
precept, and not only in the first and third.

Obj. 3: Further, by observing the precepts man deserves to be
rewarded by God. But the Divine promises concern the rewards of the
precepts. Therefore the promise should have been included in each
precept, and not only in the second and fourth.

Obj. 4: Further, the Old Law is called "the law of fear," in so far
as it induced men to observe the precepts, by means of the threat of
punishments. But all the precepts of the decalogue belong to the Old
Law. Therefore a threat of punishment should have been included in
each, and not only in the first and second.

Obj. 5: Further, all the commandments of God should be retained in
the memory: for it is written (Prov. 3:3): "Write them in the tables
of thy heart." Therefore it was not fitting that mention of the
memory should be made in the third commandment only. Consequently it
seems that the precepts of the decalogue are unsuitably formulated.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Wis. 11:21) that "God made all
things, in measure, number and weight." Much more therefore did He
observe a suitable manner in formulating His Law.

_I answer that,_ The highest wisdom is contained in the precepts of
the Divine law: wherefore it is written (Deut. 4:6): "This is your
wisdom and understanding in the sight of nations." Now it belongs to
wisdom to arrange all things in due manner and order. Therefore it
must be evident that the precepts of the Law are suitably set forth.

Reply Obj. 1: Affirmation of one thing always leads to the denial of
its opposite: but the denial of one opposite does not always lead to
the affirmation of the other. For it follows that if a thing is
white, it is not black: but it does not follow that if it is not
black, it is white: because negation extends further than
affirmation. And hence too, that one ought not to do harm to another,
which pertains to the negative precepts, extends to more persons, as
a primary dictate of reason, than that one ought to do someone a
service or kindness. Nevertheless it is a primary dictate of reason
that man is a debtor in the point of rendering a service or kindness
to those from whom he has received kindness, if he has not yet repaid
the debt. Now there are two whose favors no man can sufficiently
repay, viz. God and man's father, as stated in _Ethic._ viii, 14.
Therefore it is that there are only two affirmative precepts; one
about the honor due to parents, the other about the celebration of
the Sabbath in memory of the Divine favor.

Reply Obj. 2: The reasons for the purely moral precepts are manifest;
hence there was no need to add the reason. But some of the precepts
include ceremonial matter, or a determination of a general moral
precept; thus the first precept includes the determination, "Thou
shalt not make a graven thing"; and in the third precept the
Sabbath-day is fixed. Consequently there was need to state the reason
in each case.

Reply Obj. 3: Generally speaking, men direct their actions to some
point of utility. Consequently in those precepts in which it seemed
that there would be no useful result, or that some utility might be
hindered, it was necessary to add a promise of reward. And since
parents are already on the way to depart from us, no benefit is
expected from them: wherefore a promise of reward is added to the
precept about honoring one's parents. The same applies to the precept
forbidding idolatry: since thereby it seemed that men were hindered
from receiving the apparent benefit which they think they can get by
entering into a compact with the demons.

Reply Obj. 4: Punishments are necessary against those who are prone
to evil, as stated in _Ethic._ x, 9. Wherefore a threat of punishment
is only affixed to those precepts of the law which forbade evils to
which men were prone. Now men were prone to idolatry by reason of the
general custom of the nations. Likewise men are prone to perjury on
account of the frequent use of oaths. Hence it is that a threat is
affixed to the first two precepts.

Reply Obj. 5: The commandment about the Sabbath was made in memory of
a past blessing. Wherefore special mention of the memory is made
therein. Or again, the commandment about the Sabbath has a
determination affixed to it that does not belong to the natural law,
wherefore this precept needed a special admonition.
________________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 8]

Whether the Precepts of the Decalogue Are Dispensable?

Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts of the decalogue are
dispensable. For the precepts of the decalogue belong to the natural
law. But the natural law fails in some cases and is changeable, like
human nature, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 7). Now the failure
of law to apply in certain particular cases is a reason for
dispensation, as stated above (Q. 96, A. 6; Q. 97, A. 4). Therefore a
dispensation can be granted in the precepts of the decalogue.

Obj. 2: Further, man stands in the same relation to human law as God
does to Divine law. But man can dispense with the precepts of a law
made by man. Therefore, since the precepts of the decalogue are
ordained by God, it seems that God can dispense with them. Now our
superiors are God's viceregents on earth; for the Apostle says (2
Cor. 2:10): "For what I have pardoned, if I have pardoned anything,
for your sakes have I done it in the person of Christ." Therefore
superiors can dispense with the precepts of the decalogue.

Obj. 3: Further, among the precepts of the decalogue is one
forbidding murder. But it seems that a dispensation is given by men
in this precept: for instance, when according to the prescription of
human law, such as evil-doers or enemies are lawfully slain.
Therefore the precepts of the decalogue are dispensable.

Obj. 4: Further, the observance of the Sabbath is ordained by a
precept of the decalogue. But a dispensation was granted in this
precept; for it is written (1 Macc. 2:4): "And they determined in
that day, saying: Whosoever shall come up to fight against us on the
Sabbath-day, we will fight against him." Therefore the precepts of
the decalogue are dispensable.

_On the contrary,_ are the words of Isa. 24:5, where some are
reproved for that "they have changed the ordinance, they have broken
the everlasting covenant"; which, seemingly, apply principally to the
precepts of the decalogue. Therefore the precepts of the decalogue
cannot be changed by dispensation.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 96, A. 6; Q. 97, A. 4), precepts
admit of dispensation, when there occurs a particular case in which,
if the letter of the law be observed, the intention of the lawgiver
is frustrated. Now the intention of every lawgiver is directed first
and chiefly to the common good; secondly, to the order of justice and
virtue, whereby the common good is preserved and attained. If
therefore there be any precepts which contain the very preservation
of the common good, or the very order of justice and virtue, such
precepts contain the intention of the lawgiver, and therefore are
indispensable. For instance, if in some community a law were enacted,
such as this--that no man should work for the destruction of the
commonwealth, or betray the state to its enemies, or that no man
should do anything unjust or evil, such precepts would not admit of
dispensation. But if other precepts were enacted, subordinate to the
above, and determining certain special modes of procedure, these
latter precepts would admit of dispensation, in so far as the
omission of these precepts in certain cases would not be prejudicial
to the former precepts which contain the intention of the lawgiver.
For instance if, for the safeguarding of the commonwealth, it were
enacted in some city that from each ward some men should keep watch
as sentries in case of siege, some might be dispensed from this on
account of some greater utility.

Now the precepts of the decalogue contain the very intention of the
lawgiver, who is God. For the precepts of the first table, which
direct us to God, contain the very order to the common and final
good, which is God; while the precepts of the second table contain
the order of justice to be observed among men, that nothing undue be
done to anyone, and that each one be given his due; for it is in this
sense that we are to take the precepts of the decalogue. Consequently
the precepts of the decalogue admit of no dispensation whatever.

Reply Obj. 1: The Philosopher is not speaking of the natural law
which contains the very order of justice: for it is a never-failing
principle that "justice should be preserved." But he is speaking in
reference to certain fixed modes of observing justice, which fail to
apply in certain cases.

Reply Obj. 2: As the Apostle says (2 Tim. 2:13), "God continueth
faithful, He cannot deny Himself." But He would deny Himself if He
were to do away with the very order of His own justice, since He is
justice itself. Wherefore God cannot dispense a man so that it be
lawful for him not to direct himself to God, or not to be subject to
His justice, even in those matters in which men are directed to one
another.

Reply Obj. 3: The slaying of a man is forbidden in the decalogue, in
so far as it bears the character of something undue: for in this
sense the precept contains the very essence of justice. Human law
cannot make it lawful for a man to be slain unduly. But it is not
undue for evil-doers or foes of the common weal to be slain: hence
this is not contrary to the precept of the decalogue; and such a
killing is no murder as forbidden by that precept, as Augustine
observes (De Lib. Arb. i, 4). In like manner when a man's property is
taken from him, if it be due that he should lose it, this is not
theft or robbery as forbidden by the decalogue.

Consequently when the children of Israel, by God's command, took away
the spoils of the Egyptians, this was not theft; since it was due to
them by the sentence of God. Likewise when Abraham consented to slay
his son, he did not consent to murder, because his son was due to be
slain by the command of God, Who is Lord of life and death: for He it
is Who inflicts the punishment of death on all men, both godly and
ungodly, on account of the sin of our first parent, and if a man be
the executor of that sentence by Divine authority, he will be no
murderer any more than God would be. Again Osee, by taking unto
himself a wife of fornications, or an adulterous woman, was not
guilty either of adultery or of fornication: because he took unto
himself one who was his by command of God, Who is the Author of the
institution of marriage.

Accordingly, therefore, the precepts of the decalogue, as to the
essence of justice which they contain, are unchangeable: but as to
any determination by application to individual actions--for instance,
that this or that be murder, theft or adultery, or not--in this point
they admit of change; sometimes by Divine authority alone, namely, in
such matters as are exclusively of Divine institution, as marriage
and the like; sometimes also by human authority, namely in such
matters as are subject to human jurisdiction: for in this respect men
stand in the place of God: and yet not in all respects.

Reply Obj. 4: This determination was an interpretation rather than a
dispensation. For a man is not taken to break the Sabbath, if he does
something necessary for human welfare; as Our Lord proves (Matt.
12:3, seqq.).
________________________

NINTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 9]

Whether the Mode of Virtue Falls Under the Precept of the Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that the mode of virtue falls under the
precept of the law. For the mode of virtue is that deeds of justice
should be done justly, that deeds of fortitude should be done
bravely, and in like manner as to the other virtues. But it is
commanded (Deut. 26:20) that "thou shalt follow justly after that
which is just." Therefore the mode of virtue falls under the precept.

Obj. 2: Further, that which belongs to the intention of the lawgiver
comes chiefly under the precept. But the intention of the lawgiver is
directed chiefly to make men virtuous, as stated in _Ethic._ ii: and
it belongs to a virtuous man to act virtuously. Therefore the mode of
virtue falls under the precept.

Obj. 3: Further, the mode of virtue seems to consist properly in
working willingly and with pleasure. But this falls under a precept
of the Divine law, for it is written (Ps. 99:2): "Serve ye the Lord
with gladness"; and (2 Cor. 9:7): "Not with sadness or necessity: for
God loveth a cheerful giver"; whereupon the gloss says: "Whatever ye
do, do gladly; and then you will do it well; whereas if you do it
sorrowfully, it is done in thee, not by thee." Therefore the mode of
virtue falls under the precept of the law.

_On the contrary,_ No man can act as a virtuous man acts unless he
has the habit of virtue, as the Philosopher explains (Ethic. ii, 4;
v, 8). Now whoever transgresses a precept of the law, deserves to be
punished. Hence it would follow that a man who has not the habit of
virtue, would deserve to be punished, whatever he does. But this is
contrary to the intention of the law, which aims at leading man to
virtue, by habituating him to good works. Therefore the mode of
virtue does not fall under the precept.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 90, A. 3, ad 2), a precept of
law has compulsory power. Hence that on which the compulsion of the
law is brought to bear, falls directly under the precept of the law.
Now the law compels through fear of punishment, as stated in _Ethic._
x, 9, because that properly falls under the precept of the law, for
which the penalty of the law is inflicted. But Divine law and human
law are differently situated as to the appointment of penalties;
since the penalty of the law is inflicted only for those things which
come under the judgment of the lawgiver; for the law punishes in
accordance with the verdict given. Now man, the framer of human law,
is competent to judge only of outward acts; because "man seeth those
things that appear," according to 1 Kings 16:7: while God alone, the
framer of the Divine law, is competent to judge of the inward
movements of wills, according to Ps. 7:10: "The searcher of hearts
and reins is God."

Accordingly, therefore, we must say that the mode of virtue is in
some sort regarded both by human and by Divine law; in some respect
it is regarded by the Divine, but not by the human law; and in
another way, it is regarded neither by the human nor by the Divine
law. Now the mode of virtue consists in three things, as the
Philosopher states in _Ethic._ ii. The first is that man should act
"knowingly": and this is subject to the judgment of both Divine and
human law; because what a man does in ignorance, he does
accidentally. Hence according to both human and Divine law, certain
things are judged in respect of ignorance to be punishable or
pardonable.

The second point is that a man should act "deliberately," i.e. "from
choice, choosing that particular action for its own sake"; wherein a
twofold internal movement is implied, of volition and of intention,
about which we have spoken above (QQ. 8, 12): and concerning these
two, Divine law alone, and not human law, is competent to judge. For
human law does not punish the man who wishes to slay, and slays not:
whereas the Divine law does, according to Matt. 5:22: "Whosoever is
angry with his brother, shall be in danger of the judgment."

The third point is that he should "act from a firm and immovable
principle": which firmness belongs properly to a habit, and implies
that the action proceeds from a rooted habit. In this respect, the
mode of virtue does not fall under the precept either of Divine or of
human law, since neither by man nor by God is he punished as breaking
the law, who gives due honor to his parents and yet has not the habit
of filial piety.

Reply Obj. 1: The mode of doing acts of justice, which falls under
the precept, is that they be done in accordance with right; but not
that they be done from the habit of justice.

Reply Obj. 2: The intention of the lawgiver is twofold. His aim, in
the first place, is to lead men to something by the precepts of the
law: and this is virtue. Secondly, his intention is brought to bear
on the matter itself of the precept: and this is something leading or
disposing to virtue, viz. an act of virtue. For the end of the
precept and the matter of the precept are not the same: just as
neither in other things is the end the same as that which conduces to
the end.

Reply Obj. 3: That works of virtue should be done without sadness,
falls under the precept of the Divine law; for whoever works with
sadness works unwillingly. But to work with pleasure, i.e. joyfully
or cheerfully, in one respect falls under the precept, viz. in so far
as pleasure ensues from the love of God and one's neighbor (which
love falls under the precept), and love causes pleasure: and in
another respect does not fall under the precept, in so far as
pleasure ensues from a habit; for "pleasure taken in a work proves
the existence of a habit," as stated in _Ethic._ ii, 3. For an act
may give pleasure either on account of its end, or through its
proceeding from a becoming habit.
________________________

TENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 10]

Whether the Mode of Charity Falls Under the Precept of the Divine Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that the mode of charity falls under the
precept of the Divine law. For it is written (Matt. 19:17): "If thou
wilt enter into life, keep the commandments": whence it seems to
follow that the observance of the commandments suffices for entrance
into life. But good works do not suffice for entrance into life,
except they be done from charity: for it is written (1 Cor. 13:3):
"If I should distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I
should deliver my body to be burned, and have not charity, it
profiteth me nothing." Therefore the mode of charity is included in
the commandment.

Obj. 2: Further, the mode of charity consists properly speaking in
doing all things for God. But this falls under the precept; for the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:31): "Do all to the glory of God." Therefore
the mode of charity falls under the precept.

Obj. 3: Further, if the mode of charity does not fall under the
precept, it follows that one can fulfil the precepts of the law
without having charity. Now what can be done without charity can be
done without grace, which is always united to charity. Therefore one
can fulfil the precepts of the law without grace. But this is the
error of Pelagius, as Augustine declares (De Haeres. lxxxviii).
Therefore the mode of charity is included in the commandment.

_On the contrary,_ Whoever breaks a commandment sins mortally. If
therefore the mode of charity falls under the precept, it follows
that whoever acts otherwise than from charity sins mortally. But
whoever has not charity, acts otherwise than from charity. Therefore
it follows that whoever has not charity, sins mortally in whatever he
does, however good this may be in itself: which is absurd.

_I answer that,_ Opinions have been contrary on this question. For
some have said absolutely that the mode of charity comes under the
precept; and yet that it is possible for one not having charity to
fulfil this precept: because he can dispose himself to receive
charity from God. Nor (say they) does it follow that a man not having
charity sins mortally whenever he does something good of its kind:
because it is an affirmative precept that binds one to act from
charity, and is binding not for all time, but only for such time as
one is in a state of charity. On the other hand, some have said that
the mode of charity is altogether outside the precept.

Both these opinions are true up to a certain point. Because the act
of charity can be considered in two ways. First, as an act by itself:
and thus it falls under the precept of the law which specially
prescribes it, viz. "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God," and "Thou
shalt love thy neighbor." In this sense, the first opinion is true.
Because it is not impossible to observe this precept which regards
the act of charity; since man can dispose himself to possess charity,
and when he possesses it, he can use it. Secondly, the act of charity
can be considered as being the mode of the acts of the other virtues,
i.e. inasmuch as the acts of the other virtues are ordained to
charity, which is "the end of the commandment," as stated in 1 Tim.
i, 5: for it has been said above (Q. 12, A. 4) that the intention of
the end is a formal mode of the act ordained to that end. In this
sense the second opinion is true in saying that the mode of charity
does not fall under the precept, that is to say that this
commandment, "Honor thy father," does not mean that a man must honor
his father from charity, but merely that he must honor him. Wherefore
he that honors his father, yet has not charity, does not break this
precept: although he does break the precept concerning the act of
charity, for which reason he deserves to be punished.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord did not say, "If thou wilt enter into life,
keep one commandment"; but "keep" all "the commandments": among which
is included the commandment concerning the love of God and our
neighbor.

Reply Obj. 2: The precept of charity contains the injunction that God
should be loved from our whole heart, which means that all things
would be referred to God. Consequently man cannot fulfil the precept
of charity, unless he also refer all things to God. Wherefore he that
honors his father and mother, is bound to honor them from charity,
not in virtue of the precept, "Honor thy father and mother," but in
virtue of the precept, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy
whole heart." And since these are two affirmative precepts, not
binding for all times, they can be binding, each one at a different
time: so that it may happen that a man fulfils the precept of
honoring his father and mother, without at the same time breaking the
precept concerning the omission of the mode of charity.

Reply Obj. 3: Man cannot fulfil all the precepts of the law, unless
he fulfil the precept of charity, which is impossible without
charity. Consequently it is not possible, as Pelagius maintained, for
man to fulfil the law without grace.
________________________

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 11]

Whether It Is Right to Distinguish Other Moral Precepts of the Law
Besides the Decalogue?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is wrong to distinguish other
moral precepts of the law besides the decalogue. Because, as Our Lord
declared (Matt. 22:40), "on these two commandments" of charity
"dependeth the whole law and the prophets." But these two
commandments are explained by the ten commandments of the decalogue.
Therefore there is no need for other moral precepts.

Obj. 2: Further, the moral precepts are distinct from the judicial
and ceremonial precepts, as stated above (Q. 99, AA. 3, 4). But the
determinations of the general moral precepts belong to the judicial
and ceremonial precepts: and the general moral precepts are contained
in the decalogue, or are even presupposed to the decalogue, as stated
above (A. 3). Therefore it was unsuitable to lay down other moral
precepts besides the decalogue.

Obj. 3: Further, the moral precepts are about the acts of all the
virtues, as stated above (A. 2). Therefore, as the Law contains,
besides the decalogue, moral precepts pertaining to religion,
liberality, mercy, and chastity; so there should have been added some
precepts pertaining to the other virtues, for instance, fortitude,
sobriety, and so forth. And yet such is not the case. It is therefore
unbecoming to distinguish other moral precepts in the Law besides
those of the decalogue.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ps. 18:8): "The law of the Lord is
unspotted, converting souls." But man is preserved from the stain of
sin, and his soul is converted to God by other moral precepts besides
those of the decalogue. Therefore it was right for the Law to include
other moral precepts.

_I answer that,_ As is evident from what has been stated (Q. 99, AA.
3, 4), the judicial and ceremonial precepts derive their force from
their institution alone: since before they were instituted, it seemed
of no consequence whether things were done in this or that way. But
the moral precepts derive their efficacy from the very dictate of
natural reason, even if they were never included in the Law. Now of
these there are three grades: for some are most certain, and so
evident as to need no promulgation; such as the commandments of the
love of God and our neighbor, and others like these, as stated above
(A. 3), which are, as it were, the ends of the commandments;
wherefore no man can have an erroneous judgment about them. Some
precepts are more detailed, the reason of which even an uneducated
man can easily grasp; and yet they need to be promulgated, because
human judgment, in a few instances, happens to be led astray
concerning them: these are the precepts of the decalogue. Again,
there are some precepts the reason of which is not so evident to
everyone, but only the wise; these are moral precepts added to the
decalogue, and given to the people by God through Moses and Aaron.

But since the things that are evident are the principles whereby we
know those that are not evident, these other moral precepts added to
the decalogue are reducible to the precepts of the decalogue, as so
many corollaries. Thus the first commandment of the decalogue forbids
the worship of strange gods: and to this are added other precepts
forbidding things relating to worship of idols: thus it is written
(Deut. 18:10, 11): "Neither let there be found among you anyone that
shall expiate his son or daughter, making them to pass through the
fire: . . . neither let there by any wizard nor charmer, nor anyone
that consulteth pythonic spirits, or fortune-tellers, or that seeketh
the truth from the dead." The second commandment forbids perjury. To
this is added the prohibition of blasphemy (Lev. 24:15, seqq) and the
prohibition of false doctrine (Deut. 13). To the third commandment
are added all the ceremonial precepts. To the fourth commandment
prescribing the honor due to parents, is added the precept about
honoring the aged, according to Lev. 19:32: "Rise up before the hoary
head, and honor the person of the aged man"; and likewise all the
precepts prescribing the reverence to be observed towards our
betters, or kindliness towards our equals or inferiors. To the fifth
commandment, which forbids murder, is added the prohibition of hatred
and of any kind of violence inflicted on our neighbor, according to
Lev. 19:16: "Thou shalt not stand against the blood of thy neighbor":
likewise the prohibition against hating one's brother (Lev. 19:17):
"Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thy heart." To the sixth
commandment which forbids adultery, is added the prohibition about
whoredom, according to Deut. 23:17: "There shall be no whore among
the daughters of Israel, nor whoremonger among the sons of Israel";
and the prohibition against unnatural sins, according to Lev. 28:22,
23: "Thou shalt not lie with mankind . . . thou shalt not copulate
with any beast." To the seventh commandment which prohibits theft, is
added the precept forbidding usury, according to Deut. 23:19: "Thou
shalt not lend to thy brother money to usury"; and the prohibition
against fraud, according to Deut. 25:13: "Thou shalt not have divers
weights in thy bag"; and universally all prohibitions relating to
peculations and larceny. To the eighth commandment, forbidding false
testimony, is added the prohibition against false judgment, according
to Ex. 23:2: "Neither shalt thou yield in judgment, to the opinion of
the most part, to stray from the truth"; and the prohibition against
lying (Ex. 23:7): "Thou shalt fly lying," and the prohibition against
detraction, according to Lev. 19:16: "Thou shalt not be a detractor,
nor a whisperer among the people." To the other two commandments no
further precepts are added, because thereby are forbidden all kinds
of evil desires.

Reply Obj. 1: The precepts of the decalogue are ordained to the love
of God and our neighbor as pertaining evidently to our duty towards
them; but the other precepts are so ordained as pertaining thereto
less evidently.

Reply Obj. 2: It is in virtue of their institution that the
ceremonial and judicial precepts are determinations of the precepts
of the decalogue, not by reason of a natural instinct, as in the case
of the superadded moral precepts.

Reply Obj. 3: The precepts of a law are ordained for the common good,
as stated above (Q. 90, A. 2). And since those virtues which direct
our conduct towards others pertain directly to the common good, as
also does the virtue of chastity, in so far as the generative act
conduces to the common good of the species; hence precepts bearing
directly on these virtues are given, both in the decalogue and in
addition thereto. As to the act of fortitude there are the order to
be given by the commanders in the war, which is undertaken for the
common good: as is clear from Deut. 20:3, where the priest is
commanded (to speak thus): "Be not afraid, do not give back." In like
manner the prohibition of acts of gluttony is left to paternal
admonition, since it is contrary to the good of the household; hence
it is said (Deut. 21:20) in the person of parents: "He slighteth
hearing our admonitions, he giveth himself to revelling, and to
debauchery and banquetings."
________________________

TWELFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 12]

Whether the Moral Precepts of the Old Law Justified Man?

Objection 1: It would seem that the moral precepts of the Old Law
justified man. Because the Apostle says (Rom. 2:13): "For not the
hearers of the Law are justified before God, but the doers of the Law
shall be justified." But the doers of the Law are those who fulfil
the precepts of the Law. Therefore the fulfilling of the precepts of
the Law was a cause of justification.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Lev. 18:5): "Keep My laws and My
judgments, which if a man do, he shall live in them." But the
spiritual life of man is through justice. Therefore the fulfilling of
the precepts of the Law was a cause of justification.

Obj. 3: Further, the Divine law is more efficacious than human law.
But human law justifies man; since there is a kind of justice
consisting in fulfilling the precepts of law. Therefore the precepts
of the Law justified man.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:6): "The letter
killeth": which, according to Augustine (De Spir. et Lit. xiv),
refers even to the moral precepts. Therefore the moral precepts did
not cause justice.

_I answer that,_ Just as "healthy" is said properly and first of that
which is possessed of health, and secondarily of that which is a sign
or a safeguard of health; so justification means first and properly
the causing of justice; while secondarily and improperly, as it were,
it may denote a sign of justice or a disposition thereto. If justice
be taken in the last two ways, it is evident that it was conferred by
the precepts of the Law; in so far, to wit, as they disposed men to
the justifying grace of Christ, which they also signified, because as
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxii, 24), "even the life of that
people foretold and foreshadowed Christ."

But if we speak of justification properly so called, then we must
notice that it can be considered as in the habit or as in the act: so
that accordingly justification may be taken in two ways. First,
according as man is made just, by becoming possessed of the habit of
justice: secondly, according as he does works of justice, so that in
this sense justification is nothing else than the execution of
justice. Now justice, like the other virtues, may denote either the
acquired or the infused virtue, as is clear from what has been stated
(Q. 63, A. 4). The acquired virtue is caused by works; but the
infused virtue is caused by God Himself through His grace. The latter
is true justice, of which we are speaking now, and in this respect of
which a man is said to be just before God, according to Rom. 4:2: "If
Abraham were justified by works, he hath whereof to glory, but not
before God." Hence this justice could not be caused by moral
precepts, which are about human actions: wherefore the moral precepts
could not justify man by causing justice.

If, on the other hand, by justification we understand the execution
of justice, thus all the precepts of the Law justified man, but in
various ways. Because the ceremonial precepts taken as a whole
contained something just in itself, in so far as they aimed at
offering worship to God; whereas taken individually they contained
that which is just, not in itself, but by being a determination of
the Divine law. Hence it is said of these precepts that they did not
justify man save through the devotion and obedience of those who
complied with them. On the other hand the moral and judicial
precepts, either in general or also in particular, contained that
which is just in itself: but the moral precepts contained that which
is just in itself according to that "general justice" which is "every
virtue" according to _Ethic._ v, 1: whereas the judicial precepts
belonged to "special justice," which is about contracts connected
with the human mode of life, between one man and another.

Reply Obj. 1: The Apostle takes justification for the execution of
justice.

Reply Obj. 2: The man who fulfilled the precepts of the Law is said
to live in them, because he did not incur the penalty of death, which
the Law inflicted on its transgressors: in this sense the Apostle
quotes this passage (Gal. 3:12).

Reply Obj. 3: The precepts of human law justify man by acquired
justice: it is not about this that we are inquiring now, but only
about that justice which is before God.
________________________

QUESTION 101

OF THE CEREMONIAL PRECEPTS IN THEMSELVES
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the ceremonial precepts: and first we must
consider them in themselves; secondly, their cause; thirdly, their
duration. Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) The nature of the ceremonial precepts;

(2) Whether they are figurative?

(3) Whether there should have been many of them?

(4) Of their various kinds.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 101, Art. 1]

Whether the Nature of the Ceremonial Precepts Consists in Their
Pertaining to the Worship of God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the nature of the ceremonial precepts
does not consist in their pertaining to the worship of God. Because,
in the Old Law, the Jews were given certain precepts about abstinence
from food (Lev. 11); and about refraining from certain kinds of
clothes, e.g. (Lev. 19:19): "Thou shalt not wear a garment that is
woven of two sorts"; and again (Num. 15:38): "To make to themselves
fringes in the corners of their garments." But these are not moral
precepts; since they do not remain in the New Law. Nor are they
judicial precepts; since they do not pertain to the pronouncing of
judgment between man and man. Therefore they are ceremonial precepts.
Yet they seem in no way to pertain to the worship of God. Therefore
the nature of the ceremonial precepts does not consist in their
pertaining to Divine worship.

Obj. 2: Further, some state that the ceremonial precepts are those
which pertain to solemnities; as though they were so called from the
_cerei_ (candles) which are lit up on those occasions. But many other
things besides solemnities pertain to the worship of God. Therefore
it does not seem that the ceremonial precepts are so called from
their pertaining to the Divine worship.

Obj. 3: Further, some say that the ceremonial precepts are patterns,
i.e. rules, of salvation: because the Greek _chaire_ is the same as
the Latin "salve." But all the precepts of the Law are rules of
salvation, and not only those that pertain to the worship of God.
Therefore not only those precepts which pertain to Divine worship are
called ceremonial.

Obj. 4: Further, Rabbi Moses says (Doct. Perplex. iii) that the
ceremonial precepts are those for which there is no evident reason.
But there is evident reason for many things pertaining to the worship
of God; such as the observance of the Sabbath, the feasts of the
Passover and of the Tabernacles, and many other things, the reason
for which is set down in the Law. Therefore the ceremonial precepts
are not those which pertain to the worship of God.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ex. 18:19, 20): "Be thou to the
people in those things that pertain to God . . . and . . . shew the
people the ceremonies and the manner of worshipping."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 99, A. 4), the ceremonial
precepts are determinations of the moral precepts whereby man is
directed to God, just as the judicial precepts are determinations of
the moral precepts whereby he is directed to his neighbor. Now man is
directed to God by the worship due to Him. Wherefore those precepts
are properly called ceremonial, which pertain to the Divine worship.
The reason for their being so called was given above (Q. 99, A. 3),
when we established the distinction between the ceremonial and the
other precepts.

Reply Obj. 1: The Divine worship includes not only sacrifices and the
like, which seem to be directed to God immediately, but also those
things whereby His worshippers are duly prepared to worship Him: thus
too in other matters, whatever is preparatory to the end comes under
the science whose object is the end. Accordingly those precepts of
the Law which regard the clothing and food of God's worshippers, and
other such matters, pertain to a certain preparation of the
ministers, with the view of fitting them for the Divine worship: just
as those who administer to a king make use of certain special
observances. Consequently such are contained under the ceremonial
precepts.

Reply Obj. 2: The alleged explanation of the name does not seem very
probable: especially as the Law does not contain many instances of
the lighting of candles in solemnities; since, even the lamps of the
Candlestick were furnished with "oil of olives," as stated in Lev.
24:2. Nevertheless we may say that all things pertaining to the
Divine worship were more carefully observed on solemn festivals: so
that all ceremonial precepts may be included under the observance of
solemnities.

Reply Obj. 3: Neither does this explanation of the name appear to be
very much to the point, since the word "ceremony" is not Greek but
Latin. We may say, however, that, since man's salvation is from God,
those precepts above all seem to be rules of salvation, which direct
man to God: and accordingly those which refer to Divine worship are
called ceremonial precepts.

Reply Obj. 4: This explanation of the ceremonial precepts has a
certain amount of probability: not that they are called ceremonial
precisely because there is no evident reason for them; this is a kind
of consequence. For, since the precepts referring to the Divine
worship must needs be figurative, as we shall state further on (A.
2), the consequence is that the reason for them is not so very
evident.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 101, Art. 2]

Whether the Ceremonial Precepts Are Figurative?

Objection 1: It would seem that the ceremonial precepts are not
figurative. For it is the duty of every teacher to express himself in
such a way as to be easily understood, as Augustine states (De Doctr.
Christ. iv, 4, 10) and this seems very necessary in the framing of a
law: because precepts of law are proposed to the populace; for which
reason a law should be manifest, as Isidore declares (Etym. v, 21).
If therefore the precepts of the Law were given as figures of
something, it seems unbecoming that Moses should have delivered these
precepts without explaining what they signified.

Obj. 2: Further, whatever is done for the worship of God, should be
entirely free from unfittingness. But the performance of actions in
representation of others, seems to savor of the theatre or of the
drama: because formerly the actions performed in theatres were done
to represent the actions of others. Therefore it seems that such
things should not be done for the worship of God. But the ceremonial
precepts are ordained to the Divine worship, as stated above (A. 1).
Therefore they should not be figurative.

Obj. 3: Further, Augustine says (Enchiridion iii, iv) that "God is
worshipped chiefly by faith, hope, and charity." But the precepts of
faith, hope, and charity are not figurative. Therefore the ceremonial
precepts should not be figurative.

Obj. 4: Further, Our Lord said (John 4:24): "God is a spirit, and
they that adore Him, must adore Him in spirit and in truth." But a
figure is not the very truth: in fact one is condivided with the
other. Therefore the ceremonial precepts, which refer to the Divine
worship, should not be figurative.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Col. 2:16, 17): "Let no man . .
. judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of a festival day, or
of the new moon, or of the sabbaths, which are a shadow of things to
come."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1; Q. 99, AA. 3, 4), the
ceremonial precepts are those which refer to the worship of God. Now
the Divine worship is twofold: internal, and external. For since man
is composed of soul and body, each of these should be applied to the
worship of God; the soul by an interior worship; the body by an
outward worship: hence it is written (Ps. 83:3): "My heart and my
flesh have rejoiced in the living God." And as the body is ordained
to God through the soul, so the outward worship is ordained to the
internal worship. Now interior worship consists in the soul being
united to God by the intellect and affections. Wherefore according to
the various ways in which the intellect and affections of the man who
worships God are rightly united to God, his external actions are
applied in various ways to the Divine worship.

For in the state of future bliss, the human intellect will gaze on
the Divine Truth in Itself. Wherefore the external worship will not
consist in anything figurative, but solely in the praise of God,
proceeding from the inward knowledge and affection, according to Isa.
51:3: "Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the
voice of praise."

But in the present state of life, we are unable to gaze on the Divine
Truth in Itself, and we need the ray of Divine light to shine upon us
under the form of certain sensible figures, as Dionysius states
(Coel. Hier. i); in various ways, however, according to the various
states of human knowledge. For under the Old Law, neither was the
Divine Truth manifest in Itself, nor was the way leading to that
manifestation as yet opened out, as the Apostle declares (Heb. 9:8).
Hence the external worship of the Old Law needed to be figurative not
only of the future truth to be manifested in our heavenly country,
but also of Christ, Who is the way leading to that heavenly
manifestation. But under the New Law this way is already revealed:
and therefore it needs no longer to be foreshadowed as something
future, but to be brought to our minds as something past or present:
and the truth of the glory to come, which is not yet revealed, alone
needs to be foreshadowed. This is what the Apostle says (Heb. 11:1):
"The Law has [Vulg.: 'having'] a shadow of the good things to come,
not the very image of the things": for a shadow is less than an
image; so that the image belongs to the New Law, but the shadow to
the Old.

Reply Obj. 1: The things of God are not to be revealed to man except
in proportion to his capacity: else he would be in danger of
downfall, were he to despise what he cannot grasp. Hence it was more
beneficial that the Divine mysteries should be revealed to uncultured
people under a veil of figures, that thus they might know them at
least implicitly by using those figures to the honor of God.

Reply Obj. 2: Just as human reason fails to grasp poetical
expressions on account of their being lacking in truth, so does it
fail to grasp Divine things perfectly, on account of the sublimity of
the truth they contain: and therefore in both cases there is need of
signs by means of sensible figures.

Reply Obj. 3: Augustine is speaking there of internal worship; to
which, however, external worship should be ordained, as stated above.

The same answer applies to the Fourth Objection: because men were
taught by Him to practice more perfectly the spiritual worship of
God.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 101, Art. 3]

Whether There Should Have Been Many Ceremonial Precepts?

Objection 1: It would seem that there should not have been many
ceremonial precepts. For those things which conduce to an end should
be proportionate to that end. But the ceremonial precepts, as stated
above (AA. 1, 2), are ordained to the worship of God, and to the
foreshadowing of Christ. Now "there is but one God, of Whom are all
things . . . and one Lord Jesus Christ, by Whom are all things" (1
Cor. 8:6). Therefore there should not have been many ceremonial
precepts.

Obj. 2: Further, the great number of the ceremonial precepts was an
occasion of transgression, according to the words of Peter (Acts
15:10): "Why tempt you God, to put a yoke upon the necks of the
disciples, which neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear?"
Now the transgression of the Divine precepts is an obstacle to man's
salvation. Since, therefore, every law should conduce to man's
salvation, as Isidore says (Etym. v, 3), it seems that the ceremonial
precepts should not have been given in great number.

Obj. 3: Further, the ceremonial precepts referred to the outward and
bodily worship of God, as stated above (A. 2). But the Law should
have lessened this bodily worship: since it directed men to Christ,
Who taught them to worship God "in spirit and in truth," as stated in
John 4:23. Therefore there should not have been many ceremonial
precepts.

_On the contrary,_ (Osee 8:12): "I shall write to them [Vulg.: 'him']
My manifold laws"; and (Job 11:6): "That He might show thee the
secrets of His wisdom, and that His Law is manifold."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 96, A. 1), every law is given to
a people. Now a people contains two kinds of men: some, prone to
evil, who have to be coerced by the precepts of the law, as stated
above (Q. 95, A. 1); some, inclined to good, either from nature or
from custom, or rather from grace; and the like have to be taught and
improved by means of the precepts of the law. Accordingly, with
regard to both kinds of men it was expedient that the Old Law should
contain many ceremonial precepts. For in that people there were many
prone to idolatry; wherefore it was necessary to recall them by means
of ceremonial precepts from the worship of idols to the worship of
God. And since men served idols in many ways, it was necessary on the
other hand to devise many means of repressing every single one: and
again, to lay many obligations on such like men, in order that being
burdened, as it were, by their duties to the Divine worship, they
might have no time for the service of idols. As to those who were
inclined to good, it was again necessary that there should be many
ceremonial precepts; both because thus their mind turned to God in
many ways, and more continually; and because the mystery of Christ,
which was foreshadowed by these ceremonial precepts, brought many
boons to the world, and afforded men many considerations, which
needed to be signified by various ceremonies.

Reply Obj. 1: When that which conduces to an end is sufficient to
conduce thereto, then one such thing suffices for one end: thus one
remedy, if it be efficacious, suffices sometimes to restore men to
health, and then the remedy needs not to be repeated. But when that
which conduces to an end is weak and imperfect, it needs to be
multiplied: thus many remedies are given to a sick man, when one is
not enough to heal him. Now the ceremonies of the Old Law were weak
and imperfect, both for representing the mystery of Christ, on
account of its surpassing excellence; and for subjugating men's minds
to God. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 7:18, 19): "There is a setting
aside of the former commandment because of the weakness and
unprofitableness thereof, for the law brought nothing to perfection."
Consequently these ceremonies needed to be in great number.

Reply Obj. 2: A wise lawgiver should suffer lesser transgressions,
that the greater may be avoided. And therefore, in order to avoid the
sin of idolatry, and the pride which would arise in the hearts of the
Jews, were they to fulfil all the precepts of the Law, the fact that
they would in consequence find many occasions of disobedience did not
prevent God from giving them many ceremonial precepts.

Reply Obj. 3: The Old Law lessened bodily worship in many ways. Thus
it forbade sacrifices to be offered in every place and by any person.
Many such like things did it enact for the lessening of bodily
worship; as Rabbi Moses, the Egyptian testifies (Doct. Perplex. iii).
Nevertheless it behooved not to attenuate the bodily worship of God
so much as to allow men to fall away into the worship of idols.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 101, Art. 4]

Whether the Ceremonies of the Old Law Are Suitably Divided into
Sacrifices, Sacred Things, Sacraments, and Observances?

Objection 1: It would seem that the ceremonies of the Old Law are
unsuitably divided into "sacrifices, sacred things, sacraments, and
observances." For the ceremonies of the Old Law foreshadowed Christ.
But this was done only by the sacrifices, which foreshadowed the
sacrifice in which Christ "delivered Himself an oblation and a
sacrifice to God" (Eph. 5:2). Therefore none but the sacrifices were
ceremonies.

Obj. 2: Further, the Old Law was ordained to the New. But in the New
Law the sacrifice is the Sacrament of the Altar. Therefore in the Old
Law there should be no distinction between "sacrifices" and
"sacraments."

Obj. 3: Further, a "sacred thing" is something dedicated to God: in
which sense the tabernacle and its vessels were said to be
consecrated. But all the ceremonial precepts were ordained to the
worship of God, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore all ceremonies were
sacred things. Therefore "sacred things" should not be taken as a
part of the ceremonies.

Obj. 4: Further, "observances" are so called from having to be
observed. But all the precepts of the Law had to be observed: for it
is written (Deut. 8:11): "Observe [Douay: 'Take heed'] and beware
lest at any time thou forget the Lord thy God, and neglect His
commandments and judgments and ceremonies." Therefore the
"observances" should not be considered as a part of the ceremonies.

Obj. 5: Further, the solemn festivals are reckoned as part of the
ceremonial: since they were a shadow of things to come (Col. 2:16,
17): and the same may be said of the oblations and gifts, as appears
from the words of the Apostle (Heb. 9:9): and yet these do not seem
to be inclined in any of those mentioned above. Therefore the above
division of ceremonies is unsuitable.

_On the contrary,_ In the Old Law each of the above is called a
ceremony. For the sacrifices are called ceremonies (Num. 15:24):
"They shall offer a calf . . . and the sacrifices and libations
thereof, as the ceremonies require." Of the sacrament of Order it is
written (Lev. 7:35): "This is the anointing of Aaron and his sons in
the ceremonies." Of sacred things also it is written (Ex. 38:21):
"These are the instruments of the tabernacle of the testimony . . .
in the ceremonies of the Levites." And again of the observances it is
written (3 Kings 9:6): "If you . . . shall turn away from following
Me, and will not observe [Douay: 'keep'] My . . . ceremonies which I
have set before you."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (AA. 1, 2), the ceremonial precepts
are ordained to the Divine worship. Now in this worship we may
consider the worship itself, the worshippers, and the instruments of
worship. The worship consists specially in _sacrifices,_ which are
offered up in honor of God. The instruments of worship refer to the
_sacred things,_ such as the tabernacle, the vessels and so forth.
With regard to the worshippers two points may be considered. The
first point is their preparation for Divine worship, which is
effected by a sort of consecration either of the people or of the
ministers; and to this the _sacraments_ refer. The second point is
their particular mode of life, whereby they are distinguished from
those who do not worship God: and to this pertain the _observances,_
for instance, in matters of food, clothing, and so forth.

Reply Obj. 1: It was necessary for the sacrifices to be offered both
in some certain place and by some certain men: and all this pertained
to the worship of God. Wherefore just as their sacrifices signified
Christ the victim, so too their sacraments and sacred things
foreshadowed the sacraments and sacred things of the New Law; while
their observances foreshadowed the mode of life of the people under
the New Law: all of which things pertain to Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: The sacrifice of the New Law, viz. the Eucharist,
contains Christ Himself, the Author of our Sanctification: for He
sanctified "the people by His own blood" (Heb. 13:12). Hence this
Sacrifice is also a sacrament. But the sacrifices of the Old Law did
not contain Christ, but foreshadowed Him; hence they are not called
sacraments. In order to signify this there were certain sacraments
apart from the sacrifices of the Old Law, which sacraments were
figures of the sanctification to come. Nevertheless to certain
consecrations certain sacrifices were united.

Reply Obj. 3: The sacrifices and sacraments were of course sacred
things. But certain things were sacred, through being dedicated to
the Divine worship, and yet were not sacrifices or sacraments:
wherefore they retained the common designation of sacred things.

Reply Obj. 4: Those things which pertained to the mode of life of the
people who worshipped God, retained the common designation of
observances, in so far as they fell short of the above. For they were
not called sacred things, because they had no immediate connection
with the worship of God, such as the tabernacle and its vessels had.
But by a sort of consequence they were matters of ceremony, in so far
as they affected the fitness of the people who worshipped God.

Reply Obj. 5: Just as the sacrifices were offered in a fixed place,
so were they offered at fixed times: for which reason the solemn
festivals seem to be reckoned among the sacred things. The oblations
and gifts are counted together with the sacrifices; hence the Apostle
says (Heb. 5:1): "Every high-priest taken from among men, is ordained
for men in things that appertain to God, that he may offer up gifts
and sacrifices."
________________________

QUESTION 102

OF THE CAUSES OF THE CEREMONIAL PRECEPTS
(In Six Articles)

We must now consider the causes of the ceremonial precepts: under
which head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether there was any cause for the ceremonial precepts?

(2) Whether the cause of the ceremonial precepts was literal or
figurative?

(3) The causes of the sacrifices;

(4) The causes of the sacrifices;

(5) The causes of the sacred things;

(6) The causes of the observances.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 102, Art. 1]

Whether There Was Any Cause for the Ceremonial Precepts?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was no cause for the ceremonial
precepts. Because on Eph. 2:15, "Making void the law of the
commandments," the gloss says, (i.e.) "making void the Old Law as to
the carnal observances, by substituting decrees, i.e. evangelical
precepts, which are based on reason." But if the observances of the
Old Law were based on reason, it would have been useless to void them
by the reasonable decrees of the New Law. Therefore there was no
reason for the ceremonial observances of the Old Law.

Obj. 2: Further, the Old Law succeeded the law of nature. But in the
law of nature there was a precept for which there was no reason save
that man's obedience might be tested; as Augustine says (Gen. ad lit.
viii, 6, 13), concerning the prohibition about the tree of life.
Therefore in the Old Law there should have been some precepts for the
purpose of testing man's obedience, having no reason in themselves.

Obj. 3: Further, man's works are called moral according as they
proceed from reason. If therefore there is any reason for the
ceremonial precepts, they would not differ from the moral precepts.
It seems therefore that there was no cause for the ceremonial
precepts: for the reason of a precept is taken from some cause.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ps. 18:9): "The commandment of the
Lord is lightsome, enlightening the eyes." But the ceremonial
precepts are commandments of God. Therefore they are lightsome: and
yet they would not be so, if they had no reasonable cause. Therefore
the ceremonial precepts have a reasonable cause.

_I answer that,_ Since, according to the Philosopher (Metaph. i, 2),
it is the function of a "wise man to do everything in order," those
things which proceed from the Divine wisdom must needs be well
ordered, as the Apostle states (Rom. 13:1). Now there are two
conditions required for things to be well ordered. First, that they
be ordained to their due end, which is the principle of the whole
order in matters of action: since those things that happen by chance
outside the intention of the end, or which are not done seriously but
for fun, are said to be inordinate. Secondly, that which is done in
view of the end should be proportionate to the end. From this it
follows that the reason for whatever conduces to the end is taken
from the end: thus the reason for the disposition of a saw is taken
from cutting, which is its end, as stated in _Phys._ ii, 9. Now it is
evident that the ceremonial precepts, like all the other precepts of
the Law, were institutions of Divine wisdom: hence it is written
(Deut. 4:6): "This is your wisdom and understanding in the sight of
nations." Consequently we must needs say that the ceremonial precepts
were ordained to a certain end, wherefrom their reasonable causes can
be gathered.

Reply Obj. 1: It may be said there was no reason for the observances
of the Old Law, in the sense that there was no reason in the very
nature of the thing done: for instance that a garment should not be
made of wool and linen. But there could be a reason for them in
relation to something else: namely, in so far as something was
signified or excluded thereby. On the other hand, the decrees of the
New Law, which refer chiefly to faith and the love of God, are
reasonable from the very nature of the act.

Reply Obj. 2: The reason for the prohibition concerning the tree of
knowledge of good and evil was not that this tree was naturally evil:
and yet this prohibition was reasonable in its relation to something
else, in as much as it signified something. And so also the
ceremonial precepts of the Old Law were reasonable on account of
their relation to something else.

Reply Obj. 3: The moral precepts in their very nature have reasonable
causes: as for instance, "Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not
steal." But the ceremonial precepts have a reasonable cause in their
relation to something else, as stated above.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 102, Art. 2]

Whether the Ceremonial Precepts Have a Literal Cause or Merely a
Figurative Cause?

Objection 1: It would seem that the ceremonial precepts have not a
literal, but merely a figurative cause. For among the ceremonial
precepts, the chief was circumcision and the sacrifice of the paschal
lamb. But neither of these had any but a figurative cause: because
each was given as a sign. For it is written (Gen. 17:11): "You shall
circumcise the flesh of your foreskin, that it may be a sign of the
covenant between Me and you": and of the celebration of the Passover
it is written (Ex. 13:9): "It shall be as a sign in thy hand, and as
a memorial before thy eyes." Therefore much more did the other
ceremonial precepts have none but a figurative reason.

Obj. 2: Further, an effect is proportionate to its cause. But all the
ceremonial precepts are figurative, as stated above (Q. 101, A. 2).
Therefore they have no other than a figurative cause.

Obj. 3: Further, if it be a matter of indifference whether a certain
thing, considered in itself, be done in a particular way or not, it
seems that it has not a literal cause. Now there are certain points
in the ceremonial precepts, which appear to be a matter of
indifference, as to whether they be done in one way or in another:
for instance, the number of animals to be offered, and other such
particular circumstances. Therefore there is no literal cause for the
precepts of the Old Law.

_On the contrary,_ Just as the ceremonial precepts foreshadowed
Christ, so did the stories of the Old Testament: for it is written (1
Cor. 10:11) that "all (these things) happened to them in figure." Now
in the stories of the Old Testament, besides the mystical or
figurative, there is the literal sense. Therefore the ceremonial
precepts had also literal, besides their figurative causes.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the reason for whatever
conduces to an end must be taken from that end. Now the end of the
ceremonial precepts was twofold: for they were ordained to the Divine
worship, for that particular time, and to the foreshadowing of
Christ; just as the words of the prophets regarded the time being in
such a way as to be utterances figurative of the time to come, as
Jerome says on Osee 1:3. Accordingly the reasons for the ceremonial
precepts of the Old Law can be taken in two ways. First, in respect
of the Divine worship which was to be observed for that particular
time: and these reasons are literal: whether they refer to the
shunning of idolatry; or recall certain Divine benefits; or remind
men of the Divine excellence; or point out the disposition of mind
which was then required in those who worshipped God. Secondly, their
reasons can be gathered from the point of view of their being
ordained to foreshadow Christ: and thus their reasons are figurative
and mystical: whether they be taken from Christ Himself and the
Church, which pertains to the allegorical sense; or to the morals of
the Christian people, which pertains to the moral sense; or to the
state of future glory, in as much as we are brought thereto by
Christ, which refers to the anagogical sense.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as the use of metaphorical expressions in
Scripture belongs to the literal sense, because the words are
employed in order to convey that particular meaning; so also the
meaning of those legal ceremonies which commemorated certain Divine
benefits, on account of which they were instituted, and of others
similar which belonged to that time, does not go beyond the order of
literal causes. Consequently when we assert that the cause of the
celebration of the Passover was its signification of the delivery
from Egypt, or that circumcision was a sign of God's covenant with
Abraham, we assign the literal cause.

Reply Obj. 2: This argument would avail if the ceremonial precepts
had been given merely as figures of things to come, and not for the
purpose of worshipping God then and there.

Reply Obj. 3: As we have stated when speaking of human laws (Q. 96,
AA. 1, 6), there is a reason for them in the abstract, but not in
regard to particular conditions, which depend on the judgment of
those who frame them; so also many particular determinations in the
ceremonies of the Old Law have no literal cause, but only a
figurative cause; whereas in the abstract they have a literal cause.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 102, Art. 3]

Whether a Suitable Cause Can Be Assigned for the Ceremonies Which
Pertained to Sacrifices?

Objection 1: It would seem that no suitable cause can be assigned for
the ceremonies pertaining to sacrifices. For those things which were
offered in sacrifice, are those which are necessary for sustaining
human life: such as certain animals and certain loaves. But God needs
no such sustenance; according to Ps. 49:13: "Shall I eat the flesh of
bullocks? Or shall I drink the blood of goats?" Therefore such
sacrifices were unfittingly offered to God.

Obj. 2: Further, only three kinds of quadrupeds were offered in
sacrifice to God, viz. oxen, sheep and goats; of birds, generally the
turtledove and the dove; but specially, in the cleansing of a leper,
an offering was made of sparrows. Now many other animals are more
noble than these. Since therefore whatever is best should be offered
to God, it seems that not only of these three should sacrifices have
been offered to Him.

Obj. 3: Further, just as man has received from God the dominion over
birds and beasts, so also has he received dominion over fishes.
Consequently it was unfitting for fishes to be excluded from the
divine sacrifices.

Obj. 4: Further, turtledoves and doves indifferently are commanded to
be offered up. Since then the young of the dove are commanded to be
offered, so also should the young of the turtledove.

Obj. 5: Further, God is the Author of life, not only of men, but also
of animals, as is clear from Gen. 1:20, seqq. Now death is opposed to
life. Therefore it was fitting that living animals rather than slain
animals should be offered to God, especially as the Apostle
admonishes us (Rom. 12:1), to present our bodies "a living sacrifice,
holy, pleasing unto God."

Obj. 6: Further, if none but slain animals were offered in sacrifice
to God, it seems that it mattered not how they were slain. Therefore
it was unfitting that the manner of immolation should be determined,
especially as regards birds (Lev. 1:15, seqq.).

Obj. 7: Further, every defect in an animal is a step towards
corruption and death. If therefore slain animals were offered to God,
it was unreasonable to forbid the offering of an imperfect animal,
e.g. a lame, or a blind, or otherwise defective animal.

Obj. 8: Further, those who offer victims to God should partake
thereof, according to the words of the Apostle (1 Cor. 10:18): "Are
not they that eat of the sacrifices partakers of the altar?" It was
therefore unbecoming for the offerers to be denied certain parts of
the victims, namely, the blood, the fat, the breastbone and the right
shoulder.

Objection 9: Further, just as holocausts were offered up in honor of
God, so also were the peace-offerings and sin-offerings. But no
female animals was offered up to God as a holocaust, although
holocausts were offered of both quadrupeds and birds. Therefore it
was inconsistent that female animals should be offered up in
peace-offerings and sin-offerings, and that nevertheless birds should
not be offered up in peace-offerings.

Objection 10: Further, all the peace-offerings seem to be of one
kind. Therefore it was unfitting to make a distinction among them, so
that it was forbidden to eat the flesh of certain peace-offerings on
the following day, while it was allowed to eat the flesh of other
peace-offerings, as laid down in Lev. 7:15, seqq.

Objection 11: Further, all sins agree in turning us from God.
Therefore, in order to reconcile us to God, one kind of sacrifice
should have been offered up for all sins.

Objection 12: Further, all animals that were offered up in sacrifice,
were offered up in one way, viz. slain. Therefore it does not seem to
be suitable that products of the soil should be offered up in various
ways; for sometimes an offering was made of ears of corn, sometimes
of flour, sometimes of bread, this being baked sometimes in an oven,
sometimes in a pan, sometimes on a gridiron.

Objection 13: Further, whatever things are serviceable to us should
be recognized as coming from God. It was therefore unbecoming that
besides animals, nothing but bread, wine, oil, incense, and salt
should be offered to God.

Objection 14: Further, bodily sacrifices denote the inward sacrifice
of the heart, whereby man offers his soul to God. But in the inward
sacrifice, the sweetness, which is denoted by honey, surpasses the
pungency which salt represents; for it is written (Ecclus. 24:27):
"My spirit is sweet above honey." Therefore it was unbecoming that
the use of honey, and of leaven which makes bread savory, should be
forbidden in a sacrifice; while the use was prescribed, of salt which
is pungent, and of incense which has a bitter taste. Consequently it
seems that things pertaining to the ceremonies of the sacrifices have
no reasonable cause.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Lev. 1:13): "The priest shall offer
it all and burn it all upon the altar, for a holocaust, and most
sweet savor to the Lord." Now according to Wis. 7:28, "God loveth
none but him that dwelleth with wisdom": whence it seems to follow
that whatever is acceptable to God is wisely done. Therefore these
ceremonies of the sacrifices were wisely done, as having reasonable
causes.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), the ceremonies of the Old
Law had a twofold cause, viz. a literal cause, according as they were
intended for Divine worship; and a figurative or mystical cause,
according as they were intended to foreshadow Christ: and on either
hand the ceremonies pertaining to the sacrifices can be assigned to a
fitting cause.

For, according as the ceremonies of the sacrifices were intended for
the divine worship, the causes of the sacrifices can be taken in two
ways. First, in so far as the sacrifice represented the directing of
the mind to God, to which the offerer of the sacrifice was
stimulated. Now in order to direct his mind to God aright, man must
recognize that whatever he has is from God as from its first
principle, and direct it to God as its last end. This was denoted in
the offerings and sacrifices, by the fact that man offered some of
his own belongings in honor of God, as though in recognition of his
having received them from God, according to the saying of David (1
Paral. xxix, 14): "All things are Thine: and we have given Thee what
we received of Thy hand." Wherefore in offering up sacrifices man
made protestation that God is the first principle of the creation of
all things, and their last end, to which all things must be directed.
And since, for the human mind to be directed to God aright, it must
recognize no first author of things other than God, nor place its end
in any other; for this reason it was forbidden in the Law to offer
sacrifice to any other but God, according to Ex. 22:20: "He that
sacrificeth to gods, shall be put to death, save only to the Lord."
Wherefore another reasonable cause may be assigned to the ceremonies
of the sacrifices, from the fact that thereby men were withdrawn from
offering sacrifices to idols. Hence too it is that the precepts about
the sacrifices were not given to the Jewish people until after they
had fallen into idolatry, by worshipping the molten calf: as though
those sacrifices were instituted, that the people, being ready to
offer sacrifices, might offer those sacrifices to God rather than to
idols. Thus it is written (Jer. 7:22): "I spake not to your fathers
and I commanded them not, in the day that I brought them out of the
land of Egypt, concerning the matter of burnt-offerings and
sacrifices."

Now of all the gifts which God vouchsafed to mankind after they had
fallen away by sin, the chief is that He gave His Son; wherefore it
is written (John 3:16): "God so loved the world, as to give His
only-begotten Son; that whosoever believeth in Him, may not perish,
but may have life everlasting." Consequently the chief sacrifice is
that whereby Christ Himself "delivered Himself . . . to God for an
odor of sweetness" (Eph. 5:2). And for this reason all the other
sacrifices of the Old Law were offered up in order to foreshadow this
one individual and paramount sacrifice--the imperfect forecasting the
perfect. Hence the Apostle says (Heb. 10:11) that the priest of the
Old Law "often" offered "the same sacrifices, which can never take
away sins: but" Christ offered "one sacrifice for sins, for ever."
And since the reason of the figure is taken from that which the
figure represents, therefore the reasons of the figurative sacrifices
of the Old Law should be taken from the true sacrifice of Christ.

Reply Obj. 1: God did not wish these sacrifices to be offered to Him
on account of the things themselves that were offered, as though He
stood in need of them: wherefore it is written (Isa. 1:11): "I desire
not holocausts of rams, and fat of fatlings, and blood of calves and
lambs and buckgoats." But, as stated above, He wished them to be
offered to Him, in order to prevent idolatry; in order to signify the
right ordering of man's mind to God; and in order to represent the
mystery of the Redemption of man by Christ.

Reply Obj. 2: In all the respects mentioned above (ad 1), there was a
suitable reason for these animals, rather than others, being offered
in sacrifice to God. First, in order to prevent idolatry. Because
idolaters offered all other animals to their gods, or made use of
them in their sorceries: while the Egyptians (among whom the people
had been dwelling) considered it abominable to slay these animals,
wherefore they used not to offer them in sacrifice to their gods.
Hence it is written (Ex. 8:26): "We shall sacrifice the abominations
of the Egyptians to the Lord our God." For they worshipped the sheep;
they reverenced the ram (because demons appeared under the form
thereof); while they employed oxen for agriculture, which was
reckoned by them as something sacred.

Secondly, this was suitable for the aforesaid right ordering of man's
mind to God: and in two ways. First, because it is chiefly by means
of these animals that human life is sustained: and moreover they are
most clean, and partake of a most clean food: whereas other animals
are either wild, and not deputed to ordinary use among men: or, if
they be tame, they have unclean food, as pigs and geese: and nothing
but what is clean should be offered to God. These birds especially
were offered in sacrifice because there were plenty of them in the
land of promise. Secondly, because the sacrificing of these animals
represented purity of heart. Because as the gloss says on Lev. 1, "We
offer a calf, when we overcome the pride of the flesh; a lamb, when
we restrain our unreasonable motions; a goat, when we conquer
wantonness; a turtledove, when we keep chaste; unleavened bread, when
we feast on the unleavened bread of sincerity." And it is evident
that the dove denotes charity and simplicity of heart.

Thirdly, it was fitting that these animals should be offered, that
they might foreshadow Christ. Because, as the gloss observes, "Christ
is offered in the calf, to denote the strength of the cross; in the
lamb, to signify His innocence; in the ram, to foreshadow His
headship; and in the goat, to signify the likeness of 'sinful flesh'
[*An allusion to Col. 2:11 (Textus Receptus)]. The turtledove and
dove denoted the union of the two natures"; or else the turtledove
signified chastity; while the dove was a figure of charity. "The
wheat-flour foreshadowed the sprinkling of believers with the water
of Baptism."

Reply Obj. 3: Fish through living in water are further removed from
man than other animals, which, like man, live in the air. Again, fish
die as soon as they are taken out of water; hence they could not be
offered in the temple like other animals.

Reply Obj. 4: Among turtledoves the older ones are better than the
young; while with doves the case is the reverse. Wherefore, as Rabbi
Moses observes (Doct. Perplex. iii), turtledoves and young doves are
commanded to be offered, because nothing should be offered to God but
what is best.

Reply Obj. 5: The animals which were offered in sacrifice were slain,
because it is by being killed that they become useful to man,
forasmuch as God gave them to man for food. Wherefore also they were
burnt with fire: because it is by being cooked that they are made fit
for human consumption. Moreover the slaying of the animals signified
the destruction of sins: and also that man deserved death on account
of his sins; as though those animals were slain in man's stead, in
order to betoken the expiation of sins. Again the slaying of these
animals signified the slaying of Christ.

Reply Obj. 6: The Law fixed the special manner of slaying the
sacrificial animals in order to exclude other ways of killing,
whereby idolaters sacrificed animals to idols. Or again, as Rabbi
Moses says (Doct. Perplex. iii), "the Law chose that manner of
slaying which was least painful to the slain animal." This excluded
cruelty on the part of the offerers, and any mangling of the animals
slain.

Reply Obj. 7: It is because unclean animals are wont to be held in
contempt among men, that it was forbidden to offer them in sacrifice
to God: and for this reason too they were forbidden (Deut. 23:18) to
offer "the hire of a strumpet or the price of a dog in the house of
. . . God." For the same reason they did not offer animals before the
seventh day, because such were abortive as it were, the flesh being
not yet firm on account of its exceeding softness.

Reply Obj. 8: There were three kinds of sacrifices. There was one in
which the victim was entirely consumed by fire: this was called "a
holocaust, i.e. all burnt." For this kind of sacrifice was offered to
God specially to show reverence to His majesty, and love of His
goodness: and typified the state of perfection as regards the
fulfilment of the counsels. Wherefore the whole was burnt up: so that
as the whole animal by being dissolved into vapor soared aloft, so it
might denote that the whole man, and whatever belongs to him, are
subject to the authority of God, and should be offered to Him.

Another sacrifice was the "sin-offering," which was offered to God on
account of man's need for the forgiveness of sin: and this typifies
the state of penitents in satisfying for sins. It was divided into
two parts: for one part was burnt; while the other was granted to the
use of the priests to signify that remission of sins is granted by
God through the ministry of His priests. When, however, this
sacrifice was offered for the sins of the whole people, or specially
for the sin of the priest, the whole victim was burnt up. For it was
not fitting that the priests should have the use of that which was
offered for their own sins, to signify that nothing sinful should
remain in them. Moreover, this would not be satisfaction for sin: for
if the offering were granted to the use of those for whose sins it
was offered, it would seem to be the same as if it had not been
offered.

The third kind of sacrifice was called the "peace-offering," which
was offered to God, either in thanksgiving, or for the welfare and
prosperity of the offerers, in acknowledgment of benefits already
received or yet to be received: and this typifies the state of those
who are proficient in the observance of the commandments. These
sacrifices were divided into three parts: for one part was burnt in
honor of God; another part was allotted to the use of the priests;
and the third part to the use of the offerers; in order to signify
that man's salvation is from God, by the direction of God's
ministers, and through the cooperation of those who are saved.

But it was the universal rule that the blood and fat were not
allotted to the use either of the priests or of the offerers: the
blood being poured out at the foot of the altar, in honor of God,
while the fat was burnt upon the altar (Lev. 9:9, 10). The reason for
this was, first, in order to prevent idolatry: because idolaters used
to drink the blood and eat the fat of the victims, according to Deut.
32:38: "Of whose victims they eat the fat, and drank the wine of
their drink-offerings." Secondly, in order to form them to a right
way of living. For they were forbidden the use of the blood that they
might abhor the shedding of human blood; wherefore it is written
(Gen. 9:4, 5): "Flesh with blood you shall not eat: for I will
require the blood of your lives": and they were forbidden to eat the
fat, in order to withdraw them from lasciviousness; hence it is
written (Ezech. 34:3): "You have killed that which was fat." Thirdly,
on account of the reverence due to God: because blood is most
necessary for life, for which reason "life" is said to be "in the
blood" (Lev. 17:11, 14): while fat is a sign of abundant nourishment.
Wherefore, in order to show that to God we owe both life and a
sufficiency of all good things, the blood was poured out, and the fat
burnt up in His honor. Fourthly, in order to foreshadow the shedding
of Christ's blood, and the abundance of His charity, whereby He
offered Himself to God for us.

In the peace-offerings, the breast-bone and the right shoulder were
allotted to the use of the priest, in order to prevent a certain kind
of divination which is known as "spatulamantia," so called because it
was customary in divining to use the shoulder-blade (_spatula_), and
the breast-bone of the animals offered in sacrifice; wherefore these
things were taken away from the offerers. This is also denoted the
priest's need of wisdom in the heart, to instruct the people--this
was signified by the breast-bone, which covers the heart; and his
need of fortitude, in order to bear with human frailty--and this was
signified by the right shoulder.

Reply Obj. 9: Because the holocaust was the most perfect kind of
sacrifice, therefore none but a male was offered for a holocaust:
because the female is an imperfect animal. The offering of
turtledoves and doves was on account of the poverty of the offerers,
who were unable to offer bigger animals. And since peace-victims were
offered freely, and no one was bound to offer them against his will,
hence these birds were offered not among the peace-victims, but among
the holocausts and victims for sin, which man was obliged to offer at
times. Moreover these birds, on account of their lofty flight, were
befitting the perfection of the holocausts: and were suitable for
sin-offerings because their song is doleful.

Reply Obj. 10: The holocaust was the chief of all the sacrifices:
because all was burnt in honor of God, and nothing of it was eaten.
The second place in holiness, belongs to the sacrifice for sins,
which was eaten in the court only, and on the very day of the
sacrifice (Lev. 7:6, 15). The third place must be given to the
peace-offerings of thanksgiving, which were eaten on the same day,
but anywhere in Jerusalem. Fourth in order were the "ex-voto"
peace-offerings, the flesh of which could be eaten even on the
morrow. The reason for this order is that man is bound to God,
chiefly on account of His majesty; secondly, on account of the sins
he has committed; thirdly, because of the benefits he has already
received from Him; fourthly, by reason of the benefits he hopes to
receive from Him.

Reply Obj. 11: Sins are more grievous by reason of the state of the
sinner, as stated above (Q. 73, A. 10): wherefore different victims
are commanded to be offered for the sin of a priest, or of a prince,
or of some other private individual. "But," as Rabbi Moses says
(Doct. Perplex. iii), "we must take note that the more grievous the
sin, the lower the species of animals offered for it. Wherefore the
goat, which is a very base animal, was offered for idolatry; while a
calf was offered for a priest's ignorance, and a ram for the
negligence of a prince."

Reply Obj. 12: In the matter of sacrifices the Law had in view the
poverty of the offerers; so that those who could not have a
four-footed animal at their disposal, might at least offer a bird;
and that he who could not have a bird might at least offer bread; and
that if a man had not even bread he might offer flour or ears of corn.

The figurative cause is that the bread signifies Christ Who is the
"living bread" (John 6:41, 51). He was indeed an ear of corn, as it
were, during the state of the law of nature, in the faith of the
patriarchs; He was like flour in the doctrine of the Law of the
prophets; and He was like perfect bread after He had taken human
nature; baked in the fire, i.e. formed by the Holy Ghost in the oven
of the virginal womb; baked again in a pan by the toils which He
suffered in the world; and consumed by fire on the cross as on a
gridiron.

Reply Obj. 13: The products of the soil are useful to man, either as
food, and of these bread was offered; or as drink, and of these wine
was offered; or as seasoning, and of these oil and salt were offered;
or as healing, and of these they offered incense, which both smells
sweetly and binds easily together.

Now the bread foreshadowed the flesh of Christ; and the wine, His
blood, whereby we were redeemed; oil betokens the grace of Christ;
salt, His knowledge; incense, His prayer.

Reply Obj. 14: Honey was not offered in the sacrifices to God, both
because it was wont to be offered in the sacrifices to idols; and in
order to denote the absence of all carnal sweetness and pleasure from
those who intend to sacrifice to God. Leaven was not offered, to
denote the exclusion of corruption. Perhaps too, it was wont to be
offered in the sacrifices to idols.

Salt, however, was offered, because it wards off the corruption of
putrefaction: for sacrifices offered to God should be incorrupt.
Moreover, salt signifies the discretion of wisdom, or again,
mortification of the flesh.

Incense was offered to denote devotion of the heart, which is
necessary in the offerer; and again, to signify the odor of a good
name: for incense is composed of matter, both rich and fragrant. And
since the sacrifice "of jealousy" did not proceed from devotion, but
rather from suspicion, therefore incense was not offered therein
(Num. 5:15).
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 102, Art. 4]

Whether Sufficient Reason Can Be Assigned for the Ceremonies
Pertaining to Holy Things?

Objection 1: It would seem that no sufficient reason can be assigned
for the ceremonies of the Old Law that pertain to holy things. For
Paul said (Acts 17:24): "God Who made the world and all things
therein; He being Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples
made by hands." It was therefore unfitting that in the Old Law a
tabernacle or temple should be set up for the worship of God.

Obj. 2: Further, the state of the Old Law was not changed except by
Christ. But the tabernacle denoted the state of the Old Law.
Therefore it should not have been changed by the building of a temple.

Obj. 3: Further, the Divine Law, more than any other indeed, should
lead man to the worship of God. But an increase of divine worship
requires multiplication of altars and temples; as is evident in
regard to the New Law. Therefore it seems that also under the Old Law
there should have been not only one tabernacle or temple, but many.

Obj. 4: Further, the tabernacle or temple was ordained to the worship
of God. But in God we should worship above all His unity and
simplicity. Therefore it seems unbecoming for the tabernacle or
temple to be divided by means of veils.

Obj. 5: Further, the power of the First Mover, i.e. God, appears
first of all in the east, for it is in that quarter that the first
movement begins. But the tabernacle was set up for the worship of
God. Therefore it should have been built so as to point to the east
rather than the west.

Obj. 6: Further, the Lord commanded (Ex. 20:4) that they should "not
make . . . a graven thing, nor the likeness of anything." It was
therefore unfitting for graven images of the cherubim to be set up in
the tabernacle or temple. In like manner, the ark, the propitiatory,
the candlestick, the table, the two altars, seem to have been placed
there without reasonable cause.

Obj. 7: Further, the Lord commanded (Ex. 20:24): "You shall make an
altar of earth unto Me": and again (Ex. 20:26): "Thou shalt not go up
by steps unto My altar." It was therefore unfitting that subsequently
they should be commanded to make an altar of wood laid over with gold
or brass; and of such a height that it was impossible to go up to it
except by steps. For it is written (Ex. 27:1, 2): "Thou shalt make
also an altar of setim wood, which shall be five cubits long, and as
many broad . . . and three cubits high . . . and thou shalt cover it
with brass": and (Ex. 30:1, 3): "Thou shalt make . . . an altar to
burn incense, of setim wood . . . and thou shalt overlay it with the
purest gold."

Obj. 8: Further, in God's works nothing should be superfluous; for
not even in the works of nature is anything superfluous to be found.
But one cover suffices for one tabernacle or house. Therefore it was
unbecoming to furnish the tabernacle with many coverings, viz.
curtains, curtains of goats' hair, rams' skins dyed red, and
violet-colored skins (Ex. 26).

Objection 9: Further, exterior consecration signifies interior
holiness, the subject of which is the soul. It was therefore
unsuitable for the tabernacle and its vessels to be consecrated,
since they were inanimate things.

Objection 10: Further, it is written (Ps. 33:2): "I will bless the
Lord at all times, His praise shall always be in my mouth." But the
solemn festivals were instituted for the praise of God. Therefore it
was not fitting that certain days should be fixed for keeping solemn
festivals; so that it seems that there was no suitable cause for the
ceremonies relating to holy things.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Heb. 8:4) that those who "offer
gifts according to the law . . . serve unto the example and shadow of
heavenly things. As it was answered to Moses, when he was to finish
the tabernacle: See, says He, that thou make all things according to
the pattern which was shown thee on the mount." But that is most
reasonable, which presents a likeness to heavenly things. Therefore
the ceremonies relating to holy things had a reasonable cause.

_I answer that,_ The chief purpose of the whole external worship is
that man may give worship to God. Now man's tendency is to reverence
less those things which are common, and indistinct from other things;
whereas he admires and reveres those things which are distinct from
others in some point of excellence. Hence too it is customary among
men for kings and princes, who ought to be reverenced by their
subjects, to be clothed in more precious garments, and to possess
vaster and more beautiful abodes. And for this reason it behooved
special times, a special abode, special vessels, and special
ministers to be appointed for the divine worship, so that thereby the
soul of man might be brought to greater reverence for God.

In like manner the state of the Old Law, as observed above (A. 2; Q.
100, A. 12; Q. 101, A. 2), was instituted that it might foreshadow
the mystery of Christ. Now that which foreshadows something should be
determinate, so that it may present some likeness thereto.
Consequently, certain special points had to be observed in matters
pertaining to the worship of God.

Reply Obj. 1: The divine worship regards two things: namely, God Who
is worshipped; and men, who worship Him. Accordingly God, Who is
worshipped, is confined to no bodily place: wherefore there was no
need, on His part, for a tabernacle or temple to be set up. But men,
who worship Him, are corporeal beings: and for their sake there was
need for a special tabernacle or temple to be set up for the worship
of God, for two reasons. First, that through coming together with the
thought that the place was set aside for the worship of God, they
might approach thither with greater reverence. Secondly, that certain
things relating to the excellence of Christ's Divine or human nature
might be signified by the arrangement of various details in such
temple or tabernacle.

To this Solomon refers (3 Kings 8:27) when he says: "If heaven and
the heavens of heavens cannot contain Thee, how much less this house
which I have built" for Thee? And further on (3 Kings 8:29, 20) he
adds: "That Thy eyes may be open upon this house . . . of which Thou
hast said: My name shall be there; . . . that Thou mayest hearken to
the supplication of Thy servant and of Thy people Israel." From this
it is evident that the house of the sanctuary was set up, not in
order to contain God, as abiding therein locally, but that God might
be made known there by means of things done and said there; and that
those who prayed there might, through reverence for the place, pray
more devoutly, so as to be heard more readily.

Reply Obj. 2: Before the coming of Christ, the state of the Old Law
was not changed as regards the fulfilment of the Law, which was
effected in Christ alone: but it was changed as regards the condition
of the people that were under the Law. Because, at first, the people
were in the desert, having no fixed abode: afterwards they were
engaged in various wars with the neighboring nations; and lastly, at
the time of David and Solomon, the state of that people was one of
great peace. And then for the first time the temple was built in the
place which Abraham, instructed by God, had chosen for the purpose of
sacrifice. For it is written (Gen. 22:2) that the Lord commanded
Abraham to "offer" his son "for a holocaust upon one of the mountains
which I will show thee": and it is related further on (Gen. 22:14)
that "he calleth the name of that place, The Lord seeth," as though,
according to the Divine prevision, that place were chosen for the
worship of God. Hence it is written (Deut. 12:5, 6): "You shall come
to the place which the Lord your God shall choose . . . and you shall
offer . . . your holocausts and victims."

Now it was not meet for that place to be pointed out by the building
of the temple before the aforesaid time; for three reasons assigned
by Rabbi Moses. First, lest the Gentiles might seize hold of that
place. Secondly, lest the Gentiles might destroy it. The third reason
is lest each tribe might wish that place to fall to their lot, and
strifes and quarrels be the result. Hence the temple was not built
until they had a king who would be able to quell such quarrels. Until
that time a portable tabernacle was employed for divine worship, no
place being as yet fixed for the worship of God. This is the literal
reason for the distinction between the tabernacle and the temple.

The figurative reason may be assigned to the fact that they signify a
twofold state. For the tabernacle, which was changeable, signifies
the state of the present changeable life: whereas the temple, which
was fixed and stable, signifies the state of future life which is
altogether unchangeable. For this reason it is said that in the
building of the temple no sound was heard of hammer or saw, to
signify that all movements of disturbance will be far removed from
the future state. Or else the tabernacle signifies the state of the
Old Law; while the temple built by Solomon betokens the state of the
New Law. Hence the Jews alone worked at the building of the
tabernacle; whereas the temple was built with the cooperation of the
