Whether Christ's Body Is in This Sacrament Movably?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ's body is movably in this
sacrament, because the Philosopher says (Topic. ii) that "when we are
moved, the things within us are moved": and this is true even of the
soul's spiritual substance. "But Christ is in this sacrament," as
shown above (Q. 74, A. 1). Therefore He is moved when it is moved.

Obj. 2: Further, the truth ought to correspond with the figure. But,
according to the commandment (Ex. 12:10), concerning the Paschal
Lamb, a figure of this sacrament, "there remained nothing until the
morning." Neither, therefore, if this sacrament be reserved until
morning, will Christ's body be there; and so it is not immovably in
this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, if Christ's body were to remain under this sacrament
even until the morrow, for the same reason it will remain there
during all coming time; for it cannot be said that it ceases to be
there when the species pass, because the existence of Christ's body
is not dependent on those species. Yet Christ does not remain in this
sacrament for all coming time. It seems, then, that straightway on
the morrow, or after a short time, He ceases to be under this
sacrament. And so it seems that Christ is in this sacrament movably.

_On the contrary,_ it is impossible for the same thing to be in
motion and at rest, else contradictories would be verified of the
same subject. But Christ's body is at rest in heaven. Therefore it is
not movably in this sacrament.

_I answer that,_ When any thing is one, as to subject, and manifold
in being, there is nothing to hinder it from being moved in one
respect, and yet to remain at rest in another just as it is one thing
for a body to be white, and another thing, to be large; hence it can
be moved as to its whiteness, and yet continue unmoved as to its
magnitude. But in Christ, being in Himself and being under the
sacrament are not the same thing, because when we say that He is
under this sacrament, we express a kind of relationship to this
sacrament. According to this being, then, Christ is not moved locally
of Himself, but only accidentally, because Christ is not in this
sacrament as in a place, as stated above (A. 5). But what is not in a
place, is not moved of itself locally, but only according to the
motion of the subject in which it is.

In the same way neither is it moved of itself according to the being
which it has in this sacrament, by any other change whatever, as for
instance, that it ceases to be under this sacrament: because whatever
possesses unfailing existence of itself, cannot be the principle of
failing; but when something else fails, then it ceases to be in it;
just as God, Whose existence is unfailing and immortal, ceases to be
in some corruptible creature because such corruptible creature ceases
to exist. And in this way, since Christ has unfailing and
incorruptible being, He ceases to be under this sacrament, not
because He ceases to be, nor yet by local movement of His own, as is
clear from what has been said, but only by the fact that the
sacramental species cease to exist.

Hence it is clear that Christ, strictly speaking is immovably in this
sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument deals with accidental movement, whereby
things within us are moved together with us. But with things which
can of themselves be in a place, like bodies, it is otherwise than
with things which cannot of themselves be in a place, such as forms
and spiritual substances. And to this mode can be reduced what we say
of Christ, being moved accidentally, according to the existence which
He has in this sacrament, in which He is not present as in a place.

Reply Obj. 2: It was this argument which seems to have convinced
those who held that Christ's body does not remain under this
sacrament if it be reserved until the morrow. It is against these
that Cyril says (Ep. lxxxiii): "Some are so foolish as to say that
the mystical blessing departs from the sacrament, if any of its
fragments remain until the next day: for Christ's consecrated body is
not changed, and the power of the blessing, and the life-giving grace
is perpetually in it." Thus are all other consecrations irremovable
so long as the consecrated things endure; on which account they are
not repeated. And although the truth corresponds with the figure,
still the figure cannot equal it.

Reply Obj. 3: The body of Christ remains in this sacrament not only
until the morrow, but also in the future, so long as the sacramental
species remain: and when they cease, Christ's body ceases to be under
them, not because it depends on them, but because the relationship of
Christ's body to those species is taken away, in the same way as God
ceases to be the Lord of a creature which ceases to exist.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 7]

Whether the Body of Christ, As It Is in This Sacrament, Can Be Seen
by Any Eye, at Least by a Glorified One?

Objection 1: It seems that the body of Christ, as it is in this
sacrament, can be seen by the eye, at least by a glorified one. For
our eyes are hindered from beholding Christ's body in this sacrament,
on account of the sacramental species veiling it. But the glorified
eye cannot be hindered by anything from seeing bodies as they are.
Therefore, the glorified eye can see Christ's body as it is in this
sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, the glorified bodies of the saints will be "made
like to the body" of Christ's "glory," according to Phil. 3:21. But
Christ's eye beholds Himself as He is in this sacrament. Therefore,
for the same reason, every other glorified eye can see Him.

Obj. 3: Further, in the resurrection the saints will be equal to the
angels, according to Luke 20:36. But the angels see the body of
Christ as it is in this sacrament, for even the devils are found to
pay reverence thereto, and to fear it. Therefore, for like reason,
the glorified eye can see Christ as He is in this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ As long as a thing remains the same, it cannot at
the same time be seen by the same eye under diverse species. But the
glorified eye sees Christ always, as He is in His own species,
according to Isa. 33:17: "(His eyes) shall see the king in his
beauty." It seems, then, that it does not see Christ, as He is under
the species of this sacrament.

_I answer that,_ The eye is of two kinds, namely, the bodily eye
properly so-called, and the intellectual eye, so-called by
similitude. But Christ's body as it is in this sacrament cannot be
seen by any bodily eye. First of all, because a body which is visible
brings about an alteration in the medium, through its accidents. Now
the accidents of Christ's body are in this sacrament by means of the
substance; so that the accidents of Christ's body have no immediate
relationship either to this sacrament or to adjacent bodies;
consequently they do not act on the medium so as to be seen by any
corporeal eye. Secondly, because, as stated above (A. 1, ad 3; A. 3),
Christ's body is substantially present in this sacrament. But
substance, as such, is not visible to the bodily eye, nor does it
come under any one of the senses, nor under the imagination, but
solely under the intellect, whose object is "what a thing is" (De
Anima iii). And therefore, properly speaking, Christ's body,
according to the mode of being which it has in this sacrament, is
perceptible neither by the sense nor by the imagination, but only by
the intellect, which is called the spiritual eye.

Moreover it is perceived differently by different intellects. For
since the way in which Christ is in this sacrament is entirely
supernatural, it is visible in itself to a supernatural, i.e. the
Divine, intellect, and consequently to a beatified intellect, of
angel or of man, which, through the participated glory of the Divine
intellect, sees all supernatural things in the vision of the Divine
Essence. But it can be seen by a wayfarer through faith alone, like
other supernatural things. And not even the angelic intellect of its
own natural power is capable of beholding it; consequently the devils
cannot by their intellect perceive Christ in this sacrament, except
through faith, to which they do not pay willing assent; yet they are
convinced of it from the evidence of signs, according to James 2:19:
"The devils believe, and tremble."

Reply Obj. 1: Our bodily eye, on account of the sacramental species,
is hindered from beholding the body of Christ underlying them, not
merely as by way of veil (just as we are hindered from seeing what is
covered with any corporeal veil), but also because Christ's body
bears a relation to the medium surrounding this sacrament, not
through its own accidents, but through the sacramental species.

Reply Obj. 2: Christ's own bodily eye sees Himself existing under the
sacrament, yet it cannot see the way in which it exists under the
sacrament, because that belongs to the intellect. But it is not the
same with any other glorified eye, because Christ's eye is under this
sacrament, in which no other glorified eye is conformed to it.

Reply Obj. 3: No angel, good or bad, can see anything with a bodily
eye, but only with the mental eye. Hence there is no parallel reason,
as is evident from what was said above.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 76, Art. 8]

Whether Christ's Body Is Truly There When Flesh or a Child Appears
Miraculously in This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that Christ's body is not truly there when
flesh or a child appears miraculously in this sacrament. Because His
body ceases to be under this sacrament when the sacramental species
cease to be present, as stated above (A. 6). But when flesh or a
child appears, the sacramental species cease to be present. Therefore
Christ's body is not truly there.

Obj. 2: Further, wherever Christ's body is, it is there either under
its own species, or under those of the sacrament. But when such
apparitions occur, it is evident that Christ is not present under His
own species, because the entire Christ is contained in this
sacrament, and He remains entire under the form in which He ascended
to heaven: yet what appears miraculously in this sacrament is
sometimes seen as a small particle of flesh, or at times as a small
child. Now it is evident that He is not there under the sacramental
species, which is that of bread or wine. Consequently, it seems that
Christ's body is not there in any way.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ's body begins to be in this sacrament by
consecration and conversion, as was said above (Q. 75, AA. 2, 3, 4).
But the flesh and blood which appear by miracle are not consecrated,
nor are they converted into Christ's true body and blood. Therefore
the body or the blood of Christ is not under those species.

_On the contrary,_ When such apparition takes place, the same
reverence is shown to it as was shown at first, which would not be
done if Christ were not truly there, to Whom we show reverence of
_latria._ Therefore, when such apparition occurs, Christ is under the
sacrament.

_I answer that,_ Such apparition comes about in two ways, when
occasionally in this sacrament flesh, or blood, or a child, is seen.
Sometimes it happens on the part of the beholders, whose eyes are so
affected as if they outwardly saw flesh, or blood, or a child, while
no change takes place in the sacrament. And this seems to happen when
to one person it is seen under the species of flesh or of a child,
while to others it is seen as before under the species of bread; or
when to the same individual it appears for an hour under the
appearance of flesh or a child, and afterwards under the appearance
of bread. Nor is there any deception there, as occurs in the feats of
magicians, because such species is divinely formed in the eye in
order to represent some truth, namely, for the purpose of showing
that Christ's body is truly under this sacrament; just as Christ
without deception appeared to the disciples who were going to Emmaus.
For Augustine says (De Qq. Evang. ii) that "when our pretense is
referred to some significance, it is not a lie, but a figure of the
truth." And since in this way no change is made in the sacrament, it
is manifest that, when such apparition occurs, Christ does not cease
to be under this sacrament.

But it sometimes happens that such apparition comes about not merely
by a change wrought in the beholders, but by an appearance which
really exists outwardly. And this indeed is seen to happen when it is
beheld by everyone under such an appearance, and it remains so not
for an hour, but for a considerable time; and, in this case some
think that it is the proper species of Christ's body. Nor does it
matter that sometimes Christ's entire body is not seen there, but
part of His flesh, or else that it is not seen in youthful guise, but
in the semblance of a child, because it lies within the power of a
glorified body for it to be seen by a non-glorified eye either
entirely or in part, and under its own semblance or in strange guise,
as will be said later (Suppl., Q. 85, AA. 2, 3).

But this seems unlikely. First of all, because Christ's body under
its proper species can be seen only in one place, wherein it is
definitively contained. Hence since it is seen in its proper species,
and is adored in heaven, it is not seen under its proper species in
this sacrament. Secondly, because a glorified body, which appears at
will, disappears when it wills after the apparition; thus it is
related (Luke 24:31) that our Lord "vanished out of sight" of the
disciples. But that which appears under the likeness of flesh in this
sacrament, continues for a long time; indeed, one reads of its being
sometimes enclosed, and, by order of many bishops, preserved in a
pyx, which it would be wicked to think of Christ under His proper
semblance.

Consequently, it remains to be said, that, while the dimensions
remain the same as before, there is a miraculous change wrought in
the other accidents, such as shape, color, and the rest, so that
flesh, or blood, or a child, is seen. And, as was said already, this
is not deception, because it is done "to represent the truth,"
namely, to show by this miraculous apparition that Christ's body and
blood are truly in this sacrament. And thus it is clear that as the
dimensions remain, which are the foundation of the other accidents,
as we shall see later on (Q. 77, A. 2), the body of Christ truly
remains in this sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: When such apparition takes place, the sacramental
species sometimes continue entire in themselves; and sometimes only
as to that which is principal, as was said above.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above, during such apparitions Christ's
proper semblance is not seen, but a species miraculously formed
either in the eyes of the beholders, or in the sacramental dimensions
themselves, as was said above.

Reply Obj. 3: The dimensions of the consecrated bread and wine
continue, while a miraculous change is wrought in the other
accidents, as stated above.
_______________________

QUESTION 77

OF THE ACCIDENTS WHICH REMAIN IN THIS SACRAMENT
(In Eight Articles)

We must now consider the accidents which remain in this sacrament;
under which head there are eight points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the accidents which remain are without a subject?

(2) Whether dimensive quantity is the subject of the other accidents?

(3) Whether such accidents can affect an extrinsic body?

(4) Whether they can be corrupted?

(5) Whether anything can be generated from them?

(6) Whether they can nourish?

(7) Of the breaking of the consecrated bread?

(8) Whether anything can be mixed with the consecrated wine?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 1]

Whether the Accidents Remain in This Sacrament Without a Subject?

Objection 1: It seems that the accidents do not remain in this
sacrament without a subject, because there ought not to be anything
disorderly or deceitful in this sacrament of truth. But for accidents
to be without a subject is contrary to the order which God
established in nature; and furthermore it seems to savor of deceit,
since accidents are naturally the signs of the nature of the subject.
Therefore the accidents are not without a subject in this sacrament.

Obj. 2: Further, not even by miracle can the definition of a thing be
severed from it, or the definition of another thing be applied to it;
for instance, that, while man remains a man, he can be an irrational
animal. For it would follow that contradictories can exist at the one
time: for the "definition of a thing is what its name expresses," as
is said in _Metaph._ iv. But it belongs to the definition of an
accident for it to be in a subject, while the definition of substance
is that it must subsist of itself, and not in another. Therefore it
cannot come to pass, even by miracle, that the accidents exist
without a subject in this sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, an accident is individuated by its subject. If
therefore the accidents remain in this sacrament without a subject,
they will not be individual, but general, which is clearly false,
because thus they would not be sensible, but merely intelligible.

Obj. 4: Further, the accidents after the consecration of this
sacrament do not obtain any composition. But before the consecration
they were not composed either of matter and form, nor of existence
(_quo est_) and essence (_quod est_). Therefore, even after
consecration they are not composite in either of these ways. But this
is unreasonable, for thus they would be simpler than angels, whereas
at the same time these accidents are perceptible to the senses.
Therefore, in this sacrament the accidents do not remain without a
subject.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says in an Easter Homily (Lanfranc, De
Corp. et Sang. Dom. xx) that "the sacramental species are the names
of those things which were there before, namely, of the bread and
wine." Therefore since the substance of the bread and the wine does
not remain, it seems that these species remain without a subject.

_I answer that,_ The species of the bread and wine, which are
perceived by our senses to remain in this sacrament after
consecration, are not subjected in the substance of the bread and
wine, for that does not remain, as stated above (Q. 75, A. 2); nor in
the substantial form, for that does not remain (Q. 75, A. 6), and if
it did remain, "it could not be a subject," as Boethius declares (De
Trin. i). Furthermore it is manifest that these accidents are not
subjected in the substance of Christ's body and blood, because the
substance of the human body cannot in any way be affected by such
accidents; nor is it possible for Christ's glorious and impassible
body to be altered so as to receive these qualities.

Now there are some who say that they are in the surrounding
atmosphere as in a subject. But even this cannot be: in the first
place, because atmosphere is not susceptive of such accidents.
Secondly, because these accidents are not where the atmosphere is,
nay more, the atmosphere is displaced by the motion of these species.
Thirdly, because accidents do not pass from subject to subject, so
that the same identical accident which was first in one subject be
afterwards in another; because an accident is individuated by the
subject; hence it cannot come to pass for an accident remaining
identically the same to be at one time in one subject, and at another
time in another. Fourthly, since the atmosphere is not deprived of
its own accidents, it would have at the one time its own accidents
and others foreign to it. Nor can it be maintained that this is done
miraculously in virtue of the consecration, because the words of
consecration do not signify this, and they effect only what they
signify.

Therefore it follows that the accidents continue in this sacrament
without a subject. This can be done by Divine power: for since an
effect depends more upon the first cause than on the second, God Who
is the first cause both of substance and accident, can by His
unlimited power preserve an accident in existence when the substance
is withdrawn whereby it was preserved in existence as by its proper
cause, just as without natural causes He can produce other effects of
natural causes, even as He formed a human body in the Virgin's womb,
"without the seed of man" (Hymn for Christmas, First Vespers).

Reply Obj. 1: There is nothing to hinder the common law of nature
from ordaining a thing, the contrary of which is nevertheless
ordained by a special privilege of grace, as is evident in the
raising of the dead, and in the restoring of sight to the blind: even
thus in human affairs, to some individuals some things are granted by
special privilege which are outside the common law. And so, even
though it be according to the common law of nature for an accident to
be in a subject, still for a special reason, according to the order
of grace, the accidents exist in this sacrament without a subject, on
account of the reasons given above (Q. 75, A. 5).

Reply Obj. 2: Since being is not a genus, then being cannot be of
itself the essence of either substance or accident. Consequently, the
definition of substance is not--"a being of itself without a
subject," nor is the definition of accident--"a being in a subject";
but it belongs to the quiddity or essence of substance "to have
existence not in a subject"; while it belongs to the quiddity or
essence of accident "to have existence in a subject." But in this
sacrament it is not in virtue of their essence that accidents are not
in a subject, but through the Divine power sustaining them; and
consequently they do not cease to be accidents, because neither is
the definition of accident withdrawn from them, nor does the
definition of substance apply to them.

Reply Obj. 3: These accidents acquired individual being in the
substance of the bread and wine; and when this substance is changed
into the body and blood of Christ, they remain in that individuated
being which they possessed before, hence they are individual and
sensible.

Reply Obj. 4: These accidents had no being of their own nor other
accidents, so long as the substance of the bread and wine remained;
but their subjects had _such_ being through them, just as snow is
_white_ through whiteness. But after the consecration the accidents
which remain have being; hence they are compounded of existence and
essence, as was said of the angels, in the First Part (Q. 50, A. 2,
ad 3); and besides they have composition of quantitative parts.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 2]

Whether in This Sacrament the Dimensive Quantity of the Bread or Wine
Is the Subject of the Other Accidents?

Objection 1: It seems that in this sacrament the dimensive quantity
of the bread or wine is not the subject of the other accidents. For
accident is not the subject of accident; because no form can be a
subject, since to be a subject is a property of matter. But dimensive
quantity is an accident. Therefore dimensive quantity cannot be the
subject of the other accidents.

Obj. 2: Further, just as quantity is individuated by substance, so
also are the other accidents. If, then, the dimensive quantity of the
bread or wine remains individuated according to the being it had
before, in which it is preserved, for like reason the other accidents
remain individuated according to the existence which they had before
in the substance. Therefore they are not in dimensive quantity as in
a subject, since every accident is individuated by its own subject.

Obj. 3: Further, among the other accidents that remain, of the bread
and wine, the senses perceive also rarity and density, which cannot
be in dimensive quantity existing outside matter; because a thing is
rare which has little matter under great dimensions, while a thing is
dense which has much matter under small dimensions, as is said in
_Phys._ iv. It does not seem, then, that dimensive quantity can be
the subject of the accidents which remain in this sacrament.

Obj. 4: Further, quantity abstract from matter seems to be
mathematical quantity, which is not the subject of sensible
qualities. Since, then, the remaining accidents in this sacrament are
sensible, it seems that in this sacrament they cannot be subjected in
the dimensive quantity of the bread and wine that remains after
consecration.

_On the contrary,_ Qualities are divisible only accidentally, that
is, by reason of the subject. But the qualities remaining in this
sacrament are divided by the division of dimensive quantity, as is
evident through our senses. Therefore, dimensive quantity is the
subject of the accidents which remain in this sacrament.

_I answer that,_ It is necessary to say that the other accidents
which remain in this sacrament are subjected in the dimensive
quantity of the bread and wine that remains: first of all, because
something having quantity and color and affected by other accidents
is perceived by the senses; nor is sense deceived in such. Secondly,
because the first disposition of matter is dimensive quantity, hence
Plato also assigned "great" and "small" as the first differences of
matter (Aristotle, _Metaph._ iv). And because the first subject is
matter, the consequence is that all other accidents are related to
their subject through the medium of dimensive quantity; just as the
first subject of color is said to be the surface, on which account
some have maintained that dimensions are the substances of bodies, as
is said in _Metaph._ iii. And since, when the subject is withdrawn,
the accidents remain according to the being which they had before, it
follows that all accidents remain founded upon dimensive quantity.

Thirdly, because, since the subject is the principle of individuation
of the accidents, it is necessary for what is admitted as the subject
of some accidents to be somehow the principle of individuation: for
it is of the very notion of an individual that it cannot be in
several; and this happens in two ways. First, because it is not
natural to it to be in any one; and in this way immaterial separated
forms, subsisting of themselves, are also individuals of themselves.
Secondly, because a form, be it substantial or accidental, is
naturally in someone indeed, not in several, as this whiteness, which
is in this body. As to the first, matter is the principle of
individuation of all inherent forms, because, since these forms,
considered in themselves, are naturally in something as in a subject,
from the very fact that one of them is received in matter, which is
not in another, it follows that neither can the form itself thus
existing be in another. As to the second, it must be maintained that
the principle of individuation is dimensive quantity. For that
something is naturally in another one solely, is due to the fact that
that other is undivided in itself, and distinct from all others. But
it is on account of quantity that substance can be divided, as is
said in _Phys._ i. And therefore dimensive quantity itself is a
particular principle of individuation in forms of this kind, namely,
inasmuch as forms numerically distinct are in different parts of the
matter. Hence also dimensive quantity has of itself a kind of
individuation, so that we can imagine several lines of the same
species, differing in position, which is included in the notion of
this quantity; for it belongs to dimension for it to be "quantity
having position" (Aristotle, Categor. iv), and therefore dimensive
quantity can be the subject of the other accidents, rather than the
other way about.

Reply Obj. 1: One accident cannot of itself be the subject of
another, because it does not exist of itself. But inasmuch as an
accident is received in another thing, one is said to be the subject
of the other, inasmuch as one is received in a subject through
another, as the surface is said to be the subject of color. Hence
when God makes an accident to exist of itself, it can also be of
itself the subject of another.

Reply Obj. 2: The other accidents, even as they were in the substance
of the bread, were individuated by means of dimensive quantity, as
stated above. And therefore dimensive quantity is the subject of the
other accidents remaining in this sacrament, rather than conversely.

Reply Obj. 3: Rarity and density are particular qualities
accompanying bodies, by reason of their having much or little matter
under dimensions; just as all other accidents likewise follow from
the principles of substance. And consequently, as the accidents are
preserved by Divine power when the substance is withdrawn, so, when
matter is withdrawn, the qualities which go with matter, such as
rarity and density, are preserved by Divine power.

Reply Obj. 4: Mathematical quantity abstracts not from intelligible
matter, but from sensible matter, as is said in _Metaph._ vii. But
matter is termed sensible because it underlies sensible qualities.
And therefore it is manifest that the dimensive quantity, which
remains in this sacrament without a subject, is not mathematical
quantity.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 3]

Whether the Species Remaining in This Sacrament Can Change External
Objects?

Objection 1: It seems that the species which remain in this sacrament
cannot affect external objects. For it is proved in _Phys._ vii, that
forms which are in matter are produced by forms that are in matter,
but not from forms which are without matter, because like makes like.
But the sacramental species are species without matter, since they
remain without a subject, as is evident from what was said above (A.
1). Therefore they cannot affect other matter by producing any form
in it.

Obj. 2: Further, when the action of the principal agent ceases, then
the action of the instrument must cease, as when the carpenter rests,
the hammer is moved no longer. But all accidental forms act
instrumentally in virtue of the substantial form as the principal
agent. Therefore, since the substantial form of the bread and wine
does not remain in this sacrament, as was shown above (Q. 75, A. 6),
it seems that the accidental forms which remain cannot act so as to
change external matter.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing acts outside its species, because an effect
cannot surpass its cause. But all the sacramental species are
accidents. Therefore they cannot change external matter, at least as
to a substantial form.

_On the contrary,_ If they could not change external bodies, they
could not be felt; for a thing is felt from the senses being changed
by a sensible thing, as is said in _De Anima_ ii.

_I answer that,_ Because everything acts in so far as it is an actual
being, the consequence is that everything stands in the same relation
to action as it does to being. Therefore, because, according to what
was said above (A. 1), it is an effect of the Divine power that the
sacramental species continue in the being which they had when the
substance of the bread and wine was present, it follows that they
continue in their action. Consequently they retain every action which
they had while the substance of the bread and wine remained, now that
the substance of the bread and wine has passed into the body and
blood of Christ. Hence there is no doubt but that they can change
external bodies.

Reply Obj. 1: The sacramental species, although they are forms
existing without matter, still retain the same being which they had
before in matter, and therefore as to their being they are like forms
which are in matter.

Reply Obj. 2: The action of an accidental form depends upon the
action of a substantial form in the same way as the being of accident
depends upon the being of substance; and therefore, as it is an
effect of Divine power that the sacramental species exist without
substance, so is it an effect of Divine power that they can act
without a substantial form, because every action of a substantial or
accidental form depends upon God as the first agent.

Reply Obj. 3: The change which terminates in a substantial form is
not effected by a substantial form directly, but by means of the
active and passive qualities, which act in virtue of the substantial
form. But by Divine power this instrumental energy is retained in the
sacramental species, just as it was before: and consequently their
action can be directed to a substantial form instrumentally, just in
the same way as anything can act outside its species, not as by its
own power, but by the power of the chief agent.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 4]

Whether the Sacramental Species Can Be Corrupted?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacramental species cannot be
corrupted, because corruption comes of the separation of the form
from the matter. But the matter of the bread does not remain in this
sacrament, as is clear from what was said above (Q. 75, A. 2).
Therefore these species cannot be corrupted.

Obj. 2: Further, no form is corrupted except accidentally, that is,
when its subject is corrupted; hence self-subsisting forms are
incorruptible, as is seen in spiritual substances. But the
sacramental species are forms without a subject. Therefore they
cannot be corrupted.

Obj. 3: Further, if they be corrupted, it will either be naturally or
miraculously. But they cannot be corrupted naturally, because no
subject of corruption can be assigned as remaining after the
corruption has taken place. Neither can they be corrupted
miraculously, because the miracles which occur in this sacrament take
place in virtue of the consecration, whereby the sacramental species
are preserved: and the same thing is not the cause of preservation
and of corruption. Therefore, in no way can the sacramental species
be corrupted.

_On the contrary,_ We perceive by our senses that the consecrated
hosts become putrefied and corrupted.

_I answer that,_ Corruption is "movement from being into non-being"
(Aristotle, _Phys._ v). Now it has been stated (A. 3) that the
sacramental species retain the same being as they had before when the
substance of the bread was present. Consequently, as the being of
those accidents could be corrupted while the substance of the bread
and wine was present, so likewise they can be corrupted now that the
substance has passed away.

But such accidents could have been previously corrupted in two ways:
in one way, of themselves; in another way, accidentally. They could
be corrupted of themselves, as by alteration of the qualities, and
increase or decrease of the quantity, not in the way in which
increase or decrease is found only in animated bodies, such as the
substances of the bread and wine are not, but by addition or
division; for, as is said in _Metaph._ iii, one dimension is
dissolved by division, and two dimensions result; while on the
contrary, by addition, two dimensions become one. And in this way
such accidents can be corrupted manifestly after consecration,
because the dimensive quantity which remains can receive division and
addition; and since it is the subject of sensible qualities, as
stated above (A. 1), it can likewise be the subject of their
alteration, for instance, if the color or the savor of the bread or
wine be altered.

An accident can be corrupted in another way, through the corruption
of its subject, and in this way also they can be corrupted after
consecration; for although the subject does not remain, still the
being which they had in the subject does remain, which being is
proper, and suited to the subject. And therefore such being can be
corrupted by a contrary agent, as the substance of the bread or wine
was subject to corruption, and, moreover, was not corrupted except by
a preceding alteration regarding the accidents.

Nevertheless, a distinction must be made between each of the aforesaid
corruptions; because, when the body and the blood of Christ succeed in
this sacrament to the substance of the bread and wine, if there be
such change on the part of the accidents as would not have sufficed
for the corruption of the bread and wine, then the body and blood of
Christ do not cease to be under this sacrament on account of such
change, whether the change be on the part of the quality, as for
instance, when the color or the savor of the bread or wine is slightly
modified; or on the part of the quantity, as when the bread or the
wine is divided into such parts as to keep in them the nature of bread
or of wine. But if the change be so great that the substance of the
bread or wine would have been corrupted, then Christ's body and blood
do not remain under this sacrament; and this either on the part of the
qualities, as when the color, savor, and other qualities of the bread
and wine are so altered as to be incompatible with the nature of bread
or of wine; or else on the part of the quantity, as, for instance, if
the bread be reduced to fine particles, or the wine divided into such
tiny drops that the species of bread or wine no longer remain.

Reply Obj. 1: Since it belongs essentially to corruption to take away
the being of a thing, in so far as the being of some form is in
matter, it results that by corruption the form is separated from the
matter. But if such being were not in matter, yet like such being as
is in matter, it could be taken away by corruption, even where there
is no matter; as takes place in this sacrament, as is evident from
what was said above.

Reply Obj. 2: Although the sacramental species are forms not in
matter, yet they have the being which they had in matter.

Reply Obj. 3: This corruption of species is not miraculous, but
natural; nevertheless, it presupposes the miracle which is wrought in
the consecration, namely, that those sacramental species retain
without a subject, the same being as they had in a subject; just as a
blind man, to whom sight is given miraculously, sees naturally.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 5]

Whether Anything Can Be Generated from the Sacramental Species?

Objection 1: It seems that nothing can be generated from the
sacramental species: because, whatever is generated, is generated out
of some matter: for nothing is generated out of nothing, although by
creation something is made out of nothing. But there is no matter
underlying the sacramental species except that of Christ's body, and
that body is incorruptible. Therefore it seems that nothing can be
generated from the sacramental species.

Obj. 2: Further, things which are not of the same genus cannot spring
from one another: thus a line is not made of whiteness. But accident
and substance differ generically. Therefore, since the sacramental
species are accidents, it seems that no substance can be generated
from them.

Obj. 3: Further, if any corporeal substance be generated from them,
such substance will not be without accident. Therefore, if any
corporeal substance be generated from the sacramental species, then
substance and accident would be generated from accident, namely, two
things from one, which is impossible. Consequently, it is impossible
for any corporeal substance to be generated out of the sacramental
species.

_On the contrary,_ The senses are witness that something is generated
out of the sacramental species, either ashes, if they be burned,
worms if they putrefy, or dust if they be crushed.

_I answer that,_ Since "the corruption of one thing is the generation
of another" (De Gener. i), something must be generated necessarily
from the sacramental species if they be corrupted, as stated above
(A. 4); for they are not corrupted in such a way that they disappear
altogether, as if reduced to nothing; on the contrary, something
sensible manifestly succeeds to them.

Nevertheless, it is difficult to see how anything can be generated
from them. For it is quite evident that nothing is generated out of
the body and blood of Christ which are truly there, because these are
incorruptible. But if the substance, or even the matter, of the bread
and wine were to remain in this sacrament, then, as some have
maintained, it would be easy to account for this sensible object
which succeeds to them. But that supposition is false, as was stated
above (Q. 75, AA. 2, 4, 8).

Hence it is that others have said that the things generated have not
sprung from the sacramental species, but from the surrounding
atmosphere. But this can be shown in many ways to be impossible. In
the first place, because when a thing is generated from another, the
latter at first appears changed and corrupted; whereas no alteration
or corruption appeared previously in the adjacent atmosphere; hence
the worms or ashes are not generated therefrom. Secondly, because the
nature of the atmosphere is not such as to permit of such things
being generated by such alterations. Thirdly, because it is possible
for many consecrated hosts to be burned or putrefied; nor would it be
possible for an earthen body, large enough to be generated from the
atmosphere, unless a great and, in fact, exceedingly sensible
condensation of the atmosphere took place. Fourthly, because the same
thing can happen to the solid bodies surrounding them, such as iron
or stone, which remain entire after the generation of the aforesaid
things. Hence this opinion cannot stand, because it is opposed to
what is manifest to our senses.

And therefore others have said that the substance of the bread and
wine returns during the corruption of the species, and so from the
returning substance of the bread and wine, ashes or worms or
something of the kind are generated. But this explanation seems an
impossible one. First of all, because if the substance of the bread
and wine be converted into the body and blood of Christ, as was shown
above (Q. 75, AA. 2, 4), the substance of the bread and wine cannot
return, except the body and blood of Christ be again changed back
into the substance of bread and wine, which is impossible: thus if
air be turned into fire, the air cannot return without the fire being
again changed into air. But if the substance of bread or wine be
annihilated, it cannot return again, because what lapses into nothing
does not return numerically the same. Unless perchance it be said
that the said substance returns, because God creates anew another new
substance to replace the first. Secondly, this seems to be
impossible, because no time can be assigned when the substance of the
bread returns. For, from what was said above (A. 4; Q. 76, A. 6, ad
3), it is evident that while the species of the bread and wine
remain, there remain also the body and blood of Christ, which are not
present together with the substance of the bread and wine in this
sacrament, according to what was stated above (Q. 75, A. 2). Hence
the substance of the bread and wine cannot return while the
sacramental species remain; nor, again, when these species pass away;
because then the substance of the bread and wine would be without
their proper accidents, which is impossible. Unless perchance it be
said that in the last instant of the corruption of the species there
returns (not, indeed, the substance of bread and wine, because it is
in that very instant that they have the being of the substance
generated from the species, but) the matter of the bread and wine;
which, matter, properly speaking, would be more correctly described
as created anew, than as returning. And in this sense the aforesaid
position might be held.

However, since it does not seem reasonable to say that anything takes
place miraculously in this sacrament, except in virtue of the
consecration itself, which does not imply either creation or return
of matter, it seems better to say that in the actual consecration it
is miraculously bestowed on the dimensive quantity of the bread and
wine to be the subject of subsequent forms. Now this is proper to
matter; and therefore as a consequence everything which goes with
matter is bestowed on dimensive quantity; and therefore everything
which could be generated from the matter of bread or wine, if it were
present, can be generated from the aforesaid dimensive quantity of
the bread or wine, not, indeed, by a new miracle, but by virtue of
the miracle which has already taken place.

Reply Obj. 1: Although no matter is there out of which a thing may be
generated, nevertheless dimensive quantity supplies the place of
matter, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: Those sacramental species are indeed accidents, yet
they have the act and power of substance, as stated above (A. 3).

Reply Obj. 3: The dimensive quantity of the bread and wine retains
its own nature, and receives miraculously the power and property of
substance; and therefore it can pass to both, that is, into substance
and dimension.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 6]

Whether the Sacramental Species Can Nourish?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacramental species cannot nourish,
because, as Ambrose says (De Sacram. v), "it is not this bread that
enters into our body, but the bread of everlasting life, which
supports the substance of our soul." But whatever nourishes enters
into the body. Therefore this bread does not nourish: and the same
reason holds good of the wine.

Obj. 2: Further, as is said in De Gener. ii, "We are nourished by the
very things of which we are made." But the sacramental species are
accidents, whereas man is not made of accidents, because accident is
not a part of substance. Therefore it seems that the sacramental
species cannot nourish.

Obj. 3: Further, the Philosopher says (De Anima ii) that "food
nourishes according as it is a substance, but it gives increase by
reason of its quantity." But the sacramental species are not a
substance. Consequently they cannot nourish.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle speaking of this sacrament says (1
Cor. 11:21): "One, indeed, is hungry, and another is drunk": upon
which the gloss observes that "he alludes to those who after the
celebration of the sacred mystery, and after the consecration of the
bread and wine, claimed their oblations, and not sharing them with
others, took the whole, so as even to become intoxicated thereby."
But this could not happen if the sacramental species did not nourish.
Therefore the sacramental species do nourish.

_I answer that,_ This question presents no difficulty, now that we
have solved the preceding question. Because, as stated in _De Anima_
ii, food nourishes by being converted into the substance of the
individual nourished. Now it has been stated (A. 5) that the
sacramental species can be converted into a substance generated from
them. And they can be converted into the human body for the same
reason as they can into ashes or worms. Consequently, it is evident
that they nourish.

But the senses witness to the untruth of what some maintain; viz.
that the species do not nourish as though they were changed into the
human body, but merely refresh and hearten by acting upon the senses
(as a man is heartened by the odor of meat, and intoxicated by the
fumes of wine). Because such refreshment does not suffice long for a
man, whose body needs repair owing to constant waste: and yet a man
could be supported for long if he were to take hosts and consecrated
wine in great quantity.

In like manner the statement advanced by others cannot stand, who
hold that the sacramental species nourish owing to the remaining
substantial form of the bread and wine: both because the form does
not remain, as stated above (Q. 75, A. 6): and because to nourish is
the act not of a form but rather of matter, which takes the form of
the one nourished, while the form of the nourishment passes away:
hence it is said in _De Anima_ ii that nourishment is at first
unlike, but at the end is like.

Reply Obj. 1: After the consecration bread can be said to be in this
sacrament in two ways. First, as to the species, which retain the
name of the previous substance, as Gregory says in an Easter Homily
(Lanfranc, De Corp. et Sang. Dom. xx). Secondly, Christ's very body
can be called bread, since it is the mystical bread "coming down from
heaven." Consequently, Ambrose uses the word "bread" in this second
meaning, when he says that "this bread does not pass into the body,"
because, to wit, Christ's body is not changed into man's body, but
nourishes his soul. But he is not speaking of bread taken in the
first acceptation.

Reply Obj. 2: Although the sacramental species are not those things
out of which the human body is made, yet they are changed into those
things stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Although the sacramental species are not a substance,
still they have the virtue of a substance, as stated above.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 7]

Whether the Sacramental Species Are Broken in This Sacrament?

Objection 1: It seems that the sacramental species are not broken in
this sacrament, because the Philosopher says in Meteor. iv that
bodies are breakable owing to a certain disposition of the pores; a
thing which cannot be attributed to the sacramental species.
Therefore the sacramental species cannot be broken.

Obj. 2: Further, breaking is followed by sound. But the sacramental
species emit no sound: because the Philosopher says (De Anima ii),
that what emits sound is a hard body, having a smooth surface.
Therefore the sacramental species are not broken.

Obj. 3: Further, breaking and mastication are seemingly of the same
object. But it is Christ's true body that is eaten, according to John
6:57: "He that eateth My flesh, and drinketh My blood." Therefore it
is Christ's body that is broken and masticated: and hence it is said
in the confession of Berengarius: "I agree with the Holy Catholic
Church, and with heart and lips I profess, that the bread and wine
which are placed on the altar, are the true body and blood of Christ
after consecration, and are truly handled and broken by the priest's
hands, broken and crushed by the teeth of believers." Consequently,
the breaking ought not to be ascribed to the sacramental species.

_On the contrary,_ Breaking arises from the division of that which
has quantity. But nothing having quantity except the sacramental
species is broken here, because neither Christ's body is broken, as
being incorruptible, nor is the substance of the bread, because it no
longer remains. Therefore the sacramental species are broken.

_I answer that,_ Many opinions prevailed of old on this matter. Some
held that in this sacrament there was no breaking at all in reality,
but merely in the eyes of the beholders. But this contention cannot
stand, because in this sacrament of truth the sense is not deceived
with regard to its proper object of judgment, and one of these
objects is breaking, whereby from one thing arise many: and these are
common sensibles, as is stated in _De Anima_ ii.

Others accordingly have said that there was indeed a genuine
breaking, but without any subject. But this again contradicts our
senses; because a quantitative body is seen in this sacrament, which
formerly was one, and is now divided into many, and this must be the
subject of the breaking.

But it cannot be said that Christ's true body is broken. First of
all, because it is incorruptible and impassible: secondly, because it
is entire under every part, as was shown above (Q. 76, A. 3), which
is contrary to the nature of a thing broken.

It remains, then, that the breaking is in the dimensive quantity of
the bread, as in a subject, just as the other accidents. And as the
sacramental species are the sacrament of Christ's true body, so is
the breaking of these species the sacrament of our Lord's Passion,
which was in Christ's true body.

Reply Obj. 1: As rarity and density remain under the sacramental
species, as stated above (A. 2, ad 3), so likewise porousness
remains, and in consequence breakableness.

Reply Obj. 2: Hardness results from density; therefore, as density
remains under the sacramental species, hardness remains there too,
and the capability of sound as a consequence.

Reply Obj. 3: What is eaten under its own species, is also broken and
masticated under its own species; but Christ's body is eaten not
under its proper, but under the sacramental species. Hence in
explaining John 6:64, "The flesh profiteth nothing," Augustine
(Tract. xxvii in Joan.) says that this is to be taken as referring to
those who understood carnally: "for they understood the flesh, thus,
as it is divided piecemeal, in a dead body, or as sold in the
shambles." Consequently, Christ's very body is not broken, except
according to its sacramental species. And the confession made by
Berengarius is to be understood in this sense, that the breaking and
the crushing with the teeth is to be referred to the sacramental
species, under which the body of Christ truly is.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 77, Art. 8]

Whether Any Liquid Can Be Mingled with the Consecrated Wine?

Objection 1: It seems that no liquid can be mingled with the
consecrated wine, because everything mingled with another partakes of
its quality. But no liquid can share in the quality of the
sacramental species, because those accidents are without a subject,
as stated above (A. 1). Therefore it seems that no liquid can be
mingled with the sacramental species of the wine.

Obj. 2: Further, if any kind of liquid be mixed with those species,
then some one thing must be the result. But no one thing can result
from the liquid, which is a substance, and the sacramental species,
which are accidents; nor from the liquid and Christ's blood, which
owing to its incorruptibility suffers neither increase nor decrease.
Therefore no liquid can be mixed with the consecrated wine.

Obj. 3: Further, if any liquid be mixed with the consecrated wine,
then that also would appear to be consecrated; just as water added to
holy-water becomes holy. But the consecrated wine is truly Christ's
blood. Therefore the liquid added would likewise be Christ's blood
otherwise than by consecration, which is unbecoming. Therefore no
liquid can be mingled with the consecrated wine.

Obj. 4: Further, if one of two things be entirely corrupted, there is
no mixture (De Gener. i). But if we mix any liquid, it seems that the
entire species of the sacramental wine is corrupted, so that the
blood of Christ ceases to be beneath it; both because great and
little are difference of quantity, and alter it, as white and black
cause a difference of color; and because the liquid mixed, as having
no obstacle, seems to permeate the whole, and so Christ's blood
ceases to be there, since it is not there with any other substance.
Consequently, no liquid can be mixed with the consecrated wine.

_On the contrary,_ It is evident to our senses that another liquid
can be mixed with the wine after it is consecrated, just as before.

_I answer that,_ The truth of this question is evident from what has
been said already. For it was said above (A. 3; A. 5, ad 2) that the
species remaining in this sacrament, as they acquire the manner of
being of substance in virtue of the consecration, so likewise do they
obtain the mode of acting and of being acted upon, so that they can
do or receive whatever their substance could do or receive, were it
there present. But it is evident that if the substance of wine were
there present, then some other liquid could be mingled with it.

Nevertheless there would be a different effect of such mixing both
according to the form and according to the quantity of the liquid.
For if sufficient liquid were mixed so as to spread itself all
through the wine, then the whole would be a mixed substance. Now what
is made up of things mixed is neither of them, but each passes into a
third resulting from both: hence it would result that the former wine
would remain no longer. But if the liquid added were of another
species, for instance, if water were mixed, the species of the wine
would be dissolved, and there would be a liquid of another species.
But if liquid of the same species were added, of instance, wine with
wine, the same species would remain, but the wine would not be the
same numerically, as the diversity of the accidents shows: for
instance, if one wine were white and the other red.

But if the liquid added were of such minute quantity that it could
not permeate the whole, the entire wine would not be mixed, but only
part of it, which would not remain the same numerically owing to the
blending of extraneous matter: still it would remain the same
specifically, not only if a little liquid of the same species were
mixed with it, but even if it were of another species, since a drop
of water blended with much wine passes into the species of wine (De
Gener. i).

Now it is evident that the body and blood of Christ abide in this
sacrament so long as the species remain numerically the same, as
stated above (A. 4; Q. 76, A. 6, ad 3); because it is this bread and
this wine which is consecrated. Hence, if the liquid of any kind
whatsoever added be so much in quantity as to permeate the whole of
the consecrated wine, and be mixed with it throughout, the result
would be something numerically distinct, and the blood of Christ will
remain there no longer. But if the quantity of the liquid added be so
slight as not to permeate throughout, but to reach only a part of the
species, Christ's blood will cease to be under that part of the
consecrated wine, yet will remain under the rest.

Reply Obj. 1: Pope Innocent III in a Decretal writes thus: "The very
accidents appear to affect the wine that is added, because, if water
is added, it takes the savor of the wine. The result is, then, that
the accidents change the subject, just as subject changes accidents;
for nature yields to miracle, and power works beyond custom." But
this must not be understood as if the same identical accident, which
was in the wine previous to consecration, is afterwards in the wine
that is added; but such change is the result of action; because the
remaining accidents of the wine retain the action of substance, as
stated above, and so they act upon the liquid added, by changing it.

Reply Obj. 2: The liquid added to the consecrated wine is in no way
mixed with the substance of Christ's blood. Nevertheless it is mixed
with the sacramental species, yet so that after such mixing the
aforesaid species are corrupted entirely or in part, after the way
mentioned above (A. 5), whereby something can be generated from those
species. And if they be entirely corrupted, there remains no further
question, because the whole will be uniform. But if they be corrupted
in part, there will be one dimension according to the continuity of
quantity, but not one according to the mode of being, because one
part thereof will be without a subject while the other is in a
subject; as in a body that is made up of two metals, there will be
one body quantitatively, but not one as to the species of the matter.

Reply Obj. 3: As Pope Innocent says in the aforesaid Decretal, "if
after the consecration other wine be put in the chalice, it is not
changed into the blood, nor is it mingled with the blood, but, mixed
with the accidents of the previous wine, it is diffused throughout
the body which underlies them, yet without wetting what surrounds
it." Now this is to be understood when there is not sufficient mixing
of extraneous liquid to cause the blood of Christ to cease to be
under the whole; because a thing is said to be "diffused throughout,"
not because it touches the body of Christ according to its proper
dimensions, but according to the sacramental dimensions, under which
it is contained. Now it is not the same with holy water, because the
blessing works no change in the substance of the water, as the
consecration of the wine does.

Reply Obj. 4: Some have held that however slight be the mixing of
extraneous liquid, the substance of Christ's blood ceases to be under
the whole, and for the reason given above (Obj. 4); which, however,
is not a cogent one; because "more" or "less" diversify dimensive
quantity, not as to its essence, but as to the determination of its
measure. In like manner the liquid added can be so small as on that
account to be hindered from permeating the whole, and not simply by
the dimensions; which, although they are present without a subject,
still they are opposed to another liquid, just as substance would be
if it were present, according to what was said at the beginning of
the article.
_______________________

QUESTION 78

OF THE FORM OF THIS SACRAMENT
(In Six Articles)

We must now consider the form of this sacrament; concerning which
there are six points of inquiry:

(1) What is the form of this sacrament?

(2) Whether the form for the consecration of the bread is appropriate?

(3) Whether the form for the consecration of the blood is appropriate?

(4) Of the power of each form?

(5) Of the truth of the expression?

(6) Of the comparison of the one form with the other?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 78, Art. 1]

Whether This Is the Form of This Sacrament: "This Is My Body," and
"This Is the Chalice of My Blood"?

Objection 1: It seems that this is not the form of this sacrament:
"This is My body," and, "This is the chalice of My blood." Because
those words seem to belong to the form of this sacrament, wherewith
Christ consecrated His body and blood. But Christ first blessed the
bread which He took, and said afterwards: "Take ye and eat; this is
My body" (Matt. 26:26). Therefore the whole of this seems to belong
to the form of this sacrament: and the same reason holds good of the
words which go with the consecration of the blood.

Obj. 2: Further, Eusebius Emissenus (Pseudo-Hieron: Ep. xxix;
Pseudo-Isid.: Hom. iv) says: "The invisible Priest changes visible
creatures into His own body, saying: 'Take ye and eat; this is My
body.'" Therefore, the whole of this seems to belong to the form of
this sacrament: and the same hold good of the works appertaining to
the blood.

Obj. 3: Further, in the form of Baptism both the minister and his act
are expressed, when it is said, "I baptize thee." But in the words
set forth above there is no mention made either of the minister or of
his act. Therefore the form of the sacrament is not a suitable one.

Obj. 4: Further, the form of the sacrament suffices for its
perfection; hence the sacrament of Baptism can be performed sometimes
by pronouncing the words of the form only, omitting all the others.
Therefore, if the aforesaid words be the form of this sacrament, it
would seem as if this sacrament could be performed sometimes by
uttering those words alone, while leaving out all the others which
are said in the mass; yet this seems to be false, because, were the
other words to be passed over, the said words would be taken as
spoken in the person of the priest saying them, whereas the bread and
wine are not changed into his body and blood. Consequently, the
aforesaid words are not the form of this sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv): "The consecration is
accomplished by the words and expressions of the Lord Jesus. Because,
by all the other words spoken, praise is rendered to God, prayer is
put up for the people, for kings, and others; but when the time comes
for perfecting the sacrament, the priest uses no longer his own
words, but the words of Christ. Therefore, it is Christ's words that
perfect this sacrament."

_I answer that,_ This sacrament differs from the other sacraments in
two respects. First of all, in this, that this sacrament is
accomplished by the consecration of the matter, while the rest are
perfected in the use of the consecrated matter. Secondly, because in
the other sacraments the consecration of the matter consists only in
a blessing, from which the matter consecrated derives instrumentally
a spiritual power, which through the priest who is an animated
instrument, can pass on to inanimate instruments. But in this
sacrament the consecration of the matter consists in the miraculous
change of the substance, which can only be done by God; hence the
minister in performing this sacrament has no other act save the
pronouncing of the words. And because the form should suit the thing,
therefore the form of this sacrament differs from the forms of the
other sacraments in two respects. First, because the form of the
other sacraments implies the use of the matter, as for instance,
baptizing, or signing; but the form of this sacrament implies merely
the consecration of the matter, which consists in transubstantiation,
as when it is said, "This is My body," or, "This is the chalice of My
blood." Secondly, because the forms of the other sacraments are
pronounced in the person of the minister, whether by way of
exercising an act, as when it is said, "I baptize thee," or "I
confirm thee," etc.; or by way of command, as when it is said in the
sacrament of order, "Take the power," etc.; or by way of entreaty, as
when in the sacrament of Extreme Unction it is said, "By this
anointing and our intercession," etc. But the form of this sacrament
is pronounced as if Christ were speaking in person, so that it is
given to be understood that the minister does nothing in perfecting
this sacrament, except to pronounce the words of Christ.

Reply Obj. 1: There are many opinions on this matter. Some have said
that Christ, Who had power of excellence in the sacraments, performed
this sacrament without using any form of words, and that afterwards
He pronounced the words under which others were to consecrate
thereafter. And the words of Pope Innocent III seem to convey the
same sense (De Sacr. Alt. Myst. iv), where he says: "In good sooth it
can be said that Christ accomplished this sacrament by His Divine
power, and subsequently expressed the form under which those who came
after were to consecrate." But in opposition to this view are the
words of the Gospel in which it is said that Christ "blessed," and
this blessing was effected by certain words. Accordingly those words
of Innocent are to be considered as expressing an opinion, rather
than determining the point.

Others, again, have said that the blessing was effected by other
words not known to us. But this statement cannot stand, because the
blessing of the consecration is now performed by reciting the things
which were then accomplished; hence, if the consecration was not
performed then by these words, neither would it be now.

Accordingly, others have maintained that this blessing was effected
by the same words as are used now; but that Christ spoke them twice,
at first secretly, in order to consecrate, and afterwards openly, to
instruct others. But even this will not hold good, because the priest
in consecrating uses these words, not as spoken in secret, but as
openly pronounced. Accordingly, since these words have no power
except from Christ pronouncing them, it seems that Christ also
consecrated by pronouncing them openly.

And therefore others said that the Evangelists did not always follow
the precise order in their narrative as that in which things actually
happened, as is seen from Augustine (De Consens. Evang. ii). Hence it
is to be understood that the order of what took place can be
expressed thus: "Taking the bread He blessed it, saying: This is My
body, and then He broke it, and gave it to His disciples." But the
same sense can be had even without changing the words of the Gospel;
because the participle "saying" implies sequence of the words uttered
with what goes before. And it is not necessary for the sequence to be
understood only with respect to the last word spoken, as if Christ
had just then pronounced those words, when He gave it to His
disciples; but the sequence can be understood with regard to all that
had gone before; so that the sense is: "While He was blessing, and
breaking, and giving it to His disciples, He spoke the words, 'Take
ye,'" etc.

Reply Obj. 2: In these words, "Take ye and eat," the use of the
consecrated, matter is indicated, which is not of the necessity of
this sacrament, as stated above (Q. 74, A. 7). And therefore not even
these words belong to the substance of the form. Nevertheless,
because the use of the consecrated matter belongs to a certain
perfection of the sacrament, in the same way as operation is not the
first but the second perfection of a thing, consequently, the whole
perfection of this sacrament is expressed by all those words: and it
was in this way that Eusebius understood that the sacrament was
accomplished by those words, as to its first and second perfection.

Reply Obj. 3: In the sacrament of Baptism the minister exercises an
act regarding the use of the matter, which is of the essence of the
sacrament: such is not the case in this sacrament; hence there is no
parallel.

Reply Obj. 4: Some have contended that this sacrament cannot be
accomplished by uttering the aforesaid words, while leaving out the
rest, especially the words in the Canon of the Mass. But that this is
false can be seen both from Ambrose's words quoted above, as well as
from the fact that the Canon of the Mass is not the same in all
places or times, but various portions have been introduced by various
people.

Accordingly it must be held that if the priest were to pronounce only
the aforesaid words with the intention of consecrating this
sacrament, this sacrament would be valid because the intention would
cause these words to be understood as spoken in the person of Christ,
even though the words were pronounced without those that precede. The
priest, however, would sin gravely in consecrating the sacrament
thus, as he would not be observing the rite of the Church. Nor does
the comparison with Baptism prove anything; for it is a sacrament of
necessity: whereas the lack of this sacrament can be supplied by the
spiritual partaking thereof, as Augustine says (cf. Q. 73, A. 3, ad
1).
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 78, Art. 2]

Whether This Is the Proper Form for the Consecration of the Bread:
"This Is My Body"?

Objection 1: It seems that this is not the proper form of this
sacrament: "This is My body." For the effect of a sacrament ought to
be expressed in its form. But the effect of the consecration of the
bread is the change of the substance of the bread into the body of
Christ, and this is better expressed by the word "becomes" than by
"is." Therefore, in the form of the consecration we ought to say:
"This becomes My body."

Obj. 2: Further, Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv), "Christ's words
consecrate this sacrament. What word of Christ? This word, whereby
all things are made. The Lord commanded, and the heavens and earth
were made." Therefore, it would be a more proper form of this
sacrament if the imperative mood were employed, so as to say: "Be
this My body."

Obj. 3: Further, that which is changed is implied in the subject of
this phrase, just as the term of the change is implied in the
predicate. But just as that into which the change is made is
something determinate, for the change is into nothing else but the
body of Christ, so also that which is converted is determinate, since
only bread is converted into the body of Christ. Therefore, as a noun
is inserted on the part of the predicate, so also should a noun be
inserted in the subject, so that it be said: "This bread is My body."

Obj. 4: Further, just as the term of the change is determinate in
nature, because it is a body, so also is it determinate in person.
Consequently, in order to determine the person, it ought to be said:
"This is the body of Christ."

Obj. 5: Further, nothing ought to be inserted in the form except what
is substantial to it. Consequently, the conjunction "for" is
improperly added in some books, since it does not belong to the
substance of the form.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord used this form in consecrating, as is
evident from Matt. 26:26.

_I answer that,_ This is the proper form for the consecration of the
bread. For it was said (A. 1) that this consecration consists in
changing the substance of bread into the body of Christ. Now the form
of a sacrament ought to denote what is done in the sacrament.
Consequently the form for the consecration of the bread ought to
signify the actual conversion of the bread into the body of Christ.
And herein are three things to be considered: namely, the actual
conversion, the term _whence,_ and the term _whereunto._

Now the conversion can be considered in two ways: first, in
_becoming,_ secondly, in _being._ But the conversion ought not to be
signified in this form as in _becoming,_ but as in _being._ First,
because such conversion is not successive, as was said above (Q. 75,
A. 7), but instantaneous; and in such changes the _becoming_ is
nothing else than the _being._ Secondly, because the sacramental
forms bear the same relation to the signification of the sacramental
effect as artificial forms to the representation of the effect of
art. Now an artificial form is the likeness of the ultimate effect,
on which the artist's intention is fixed; just as the art-form in the
builder's mind is principally the form of the house constructed, and
secondarily of the constructing. Accordingly, in this form also the
conversion ought to be expressed as in _being,_ to which the
intention is referred.

And since the conversion is expressed in this form as in _being,_ it
is necessary for the extremes of the conversion to be signified as
they exist in the fact of conversion. But then the term _whereunto_
has the proper nature of its own substance; whereas the term _whence_
does not remain in its own substance, but only as to the accidents
whereby it comes under the senses, and can be determined in relation
to the senses. Hence the term _whence_ of the conversion is
conveniently expressed by the demonstrative pronoun, relative to the
sensible accidents which continue; but the term _whereunto_ is
expressed by the noun signifying the nature of the thing which
terminates the conversion, and this is Christ's entire body, and not
merely His flesh; as was said above (Q. 76, A. 1, ad 2). Hence this
form is most appropriate: "This is My body."

Reply Obj. 1: The ultimate effect of this conversion is not a
_becoming_ but a _being,_ as stated above, and consequently
prominence should be given to this in the form.

Reply Obj. 2: God's word operated in the creation of things, and it
is the same which operates in this consecration, yet each in
different fashion: because here it operates effectively and
sacramentally, that is, in virtue of its signification. And
consequently the last effect of the consecration must needs be
signified in this sentence by a substantive verb of the indicative
mood and present time. But in the creation of things it worked merely
effectively, and such efficiency is due to the command of His wisdom;
and therefore in the creation of things the Lord's word is expressed
by a verb in the imperative mood, as in Gen. 1:3: "Let there be
light, and light was made."

Reply Obj. 3: The term _whence_ does not retain the nature of its
substance in the _being_ of the conversion, as the term _whereunto_
does. Therefore there is no parallel.

Reply Obj. 4: The pronoun "My," which implicitly points to the chief
person, i.e. the person of the speaker, sufficiently indicates
Christ's person, in Whose person these words are uttered, as stated
above (A. 1).

Reply Obj. 5: The conjunction "for" is set in this form according to
the custom of the Roman Church, who derived it from Peter the
Apostle; and this on account of the sequence with the words
preceding: and therefore it is not part of the form, just as the
words preceding the form are not.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 78, Art. 3]

Whether This Is the Proper Form for the Consecration of the Wine:
"This Is the Chalice of My Blood," Etc.?

Objection 1: It seems that this is not the proper form for the
consecration of the wine. "This is the chalice of My blood, of the
New and Eternal Testament, the Mystery of Faith, which shall be shed
for you and for many unto the forgiveness of sins." For as the bread
is changed by the power of consecration into Christ's body, so is the
wine changed into Christ's blood, as is clear from what was said
above (Q. 76, AA. 1, 2, 3). But in the form of the consecration of
the bread, the body of Christ is expressly mentioned, without any
addition. Therefore in this form the blood of Christ is improperly
expressed in the oblique case, and the chalice in the nominative,
when it is said: "This is the chalice of My blood."

Obj. 2: Further, the words spoken in the consecration of the bread
are not more efficacious than those spoken in the consecration of the
wine, since both are Christ's words. But directly the words are
spoken--"This is My body," there is perfect consecration of the
bread. Therefore, directly these other words are uttered--"This is
the chalice of My blood," there is perfect consecration of the blood;
and so the words which follow do not appeal to be of the substance of
the form, especially since they refer to the properties of this
sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, the New Testament seems to be an internal
inspiration, as is evident from the Apostle quoting the words of
Jeremias (31:31): "I will perfect unto the house of Israel a New
Testament . . . I will give My laws into their mind" (Heb. 8:8). But
a sacrament is an outward visible act. Therefore, in the form of the
sacrament the words "of the New Testament" are improperly added.

Obj. 4: Further, a thing is said to be new which is near the
beginning of its existence. But what is eternal has no beginning of
its existence. Therefore it is incorrect to say "of the New and
Eternal," because it seems to savor of a contradiction.

Obj. 5: Further, occasions of error ought to be withheld from men,
according to Isa. 57:14: "Take away the stumbling blocks out of the
way of My people." But some have fallen into error in thinking that
Christ's body and blood are only mystically present in this
sacrament. Therefore it is out of place to add "the mystery of faith."

Obj. 6: Further, it was said above (Q. 73, A. 3, ad 3), that as
Baptism is the sacrament of faith, so is the Eucharist the sacrament
of charity. Consequently, in this form the word "charity" ought
rather to be used than "faith."

Obj. 7: Further, the whole of this sacrament, both as to body and
blood, is a memorial of our Lord's Passion, according to 1 Cor.
11:26: "As often as you shall eat this bread and drink the chalice,
you shall show the death of the Lord." Consequently, mention ought to
be made of Christ's Passion and its fruit rather in the form of the
consecration of the blood, than in the form of the consecration of
the body, especially since our Lord said: "This is My body, which
shall be delivered up for you" (Luke 22:19).

Obj. 8: Further, as was already observed (Q. 48, A. 2; Q. 49, A. 3),
Christ's Passion sufficed for all; while as to its efficacy it was
profitable for many. Therefore it ought to be said: "Which shall be
shed for all," or else "for many," without adding, "for you."

Objection 9: Further, the words whereby this sacrament is consecrated
draw their efficacy from Christ's institution. But no Evangelist
narrates that Christ spoke all these words. Therefore this is not an
appropriate form for the consecration of the wine.

_On the contrary,_ The Church, instructed by the apostles, uses this
form.

_I answer that,_ There is a twofold opinion regarding this form. Some
have maintained that the words "This is the chalice of My blood"
alone belong to the substance of this form, but not those words which
follow. Now this seems incorrect, because the words which follow them
are determinations of the predicate, that is, of Christ's blood.
consequently they belong to the integrity of the expression.

And on this account others say more accurately that all the words
which follow are of the substance of the form down to the words, "As
often as ye shall do this," which belong to the use of this
sacrament, and consequently do not belong to the substance of the
form. Hence it is that the priest pronounces all these words, under
the same rite and manner, namely, holding the chalice in his hands.
Moreover, in Luke 22:20, the words that follow are interposed with
the preceding words: "This is the chalice, the new testament in My
blood."

Consequently it must be said that all the aforesaid words belong to
the substance of the form; but that by the first words, "This is the
chalice of My blood," the change of the wine into blood is denoted,
as explained above (A. 2) in the form for the consecration of the
bread; but by the words which come after is shown the power of the
blood shed in the Passion, which power works in this sacrament, and
is ordained for three purposes. First and principally for securing
our eternal heritage, according to Heb. 10:19: "Having confidence in
the entering into the holies by the blood of Christ"; and in order to
denote this, we say, "of the New and Eternal Testament." Secondly,
for justifying by grace, which is by faith according to Rom. 3:25,
26: "Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through faith in
His blood . . . that He Himself may be just, and the justifier of him
who is of the faith of Jesus Christ": and on this account we add,
"The Mystery of Faith." Thirdly, for removing sins which are the
impediments to both of these things, according to Heb. 9:14: "The
blood of Christ . . . shall cleanse our conscience from dead works,"
that is, from sins; and on this account, we say, "which shall be shed
for you and for many unto the forgiveness of sins."

Reply Obj. 1: The expression "This is the chalice of My blood" is a
figure of speech, which can be understood in two ways. First, as a
figure of metonymy; because the container is put for the contained,
so that the meaning is: "This is My blood contained in the chalice";
of which mention is now made, because Christ's blood is consecrated
in this sacrament, inasmuch as it is the drink of the faithful, which
is not implied under the notion of blood; consequently this had to be
denoted by the vessel adapted for such usage.

Secondly, it can be taken by way of metaphor, so that Christ's
Passion is understood by the chalice by way of comparison, because,
like a cup, it inebriates, according to Lam. 3:15: "He hath filled me
with bitterness, he hath inebriated me with wormwood": hence our Lord
Himself spoke of His Passion as a chalice, when He said (Matt.
26:39): "Let this chalice pass away from Me": so that the meaning is:
"This is the chalice of My Passion." This is denoted by the blood
being consecrated apart from the body; because it was by the Passion
that the blood was separated from the body.

Reply Obj. 2: As was said above (ad 1; Q. 76, A. 2, ad 1), the blood
consecrated apart expressly represents Christ's Passion, and
therefore mention is made of the fruits of the Passion in the
consecration of the blood rather than in that of the body, since the
body is the subject of the Passion. This is also pointed out in our
Lord's saying, "which shall be delivered up for you," as if to say,
"which shall undergo the Passion for you."

Reply Obj. 3: A testament is the disposal of a heritage. But God
disposed of a heavenly heritage to men, to be bestowed through the
virtue of the blood of Jesus Christ; because, according to Heb. 9:16:
"Where there is a testament the death of the testator must of
necessity come in." Now Christ's blood was exhibited to men in two
ways. First of all in figure, and this belongs to the Old Testament;
consequently the Apostle concludes (Heb. 9:16): "Whereupon neither
was the first indeed dedicated without blood," which is evident from
this, that as related in Ex. 24:7, 8, "when every" commandment of the
law "had been read" by Moses, "he sprinkled all the people" saying:
"This is the blood of the testament which the Lord hath enjoined unto
you."

Secondly, it was shown in very truth; and this belongs to the New
Testament. This is what the Apostle premises when he says (Rom.
9:15): "Therefore He is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of His death . . . they that are called may receive the promise
of eternal inheritance." Consequently, we say here, "The blood of the
New Testament," because it is shown now not in figure but in truth;
and therefore we add, "which shall be shed for you." But the internal
inspiration has its origin in the power of this blood, according as
we are justified by Christ's Passion.

Reply Obj. 4: This Testament is a "new one" by reason of its showing
forth: yet it is called "eternal" both on account of God's eternal
pre-ordination, as well as on account of the eternal heritage which
is prepared by this testament. Moreover, Christ's Person is eternal,
in Whose blood this testament is appointed.

Reply Obj. 5: The word "mystery" is inserted, not in order to exclude
reality, but to show that the reality is hidden, because Christ's
blood is in this sacrament in a hidden manner, and His Passion was
dimly foreshadowed in the Old Testament.

Reply Obj. 6: It is called the "Sacrament of Faith," as being an
object of faith: because by faith alone do we hold the presence of
Christ's blood in this sacrament. Moreover Christ's Passion justifies
by faith. Baptism is called the "Sacrament of Faith" because it is a
profession of faith. This is called the "Sacrament of Charity," as
being figurative and effective thereof.

Reply Obj. 7: As stated above (ad 2), the blood consecrated apart
represents Christ's blood more expressively; and therefore mention is
made of Christ's Passion and its fruits, in the consecration of the
blood rather than in that of the body.

Reply Obj. 8: The blood of Christ's Passion has its efficacy not
merely in the elect among the Jews, to whom the blood of the Old
Testament was exhibited, but also in the Gentiles; nor only in
priests who consecrate this sacrament, and in those others who
partake of it; but likewise in those for whom it is offered. And
therefore He says expressly, "for you," the Jews, "and for many,"
namely the Gentiles; or, "for you" who eat of it, and "for many," for
whom it is offered.

Reply Obj. 9: The Evangelists did not intend to hand down the forms
of the sacraments, which in the primitive Church had to be kept
concealed, as Dionysius observes at the close of his book on the
ecclesiastical hierarchy; their object was to write the story of
Christ. Nevertheless nearly all these words can be culled from
various passages of the Scriptures. Because the words, "This is the
chalice," are found in Luke 22:20, and 1 Cor. 11:25, while Matthew
says in chapter 26:28: "This is My blood of the New Testament, which
shall be shed for many unto the remission of sins." The words added,
namely, "eternal" and "mystery of faith," were handed down to the
Church by the apostles, who received them from our Lord, according to
1 Cor. 11:23: "I have received of the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 78, Art. 4]

Whether in the Aforesaid Words of the Forms There Be Any Created
Power Which Causes the Consecration?

Objection 1: It seems that in the aforesaid words of the forms there
is no created power which causes the consecration. Because Damascene
says (De Fide Orth. iv): "The change of the bread into Christ's body
is caused solely by the power of the Holy Ghost." But the power of
the Holy Ghost is uncreated. Therefore this sacrament is not caused
by any created power of those words.

Obj. 2: Further, miraculous works are wrought not by any created
power, but solely by Divine power, as was stated in the First Part
(Q. 110, A. 4). But the change of the bread and wine into Christ's
body and blood is a work not less miraculous than the creation of
things, or than the formation of Christ's body in the womb of a
virgin: which things could not be done by any created power.
Therefore, neither is this sacrament consecrated by any created power
of the aforesaid words.

Obj. 3: Further, the aforesaid words are not simple, but composed of
many; nor are they uttered simultaneously, but successively. But, as
stated above (Q. 75, A. 7), this change is wrought instantaneously.
Hence it must be done by a simple power. Therefore it is not effected
by the power of those words.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Sacram. iv): "If there be such
might in the word of the Lord Jesus that things non-existent came
into being, how much more efficacious is it to make things existing
to continue, and to be changed into something else? And so, what was
bread before consecration is now the body of Christ after
consecration, because Christ's word changes a creature into something
different."

_I answer that,_ Some have maintained that neither in the above words
is there any created power for causing the transubstantiation, nor in
the other forms of the sacraments, or even in the sacraments
themselves, for producing the sacramental effects. This, as was shown
above (Q. 62, A. 1), is both contrary to the teachings of the saints,
and detracts from the dignity of the sacraments of the New Law.
Hence, since this sacrament is of greater worth than the others, as
stated above (Q. 65, A. 3), the result is that there is in the words
of the form of this sacrament a created power which causes the change
to be wrought in it: instrumental, however, as in the other
sacraments, as stated above (Q. 62, AA. 3, 4). For since these words
are uttered in the person of Christ, it is from His command that they
receive their instrumental power from Him, just as His other deeds
and sayings derive their salutary power instrumentally, as was
observed above (Q. 48, A. 6; Q. 56, A. 1, ad 3).

Reply Obj. 1: When the bread is said to be changed into Christ's body
solely by the power of the Holy Ghost, the instrumental power which
lies in the form of this sacrament is not excluded: just as when we
say that the smith alone makes a knife we do not deny the power of
the hammer.

Reply Obj. 2: No creature can work miracles as the chief agent. Yet
it can do so instrumentally, just as the touch of Christ's hand
healed the leper. And in this fashion Christ's words change the bread
into His body. But in Christ's conception, whereby His body was
fashioned, it was impossible for anything derived from His body to
have the instrumental power of forming that very body. Likewise in
creation there was no term wherein the instrumental action of a
creature could be received. Consequently there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 3: The aforesaid words, which work the consecration,
operate sacramentally. Consequently, the converting power latent
under the forms of these sacraments follows the meaning, which is
terminated in the uttering of the last word. And therefore the
aforesaid words have this power in the last instant of their being
uttered, taken in conjunction with those uttered before. And this
power is simple by reason of the thing signified, although there be
composition in the words uttered outwardly.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 78, Art. 5]

Whether the Aforesaid Expressions Are True?

Objection 1: It seems that the aforesaid expressions are not true.
Because when we say: "This is My body," the word "this" designates a
substance. But according to what was said above (AA. 1, 4, ad 3; Q.
75, AA. 2, 7), when the pronoun "this" is spoken, the substance of
the bread is still there, because the transubstantiation takes place
in the last instant of pronouncing the words. But it is false to say:
"Bread is Christ's body." Consequently this expression, "This is My
body," is false.

Obj. 2: Further, the pronoun "this" appeals to the senses. But the
sensible species in this sacrament are neither Christ's body nor even
its accidents. Therefore this expression, "This is My body," cannot
be true.

Obj. 3: Further, as was observed above (A. 4, ad 3), these words, by
their signification, effect the change of the bread into the body of
Christ. But an effective cause is understood as preceding its effect.
Therefore the meaning of these words is understood as preceding the
change of the bread into the body of Christ. But previous to the
change this expression, "This is My body," is false. Therefore the
expression is to be judged as false simply; and the same reason holds
good of the other phrase: "This is the chalice of My blood," etc.

