concealed his desire that Zeid should divorce Zeinab. But all other
authors[381] have found fault with Katada in his surmise, which is not
supported by any word in the text or by any contemporary evidence. This
interpretation of Katada is contradicted by the very words of Mohammad
to Zeid in the same verse: "Keep thy wife to thyself and fear God."

[Sidenote: Other conjectures.]

26. Many have been the conjectures as to what did Mohammad hide in his
mind. There is one by Katada already explained. Another is this, that he
knew Zeid would divorce her, but concealing this in his mind, he
interdicted Zeid from doing so. A third conjecture is this, that he
concealed in his mind that if Zeid, contrary to his (Mohammad's) advice,
were to divorce her (Zeinab), he (Mohammad) would marry her. These
conjectures are all far-fetched and arbitrary, but it appears more
probable that the social inharmony and domestic disturbances between
Zeid and Zeinab, and their resolve of separation, were withheld from the
public by Mohammad, fearing the scandal it might give rise to among his
enemies. This is the only secret referred to in the verse so often
cited.

[Footnote 336: _Annals of the Early Caliphate_. By Sir W. Muir,
K.C.S.I., LL.D., D.C.L., page 75, London, 1883.]

[Footnote 337: "It is to ransom the captive."--XC, 13.

"There is no piety in turning your faces towards the east or the west,
but he is pious who believeth in God and the Last Day, and the Angels
and the Scriptures and the Prophets; who for the love of God disburseth
his wealth to his kindred and to the orphans and the needy, and the
wayfarer and those who ask; and for ransoming," &c.--II, 172.]

[Footnote 338: "And to those of your slaves who desire a deed of
_manumission_, execute it for them, if ye know good in them, and give
them a portion of the wealth of God which He hath given you. Force not
your female slaves into sin, in order that ye may gain he casual
fruitions of this world, if they wish to preserve their modesty. Yet if
any one compel them, then verily, after their compulsion, will God be
Forgiving, Merciful."--XXIV, 33.]

[Footnote 339: "A believer killeth not a believer but by mischance: and
whoso killeth a believer by mischance shall be bound to free a believer
from slavery," &c.--IV, 94.]

[Footnote 340: "And those who _thus_ put away their wives, and
afterwards would recall their words, must free a captive before they can
come together _again_," &c.--LVIII, 4.]

[Footnote 341: "But alms are only _to be given_ to the poor and the
needy, and those who collect them, and to those whose hearts are won _to
Islam_, and for ransoming and for debtors, and for the cause of God, and
the wayfarer," &c.--IX, 60.]

[Footnote 342: "God will not punish you for a mistaken word in your
oaths; but He will punish you in regard to an oath taken seriously. Its
expiation shall be to feed ten poor persons with such middling _food_ as
ye feed your families with, or to clothe them; or to set free a captive:
but he who cannot find the means shall fast three days. This is the
expiation of your oaths when ye have sworn. Keep then your oaths. Thus
God maketh his signs clear to you. Haply ye will be thankful."--V, 91.]

[Footnote 343: _Vide_ Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 223.]

[Footnote 344: According to Hishami, p. 745, a party of fifty or forty
Koreish went round about Mohammad's camp at Hodeibia, seeking to cut off
any stray followers; and having attacked the camp itself with stones and
arrows, they were caught and taken to Mohammad, who pardoned and
released them.--_Vide_ Muir's Life of Mahomet, IV, p. 31, _f.n._; and
Moslim's collection of genuine traditions _Kitab-ul Jihad vas-Siyar_,
chapter on _Tanfeel_ and _Ransom_.]

[Footnote 345: All the prisoners of Hawazin at Honain were released
without taking any ransom and were not made slaves. See Muir's Life of
Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 148-149. That Mohammad had presented three female
slaves to Ali, Othman, and Omar from the captives of Bard Hawazin, as
stated by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, p. 149, is void of all truth. The
captives were not enslaved. They were mere prisoners, as Sir W. Muir
himself calls them so (_ibid_, pp. 148-149); yet he styles these three
of them "female slaves." The captives together with the captured camp
were removed to the valley of Jierana, pending negotiations (_ibid_, p.
142). At the end of the negotiations the prisoners were released. Thus
there could be no distribution of prisoners to anyone.]

[Footnote 346: Sir W. Muir writes:--"Hishamee says that from the time of
Kheibar _slaves_ became very plentiful among the Moslems, p. 333. I do
not find that, excepting the family of Kinana, any mention is made of
slaves taken at Kheibar. But money, which the victors obtained
plentifully at Kheibar, could purchase them cheaply in any part of
Arabia." (The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 73-74, and _footnote_.) But
the word originally used by Hishamee, "_sabaya_," means captives and
property captured, and not slaves, though captives, if not ransomed,
were used to be made slaves under the Arab International Law. Besides
this even the family of Kinana was never enslaved. Kinana was taken
captive and executed, because he had killed Mahamud bin Muslama. _Vide_
para. 75 of this book. The story that Mohammad immediately on Kinana's
execution sent for her and cast his mantle over her, signifying that she
was to be his own, and consummated his marriage with her, and that her
dower was her freedom (_vide_ Muir, _ibid_, pp. 68-69), is not genuine
and authentic. His family, by which is meant Sofia and her cousin, was
not enslaved, and there is no tradition, genuine or apocryphal, to
corroborate it. I here take the opportunity of quoting a speech ascribed
to Mohammad while addressing Sofia, the widow of Kinana, copied by Abul
Mo'tamar Soleiman (died A.H. 143) in his "Campaigns of Mohammad."
Mohammad addressed her thus:--"I give thee choice either of Islam, or of
Judaism. If thou acceptest Islam, perhaps I may keep thee for myself.
But if thou preferest Judaism, I may perhaps liberate thee, and join
thee to thy family." _Vide_ Wakidi's "Campaigns of Mohammad," page 393,
Calcutta, 1856. This speech shows amply that Mohammad had no intention
of enslaving Sofia.

The story of Mohammad's marriage with Sofia after her being given to and
purchased from Dihya, emanates from Anas, who cannot be relied upon.
Anas had very recently been associated with Mohammad. He entered
Mohammad's service only the other day when he started for the expedition
of Khyber, and was but a boy only a dozen-years old at that time. It is
related by Bokhari from Anas himself, who said that the Prophet had
asked Abu Tulhah to get him a boy to serve him during the Khyber
expedition. So he took me to him, and I was a boy close to maturity
(_Bokhari-Kitabul Jihad_). Anas has given two contradictory accounts
about Sofia; in one he says, "Dihya asked Mohammad's permission for a
captive girl, and took Sofia. When Mohammad heard about Sofia, he asked
Dihya to take another one; and having liberated Sofia married her, and
her freedom was her dower." In another tradition, Anas relates that
"Sofia fell to the lot of Dihya, and Mohammad purchased her from him for
seven camels." He says:--"The people did not know whether he had married
her, or had made her a concubine-slave, but when she rode on a camel,
and Mohammad put veil round her, the people knew from this that she was
his wife." Both these traditions are narrated from Anas by Moslem in his
_Saheeh_ (Book on Marriage).

The idea that Mohammad married Sofia under the circumstances noted above
is not satisfactorily established. It was only the fancy of the people,
or was a conjecture of Anas. Yet Sir W. Muir has the effrontery to
remark against Mohammad that: "Indeed, he is not free from the suspicion
of being influenced in the destruction of Kinana by the desire of
obtaining his wife." (The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, page 68,
_footnote_.) Kinana was executed for killing Mahmood bin Muslama, and
Sofia was neither enslaved nor married by Mohammad. Even if it be shown
that Mohammad married her afterwards under some other circumstances, it
(Sir W. Muir's presumption) is an idle guess unwarranted by any
reasonable argument.

The traditionists, Anas and others, have probably confounded Sofia, the
aunt of Mohammad, who was with him during the expedition of Khyber
(_vide_ Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, page 66, _footnote_), with
Kinana's widow of the same name, whom they fancied Mohammad might have
married and carried with him on the same camel. The lady for whom
Mohammad lowered his knee to help her to ascend the camel (_ibid_, page
70) was most probably Sofia, his aunt.]

[Footnote 347: Vol. III, pp. 278-279.]

[Footnote 348: _Vide_ The Biographical Dictionary of Persons who knew
Mohammad, by Ibn Hajar. In _Biblotheca Indica_. A collection of oriental
Series, published by the Asiatic Society, Bengal, No. 215, Vol. IV.
Fasciculus 7, Calcutta, 1866; Art. Rehana, No. 444.]

[Footnote 349: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 278.]

[Footnote 350: "The days of Ignorance, that is, the period preceding
Islam."]

[Footnote 351: "Two such are named by Tabari, I, page 248."

"A light ransom was fixed for each Arab slave--seven camels and six
young ones. In the case of some tribes which had suffered most severely
(as the Beni Hanifa, the Beni Kinda, and the people of Oman discomfited
at Daba) even this was remitted."

Annals of Early Caliphate. By Sir W. Muir, K.C.S.I., LL.D., D.C.L.,
London, 1883, pp. 63, 64.]

[Footnote 352: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, page 56.]

[Footnote 353: _Ibid_, page 57, footnote.]

[Footnote 354: _Vide_ Hishamee, page 972.]

[Footnote 355: _Ibid_, page 971.]

[Footnote 356: _Vide Takrib_ by Ibn Hajar.]

[Footnote 357: _Vide_ History of Muhammad's Campaigns by Wakidi; edited
by Von Kremer, Calcutta, 1856, from p. 360 to the end.]

[Footnote 358: Vol. III, page 62.]

[Footnote 359: _Vide_ Mizan-ul-Etedal by Zahabi.]

[Footnote 360: _Vide_ Nos. 976, 977, and 978 in the Biographical
Dictionary of Persons who knew Mohammad, by Ibn Hajar, published by the
Asiatic Society, Bengal, Calcutta, 1870, Vol. IV, pp. 779, 780, and
781.]

[Footnote 361: _Vide_ Mizan, by Zahabi.]

[Footnote 362: "An eclipse of the sun occurred on the same day, and the
people spoke of it as a tribute to the death of the Prophet's son. A
vulgar impostor would have accepted and confirmed the delusion; but
Mahomet rejected the idea."--"The Life of Mahomet" by Sir W. Muir, Vol.
IV, page 166.]

[Footnote 363: "Meaning the company of his female slave."]

[Footnote 364: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 161 and 162.

Taking concubine-slaves was an established and recognized institution of
the Arab society, until Mohammad abolished it. Practically the custom
has prevailed up to the present time. No blame attached to such
alliances in the social system of the Arabs. "The Caliphs of the House
of Abbas were all of them the children of concubines except as--Saffah,
Al-Mahdi, and Al-Amin" (History of Caliphs. By Sayute. Translated by
Major Jarret, page 20, Calcutta, 1880). If the story regarding Mohammad
be true, there was no fear of exposure or offending the wives.]

[Footnote 365: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. I, Introduction, page ciii.]

[Footnote 366: "The Calcutta Review," Feby. 1868, page 374.]

[Footnote 367: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, page 160.]

[Footnote 368: Zeid bin Aslam (in _Tabrani_), who narrates the story,
though he does not mention Maria, is a Tabaee (died A.H. 136), and does
not quote his authority. Besides, his authority itself is impeached;
_vide_ Ibn Adi in his Kamal.

Masrook (in Saeed bin Mansoor) only came to Medina long after Mohammad's
death; therefore his narration, even if it be genuine, is not reliable.

Zohak Ibn Muzahim (in _Tabrani_), also a Tabaee and of impeached
authority, narrates it from Ibn Abbas, but he never heard any tradition
from him, nor had he even seen him (_vide Mzan-ul-Etedal_, by Zahabi,
and _Ansab_, by Sam-ani). His narration must be hence considered as
apocryphal.

The ascription of Ibn Omar's (died 73 A.H.) story, not strictly to the
point, is untrustworthy.

Abu Hurera's narration is also admitted as apocryphal; _vide
Dur-rul-mansoor_, by Soyuti.

All these traditions are noted by Soyuti in his _Dur-rul-mansoor_.

The tradition by Nasaee (died 303 A.H.) from Anas (died 90 A.H.)
regarding the affair of a slave is equally contradicted by the tradition
from Ayesha, the widow of the Prophet, narrated by the traditionist
Nasaee in the same place of his collection of traditions. This is the
story of the honey. _Vide_ para. 16, _ubi supra_. Ayesha's tradition is
more trustworthy than that of Anas. Hammad bin Salma, a narrator in the
ascription of Anas, has been impeached owing to the confusion of his
memory in the later days of his life (_vide Tekreeb_). Sabit, another
link in the same chain, was a story-teller by profession (_vide Zahabi's
Tabakat_,) and cannot be depended upon. And Nasaee himself has rejected
the tradition ascribed to Anas, and is reported to have said that
Ayesha's tradition has good ascription, while there is nothing valid in
that regarding Maria; _vide_ Kamalain's Annotations on _Jelalain in
loco_.]

[Footnote 369: The Life of Mahomet by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, page 310.]

[Footnote 370: _Ibid_, Vol. III, page 228, and _footnote_ at pp. 229 and
230.]

[Footnote 371: The Life of Mahomet by Sir W. Muir, page 228. The
_italics_ are mine.]

[Footnote 372: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 229. The tradition
quoted by Sir W. Muir in this page is apocryphal and technically
_Mursal_.]

[Footnote 373: _Ibid_, p. 230.]

[Footnote 374: "(T.A.) _he made_ [a thing] _lawful_, or _allowable_, to
him (Jel in XXXIII, 38, and Kull in page 275 and T.A.*) relating to a
case into which a man has brought himself (Kull): this is said to be the
meaning when the phrase occurs in the Kur:" An Arabic-English Lexicon,
by Edward William Lane, page 2375.]

[Footnote 375: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 231.]

[Footnote 376: Vide _Seerat Halabi_; or, _Insan-ul-Oyoon_, Vol. II, page
402.]

[Footnote 377: Ibn Khallikan's Biographical Dictionary, Vol. III, pp.
409-410.]

[Footnote 378: Vide _Dur-rul-mansoor_, by Sayuti, _in loco_.]

[Footnote 379: Ibn Khallikan's Biographical Dictionary, Vol. II, page
207.]

[Footnote 380: Narrated by Ibn Sad and Hakim.]

[Footnote 381: _Vide_ Abdur Razzak. Abd bin Hamid, Ibn Jarir,
Ibn-al-Monzar, Ibn Abi Hatim, and Tabrani's Collections of Traditions.]




Appendix C.


The references to the particular events and circumstances relating to
the defensive wars mentioned in the Koran, quoted and referred by me in
this work, may be classified as follows:--

I.--The Persecutions of the Koreish at Mecca (B.H. 10-1).

     Sura xvi, 43, 44, 111.
     Sura ii, 210, 214, 215.
     Sura iii, 194.
     Sura iv, 97, 99, 100.
     Sura xxii, 57.
     Sura lx, 8, 9.
     Sura xlvii, 14.
     Sura xlviii, 25.
     Sura ix, 40, 48, 95.

II.--The Aggressions of the Koreish at Medina, as well as those of the
Inhabitants thereof (A.H. 10).

     Sura ii, 214; Sura viii, 72; Sura ix, 13, 48, 72.

III. The Wars of Defence against the Koreish and the Arabs, &c., with
several References to their Aggressions (A.H. 1-8).

     Sura xxii, 39-42.
     Sura ii, 186-189, 214, 215, 245, 247, 252.
     Sura iv, 76-78, 86, 91, 93.
     Sura viii, 19, 39-41, 58-66, 73, 74.
     Sura ix, 10, 13.

IV.--The Various Battles, &c.

         (1) _The Battle of Badr_ (A.H. 2).
             Sura iii, 11, 119;
             Sura viii, 5-19, 39-52, 66-72;
             Sura xlvii, 4, 15.

         (2) _The Battle of Ohad_ (A.H. 3).
             Sura iii, 117-122;
             134-154;
             159-162.

         (3) _The Second Battle of Badr_ (A.H. 4), and _The Expulsion
            of the Bani Nazeer_ (A.H. 4).
             Sura iii, 167; and
             Sura lix, 2-14.

         (4) _The Battle of Ahzab_ (A.H. 5).
             Sura xxxiii, 9-25.

         (5) _The Jews, Bani Koreiza, &c._ (A.H. 5).
             Sura viii, 58-66;
             Sura xxxiii, 26-27.

         (6) _The pilgrimic Expedition to Hodeibia_ (A.H. 6).
             Sura xlviii, 1-3, 10, 11, 24, 25;
             Sura lx.

         (7) _The Expedition to Khyber_ (A.H. 7).
             Sura xlviii, 17, 20-22.

         (8) _The breach of the truce of Hodeibia by the Koreish_
            (A.H. 8).

             (_a_) Before the Conquest of Mecca.
               Sura ix, 1-15.

             (_b_) After the Conquest of Mecca,
               Sura ix, 16-24.

         (9) _The Battle of Honain_ (A.H. 8).
             Sura ix, 25-27.

         (10) _After the Battle of Honain_ (A.H. 9).
             Sura ix, 28.

         (11) _The Expedition to Tabuk against the Christians
           (Romans) and their Jewish Allies_ (A.H. 9).

             (_a_) Exhortation to go to war in defence.
               Sura ix, 29-41, 124.

             (_b_) Backwardness reproached.
               42-52, 56-57, 82-90.

             (_c_) Exhortations for contribution.
               53-55, 58-60, 81.

             (_d_) The disaffected chided.
               65-76, 121, 122, 125-130.

             (_e_) The Bedouins reprobated.
               91-102.

             (_f_) The penitents forgiven.
               103-107, 118.

_THE END._




INDEX.


A.

Aamir, lii.

Aamir bin Tofeil, chief of Bani Aamir, xlvi.

Abbas, 34.

Abd-bin Hamid, 109 _f.n._, 222.

Abd bin Kosayy, xxxiii.

Abd Monat, xvii _f.n._

Abd Shams, xxviii, 7.

Abdel Malik ibn Hisham, 72 _f.n._, 73 _f.n._

Abd-ud-Dar, xxxiii.

Abd-ul-Kays, xlvi, lii.

Abdul Hamid, 206, 208.

Abdul Rahman, Mohammad's instruction to him, xxvii.

Abdullah, 96, 97.

Abdullah bin Abdur Rahaman bin Abi Sasta, 206, 208.

Abdullah bin al Harith, 222.

Abdullah bin Jahsh, 31, 56.

Abdullah bin Khalal, 96.

Abdullah bin Omar, 68 _f.n._

Abdullah ibn Abbas, 135.

Abdullah ibn Masood, 79, 80.

Abdullah ibn Oneis, 69, 73.

Abdullah ibn Rawaha, 72, 102.
