
2. FESTIVAL OF MU'IN-UD-DIN CHISTI.[264]--The tomb of this Saint is in
Ajmir. He was a Syed descended from Husain, the son of 'Ali, and was born
in Sajistan about the year 537 A.H. His father died when he was about
fifteen years old. Soon after this he fell in with a famous Fakir, Ibrahim
Qanduzi, through whose influence he began to seek the Tariqat, or mystical
road to the knowledge of God. When he was twenty years of age he received
further instruction from the famous 'Abd-ul-Qadir Jilani. After the
conquest of Hindustan by Shahab-ud-din Ghori, Mu'in-ud-din retired to
Ajmir, where he died in the odour of sanctity 636 A.H. Pilgrimages to this
tomb have been and are very popular. Emperors and people vied with each
other in doing honour to the memory of this saint. Even Akbar, sceptic
though he was as regards orthodox Islam, made a pilgrimage to this shrine,
and offered vows that he might have a son who would live to manhood. Hindus
also visit this tomb and presents from rich men of this class are not
unusual.

3. FESTIVAL OF SALAR MAS'UD GHAZI.--There is some doubt as to the
nationality of this Saint. Some say he was a Husaini Syed, others that he
was a Pathan, and a martyr. His tomb is situated in Oude. Afsos thus
describes the {260} pilgrimage. "Once a year great crowds of people gather
from all parts. They carry red lances, and beat thousands of tambourines.
The 'Urs is held on the first Sunday of the month Jith (May-June). The
people believe that this was his wedding day, because it is said that he
had on wedding garments when he was killed. This belief once led a certain
oilman, a resident of Raduli, to send a bedstead, chair, and other marriage
presents to the shrine at this time. The custom is still kept up by the
descendants of the oilman. The common people fasten ropes to the branches
of the trees in the neighbourhood, and swing, some by the hands and some by
the heels, and assume various disguises. They thus hope to obtain what they
desire." The Hindus venerate this Saint very highly. The Musalmans look
upon him as a most sacred person, for he slew many idolatrous Hindus, and
so earned the title of Ghazi, the warrior: the Hindus consider that it was
only by the power of God that he could do so many acts of prowess.

4. FESTIVAL OF THE BIRA OR OF KHAJA KHIZR.--Of this Saint, M. Garcin de
Tassy says: "Khaja Khizr is a personage respecting whom the opinions of
orientals vary. Many consider him the same as Phineas, the grandson of
Aaron; others that he is the prophet Elias; and lastly, the Turks confound
him with St. George. In order to reconcile these conflicting opinions, some
allege that the same soul has animated three different persons. Whatever be
the fact, Khizr, according to the Musalmans, discovered the source of the
Water of Life of which he is the guardian. He is believed to be very clever
in divination, and to be the patron of waters. As such a festival is held
in his honour." Jawan describes it thus: "In the month of Bhadun
(August-September) all whose wishes have been fulfilled, make it a point of
duty to set afloat the boat (nau) in honour of Khaja Khizr, and to make
according to their means offerings of milk and bruised grain to the holy
personage. On every Friday, and in some places on every Thursday, in the
month {261} in question, the devotees having prepared the bira carry it at
night to the bank of the river, with many ceremonies. There great and
small, having lighted lamps and tapers, make their respective oblations,
whilst a number of swimmers together jointly push the bira into the middle
of the river." Sometimes a number of small biras, made of clay, are also
launched, and as each carries a lamp the general effect is striking. It is
said that the Musalman natives of the Maldive Islands annually launch a
small vessel laden with perfumes, gum, and odoriferous flowers, and leave
it to the mercy of the winds and waves as an offering to the god of the
sea. There can be no doubt that this god of the sea is Khizr, the patron of
the waters.

The following prayer is recited in the Fatiha of Khizr: "To obtain purity
of heart, and the benediction of Him who hears the vows of mortals, and who
alone can keep from them all evils, I rest upon the merits of Khaja Khizr,
the great prophet Elias."

5. THE FEAST OF PIR DASTGIR SAHIB.--This is held on the eleventh day of the
month of Rabi'-us-Sani. The Sunnis hold this Saint in great reverence. He
has no less than ninety-nine names. His tomb is at Baghdad. On the tenth of
the month the ceremony called Sandal (p. 245) is performed, followed on the
next day by the 'Urs, when the Maulad, or the account of the circumstances
connected with the birth of the saint is read; Qasa,id, or elegiac poems
are recited; the Darud is repeated and Fatihas are said. The Quran is also
read through. Vows are frequently made to this Saint and in time of any
special visitation, such as cholera, a flag is carried about in honour of
this Pir by some of his devotees to whom presents of food, &c, are offered.
Fatiha is then said over them. He is said to appear to his followers during
their sleep and to give them directions. Ja'far Sharif, the compiler of the
Qanun-i-Islam speaking, on this point relates his own experience thus: "The
author speaks from personal experience, for at the time of need, when he
{262} was oppressed in mind concerning things which he desired, he used to
repeat constantly the ninety-nine names of the Pir and vow before the Holy
God, imploring His assistance by the soul of Dastgir; and through the mercy
of the Almighty, his Excellency Ghaus-ul-A'zam (Dastgir) presented himself
in his sleep, and relieved him of his perplexities and vouchsafed his
behests."

Syed Ahmad Kabir Rafai, the founder of the Rafai Darwishes was a nephew of
this Saint.

6. FESTIVAL OF QADIR WALI SAHIB.--This is the great saint of Southern
India. The 'Urs is celebrated on the tenth day of Jamadi-us-Sani. The
shrine is at Nagore, a town situated four miles north of Negapatam. The
sandal and other ceremonies are similar to those described already. He is
the patron saint of sailors, who in times of difficulty vow that, if they
reach the shore in safety, they will offer a Fatiha in the name of Qadir
Wali. The common people have a profound faith in the power of the saint to
work miracles. The story of the following one is frequently related: "A
vessel springing a leak was about to founder, when the Captain made a vow
that should Qadir Wali stop the leak, he would offer in his name the value
of the cargo. At that time the saint was being shaved, but being
miraculously acquainted with the perilous position of the Captain he cast
away the looking-glass which he held in his hand. This glass attached
itself to the hole in the bottom of the ship which then came safely to
land. The Captain, in due course, presented his offering to the saint who
requested him to return the glass to the barber. The Captain was astonished
at this request and enquired what glass was meant. He was then directed to
look at the bottom of his ship. He did so, and discovered how the saint had
saved the ship."

The festival affords a curious illustration of the way in which Hindu
influences have acted on Islam, and how even Hindus pay regard to Muslim
Saints. Qadir Wali is said to {263} have been a Fakir who lived on the
charity of both Hindus and Musalmans. Indeed both parties claim him as
belonging to their respective religions, which may be accounted for by the
fact that in his preaching to mixed audiences he suited his addresses to
both classes of his hearers. After his death a small Mosque was erected on
or near his tomb. The fame of the Wali gradually grew, and a Hindu Rajah
made a vow that if he were blessed with the birth of a son, he would
enlarge and beautify the Mosque. His wish was fulfilled, and the present
elegant structure is the result. So famous has the shrine of the Saint now
become that the Musalmans there say: "First Mecca, then Nagore." The same
reason which induced the Hindu Rajah to make a votive offering years ago,
still influences large numbers of people. On Thursday evenings, the
commencement of the Muhammadan Sabbath, many Hindu women resort to the
shrine of the Saint. On the closing night of the Annual Feast, Tabuts are
taken in procession from Negapatam, and rich presents are sent from the
Tanjore Palace to the Nagore Mosque. Thus is the Hindu connection still
kept up with the festival of this Musalman Saint.

There are many other Walis and Pirs to whose tombs pilgrimages are made,
and in memory of whom many superstitious observances are still kept up; but
all such pilgrimages to a Dargah (shrine) are no necessary part of Islam.
In all parts of the country there are the shrines of Saints who have a
local reputation and whose annual festivals are more or less observed.
Still it is not necessary for me to give a further account of these. This
brings me to the close of my subject.

In the preceding chapters, I have endeavoured to set forth the main
features of the Faith of Islam, and the religious duties it enjoins. I
might now go on to show its relation to Judaism and Christianity, the
elements it has drawn from them, and the distortions it has made in the
borrowing, as well as the protest it raised against much that was {264}
corrupt in the Christianity with which it came in contact. I might also
enlarge upon its moral and social effects, and the character it produces in
the individual and the state. But these subjects would lead me far beyond
my present scope. I prefer to content myself with giving a representation
of the Faith of Islam from its own authorities, and with leaving my readers
to make comparisons and draw inferences for themselves.

THE END.

{265}

       *       *       *       *       *


INDEX OF TECHNICAL TERMS.

          A.

  Aiyam-i-Biz, 214
  Aiyam-ut-Tashriq, 231
 'Alam, 238
  Al-A'raf, 167
  Al-Barzakh, 168
  Al-Mahdi, 80
  Akhir-Char Shambah, 244
 'Amm, 48
  Amr-i-Takwiti, 176
  Anbiya-ulul-'Azm, 150
  Asar-i-Sharif, 245
  Ashab, 7
 'Ashura, 241
 'Ashur Khana, 237
  Asma-i-Husna, 133
  Attahiyat, 197
  Auliya, 152
  Ayat, 54
  Ayat-ul-Kursi, 212
  Azad, 95
  Azan, 193

          B.

  Bara Wafat, 244
  Baqab-i-Qausain, 158
  Baqr-'id, 252
  bid'at, 14
  Buraq, 241

          D.

  Da,iri, 81
  Dalalat, 53
  Dalil-i-qata'i, 187
  Dalil-i-zani, 187
  Darwishes, 94
  Dargah, 258
  Du'a, 197

          F.

  Fana, 93
  Faru', 120
  Farz, 187
  Farz-i-'ain, 208
  Farz-i-kifaya, 207
  Fatrah, 3
  Fitrat, 187
  Fuqiha, 33

          G.

  Ghair-i-Mahdi, 81
  Ghusl, 190
  Gunah-i-kabira, 154
  Gunah-i-saghira, 154
  {266}

          H.

  Hadis-i-Ahad, 70
  Hadis-i-Hasan, 71
  Hadis-i-Mua'llaq, 72
  Hadis-i-Mursal, 72
  Hadis-i-Mutawatir, 70
  Hadis-i-Sahih, 71
  Hadis-i-Z'aif, 71
  Hadd, 179
  Hafiz, 42
  Haft Sifat, 118
  Hajj, 223
  Hajr-ul-Aswad, 226
  Hal, 93
  Haqiqat, 52, 93
  Haram, 188
  Harut, 142
  Hasal Khazaf, 230

          I.

  Ibadhiyah, 76
  Ibarat, 53
  Iblis, 140
 'Id-gah, 245
 'Id-ul-Fitr, 247
  Iftar, 250
  Ihlal, 224
  Ihram, 224
  Ijma', 16
  Ijma'-i-Ummat, 17
  Ijtihad, 17, 26, 32
  Ijtihad fi'l-Masa,il, 34
  Ijtihad fi'l-Mazhab, 34
  Ijtihad fi'l-Shari', 34
  Ilham, 37
  Ilka, 40
 'Ilm-i-usul, 41
  Imam, 75
  Imam Abu Hanifa, 19
  Imam Ibn Malik, 20
  Imam As-Shafa'i, 21
  Imam Ibn Hanbal, 22
  Imamat, 75
  Imam Bara, 237
  Iman-i-mufassal, 116
  Iman-i-mujmal, 116
  Istidlal, 53
  Isharat, 53
  Ishrak fi'l-'ibadat, 108
  Ishrak fi'l-adab, 109
  Isnad, 67
 'Itikaf, 249
  Iqamat, 194
  Iqtiza, 54
  I'tibar-ul-Amsal, 27

          J.

  Jabrians, 132
  Jahannum, 172
  Jami'-i-Tirmizi, 86
  Jamrat-ul-Akahah, 230
  Jannat, 171
  Jashn-i-milad-i-sharif, 245
  Jinn, 145
  Juz, 56

          K.

  K'aba, 227
  Kalam, 135
  {267}
  Kalima, 54, 116
  Karamians, 163
  Kasb, 130
  Kausar, 171
  Kinayah, 52
  Kiram-ul-Katibin, 141
  Kitman, 91
  Khafi, 50
  Kharigites, 76
  Khass, 48
  Kharq-i-'adat, 157
  Khulafa-i-Rashidin, 66
  Khutba, 201

          L.

  Labbaik, 225
  Lahad, 211
  Lailat-ul-Qadr, 2

          M.

  Mahmudiah, 83
  Majaz, 52
  Majzub, 95
  Maukadda', 200
  Makruh, 188
  Mansukh, 59
  Maqam-i-Mahmud, 169
  Marsiya, 238
  Marut, 142
  Mihrab, 243
  Mimbar, 239
  Miqat, 225
  Mizan, 165
  Mua'qqibat, 141
  Muawwal, 48
  Mu,azzin, 193
  Mubah, 188
  Mufassir, 33, 50
  Mufsid, 188
  Muhaddis, 67
  Mujassimians, 131
  Mu'jizat, 157
  Mujmal, 51
  Mujtahid, 17
