
"Slowly the clouds return
To their own hill,
Floating along the skies
So calm and still.

The seventh picture, called 'the Forgetting of the Cow and the
Remembering of the Man,' represents the cowherd looking at the
beautiful scenery surrounding his cottage.

"The cow goes out by day
And comes by night.
I care for her in no way,
But all is right."

The eighth picture, called 'the Forgetting of the Cow and of the
Man,' represents a large empty circle.

"There's no cowherd nor cow
Within the pen;
No moon of truth nor clouds
Of doubt in men."

The ninth picture, called 'the Returning to the Root and Source,'
represents a beautiful landscape full of lovely trees in full blossom.

"There is no dyer of hills,
Yet they are green;
So flowers smile, and titter rills
At their own wills."

The tenth picture, called 'the Going into the City with Open Hands,'
represents a smiling monk, gourd in hand, talking with a man who
looks like a pedlar.

"The cares for body make
That body pine;
Let go of cares and thoughts,
O child of mine!"

These Ten Pictures of the Cowherd correspond in meaning to the Five
Ranks of Merit above stated, even if there is a slight difference, as
is shown in the following table:


THE FIVE RANKS.---THE TEN PICTURES.

1. The Rank of Turning---1. The Searching of the Cow.
                         2. The Finding of the Cow's Tracks.

2. The Rank of Service---3. The Finding of the Cow.
                         4. The Catching of the Cow.

3. The Rank of Merit---5. The Taming of the Cow.
                       6. The Going Home, Riding on the Cow.

4. The Rank of Co-operative Merit---9. The Returning to the Root and
Source.
                                    10. The Going into the City with
Open Hands.

5. The Rank of Merit-over-Merit---7. The Forgetting of the Cow and
the Remembering of the Man.
                                  8. The Forgetting of the Cow and of
the Man.



14. Zen and Nirvana.

The beatitude of Zen is Nirvana, not in the Hinayanistic sense of the
term, but in the sense peculiar to the faith.  Nirvana literally
means extinction or annihilation; hence the extinction of life or the
annihilation of individuality.  To Zen, however, it means the state
of extinction of pain and the annihilation of sin.  Zen never looks
for the realization of its beatitude in a place like heaven, nor
believes in the realm of Reality transcendental of the phenomenal
universe, nor gives countenance to the superstition of Immortality,
nor does it hold the world is the best of all possible worlds, nor
conceives life simply as blessing.  It is in this life, full of
shortcomings, misery, and sufferings, that Zen hopes to realize its
beatitude.  It is in this world, imperfect, changing, and moving,
that Zen finds the Divine Light it worships.  It is in this
phenomenal universe of limitation and relativity that Zen aims to
attain to highest Nirvana.  "We speak," says the author of
Vimalakirtti-nirdeca-sutra, "of the transitoriness of body, but not
of the desire of the Nirvana or destruction of it."  "Paranirvana,"
according to the author of Lankavatarasutra, "is neither death nor
destruction, but bliss, freedom, and purity."  "Nirvana," says Kiai
Hwan,[FN#276] "means the extinction of pain or the crossing over of
the sea of life and death.  It denotes the real permanent state of
spiritual attainment.  It does not signify destruction or
annihilation.  It denotes the belief in the great root of life and
spirit."  It is Nirvana of Zen to enjoy bliss for all sufferings of
life.  It is Nirvana of Zen to be serene in mind for all disturbances
of actual existence.  It is Nirvana of Zen to be in the conscious
union with Universal Life or Buddha through Enlightenment.


[FN#276]  A commentator of Saddharma-pundarika-sutra.



15. Nature and her Lesson.

Nature offers us nectar and ambrosia every day, and everywhere we go
the rose and lily await us.  "Spring visits us men," says
Gu-do,[FN#277] "her mercy is great.  Every blossom holds out the
image of Tathagata."  "What is the spiritual body of Buddha who is
immortal and divine?" asked a man to Ta Lun (Dai-ryu), who instantly
replied: "The flowers cover the mountain with golden brocade.  The
waters tinge the rivulets with heavenly blue."  "Universe is the
whole body of Tathagata; observed Do-gen.  "The worlds in ten
directions, the earth, grass, trees, walls, fences, tiles, pebbles-in
a word, all the animated and inanimate objects partake of the
Buddha-nature.  Thereby, those who partake in the benefit of the Wind
and Water that rise out of them are, all of them, helped by the
mysterious influence of Buddha, and show forth Enlightenment."[FN#278]


[FN#277]  One of the distinguished Zenists in the Tokugawa period,
who died in 1661.

[FN#278]  Sho-bo gen-zo.


Thus you can attain to highest bliss through your conscious union
with Buddha.  Nothing can disturb your peace, when you can enjoy
peace in the midst of disturbances; nothing can cause you to suffer,
when you welcome misfortunes and hardships in order to train and
strengthen your character; nothing can tempt you to commit sin, when
you are constantly ready to listen to the sermon given by everything
around you; nothing can distress you, when you make the world the
holy temple of Buddha.  This is the state of Nirvana which everyone
believing in Buddha may secure.



16. The Beatitude of Zen.

We are far from denying, as already shown in the foregoing chapters,
the existence of troubles, pains, diseases, sorrows, deaths in life.
Our bliss consists in seeing the fragrant rose of Divine mercy among
the thorns of worldly trouble, in finding the fair oasis of Buddha's
wisdom in the desert of misfortunes, in getting the wholesome balm of
His love in the seeming poison of pain, in gathering the sweet honey
of His spirit even in the sting of horrible death.

History testifies to the truth that it is misery that teaches men
more than happiness, that it is poverty that strengthens them more
than wealth, that it is adversity that moulds character more than
prosperity, that it is disease and death that call forth the inner
life more than health and long life.  At least, no one can be blind
to the fact that good and evil have an equal share in forming the
character and working out the destiny of man.  Even such a great
pessimist as Schopenhauer says: "As our bodily frame would burst
asunder if the pressure of atmosphere were removed, so if the lives
of men were relieved of all need, hardship, and adversity, if
everything they took in hand were successful, they would be so
swollen with arrogance . . . that they would present the spectacle of
unbridled folly.  A ship without ballast is unstable, and will not go
straight."  Therefore let us make our ship of life go straight with
its ballast of miseries and hardships, over which we gain control.

The believer in Buddha is thankful to him, not only for the sunshine
of life, but also for its wind, rain, snow, thunder, and lightning,
because He gives us nothing in vain. Hisa-nobu (Ko-yama) was,
perhaps, one of the happiest persons that Japan ever produced, simply
because he was ever thankful to the Merciful One.  One day he went
out without an umbrella and met with a shower.  Hurrying up to go
home, he stumbled and fell, wounding both his legs.  As he rose up,
he was overheard to say: "Thank heaven."  And being asked why he was
so thankful, replied: "I got both my legs hurt, but, thank heaven,
they were not broken."  On another occasion he lost consciousness,
having been kicked violently by a wild horse.  When he came to
himself, he exclaimed: "Thank heaven," in hearty joy.  Being asked
the reason why he was so joyful, he answered: "I have really given up
my ghost, but, thank heaven, I have escaped death after all."[FN#279]
 A person in such a state of mind can do anything with heart and
might.  Whatever he does is an act of thanks for the grace of Buddha,
and he does it, not as his duty, but as the overflowing of his
gratitude which lie himself cannot check.  Here exists the formation
of character.  Here exist real happiness and joy.  Here exists the
realization of Nirvana.


[FN#279]  Ki-jin-den.


Most people regard death as the greatest of evils, only because they
fear death.  They fear death only because they have the instinct of
self-preservation.  Hereupon pessimistic philosophy and religion
propose to attain to Nirvana by the extinction of Will-to-live, or by
the total annihilation of life.  But this is as much as to propose
death as the final cure to a patient.  Elie Metchnikoff proposes, in
his 'Nature of Man,' another cure, saying: 'If man could only
contrive to live long enough--say, for one hundred and forty years--a
natural desire for extinction would take the place of the instinct
for self-preservation, and the call of death would then harmoniously
satisfy his legitimate craving of a ripe old age.'  Why, we must ask,
do you trouble yourself so much about death?  Is there any instance
of an individual who escaped it in the whole history of mankind?  If
there be no way of escape, why do you trouble yourself about it?  Can
you cause things to fall off the earth against the law of
gravitation?  Is there any example of an individual object that
escaped the government of that law in the whole history of the world?
 Why, then, do you trouble yourself about it?  It is no less silly to
trouble yourself about death than you do about gravitation.  Can you
realize that death, which you have yet no immediate experience of, is
the greatest of evil?  We dare to declare death to be one of the
blessings which we have to be thankful for.  Death is the scavenger
of the world; it sweeps away all uselessness, staleness, and
corruption from the world, and keeps life clean and ever now.  When
you are of no use for the world it comes upon you, removes you to
oblivion in order to relieve life of useless encumbrance.  The stream
of existence should be kept running, otherwise it would become
putrid.  If old lives were to stop the running stream it would stand
still, and consequently become filthy, poisoned, and worthless.
Suppose there were only births and no deaths.  The earth has to be
packed with men and women, who are doomed to live to all eternity,
jostling, colliding, bumping, trampling each other, and vainly
struggling to get out of the Black Hole of the earth.  Thanks to
death we are not in the Black Hole!

Only birth and no death is far worse than only death and no birth.
"The dead," says Chwang Tsz, "have no tyrannical king about, no
slavish subject to meet; no change of seasons overtakes them.  The
heaven and the earth take the places of Spring and Autumn.  The king
or emperor of a great nation cannot be happier than they."  How would
you be if death should never overtake you when ugly decrepitude makes
you blind and deaf, bodily and mentally, and deprives you of all
possible pleasures?  How would you be if you should not die when your
body is broken to pieces or terribly burned by an accident--say, by a
violent earthquake followed by a great conflagration?  Just imagine
Satan, immortal Satan, thrown down by the ire of God into Hell's
fiery gulf, rolling himself in dreadful torture to the end of time.
You cannot but conclude that it is only death which relieves you of
extreme sufferings, incurable diseases, and it is one of the
blessings you ought to be thankful for.

The believer of Buddha is thankful even for death itself, the which
is the sole means of conquering death.  If he be thankful even for
death, how much more for the rest of things!  He can find a meaning
in every form of life.  He can perceive a blessing in every change of
fortune.  He can acknowledge a mission for every individual.  He can
live in contentment and joy under any conditions.  Therefore Lin Tsi
(Rin-zai) says: "All the Buddhas might appear before me and I would
not be glad.  All the Three Regions[FN#280] and Hells might suddenly
present themselves before me, and I would not fear. . . .  He (an
Enlightened person) might get into the fire, and it would not burn
him.  He might get into water, and it would not drown him.  He might
be born in Hell, and he would be happy as if he were in a fair
garden.  He might be born among Pretas and beasts, and he would not
suffer from pain.  How can he be so? Because he can enjoy
everything.'[FN#281]


[FN#280]  (1) Naraka, or Hell; (2) Pretas, or hungry demons; (3)
beasts.

[FN#281]  Lin Tsi Luk (Rin-zai-roku).






APPENDIX



ORIGIN OF MAN

(GEN-NIN-RON)



BY

KWEI FUNG TSUNG MIH

THE SEVENTH PATRIARCH OF THE KEGON SECT



TRANSLATED BY

KAITEN NUKARIYA





PREFACE



Tsung Mih (Shu-Mitsu, A.D. 774-841), the author of Yuen Jan Lun
('Origin of Man'), one of the greatest scholars that China ever
produced, was born in a Confucianist family of the State of Kwo Cheu.
 Having been converted by Tao Yuen (Do-yen), a noted priest of the
Zen Sect, he was known at the age of twenty-nine as a prominent
member of that sect, and became the Eleventh Patriarch after
Bodhidharma, the First Patriarch of the sect, who had come over to
China from India about A.D. 520.  Some years after he studied under
Chino, Kwan (Cho-kwan) the philosophical doctrine of the Avatamsaka
School, now known in Japan as the Kegon Sect, and distinguished
himself as the Seventh Patriarch of that school.  In A.D. 835 he was
received in audience by the Emperor Wan Tsung, who questioned him in
a general way about the Buddhist doctrines, and bestowed upon him the
honourable title of Great Virtuous Teacher, together with abundant
gifts.  The author produced over ninety volumes of books, which
include a commentary on Avatamsaka-sutra, one on
Purnabuddha-sutra-prasannartha-sutra, and many others.  Yuen Jan Lun
is one of the shortest of his essays, but it contains all the
essential doctrines, respecting the origin of life and of the
universe, which are found in Taoism, Confucianism, Hinayanism, and
Mahayanism.  How important a position it holds among the Buddhist
books can be well imagined from the fact that over twenty
commentaries were written on it both by the Chinese and the Japanese
Buddhist scholars.  It is said that a short essay under the same
title by a noted contemporary Confucianist scholar, Han Tui Chi
(Kan-tai-shi, who flourished 803-823), suggested to him to write a
book in order to make clear to the public the Buddhist view on the
same subject.  Thus be entitled the book 'Origin of Man,' in spite of
his treating of the origin of life and of the universe.  Throughout
the whole book occur coupled sentences, consisting mostly of the same
number of Chinese characters, and consequently while one sentence is
too laconic, the other is overladen with superfluous words, put in to
make the right number in the balanced group of characters.  In
addition to this, the text is full of too concise phrases, and often
of ambiguous ones, as it is intended to state as briefly as possible
all the important doctrines of the Buddhist as well as of the outside
schools.  On this account the author himself wrote a few notes on the
passages that lie thought it necessary to explain.  The reader will
find these notes beginning with 'A' put by the translator to
distinguish them from his own.

K. N.




ORIGIN OF MAN[FN#282]


INTRODUCTION
