and what that is we need not find any difficulty in ascertaining. 'The
beauties of holiness' is a frequent phrase for the sacerdotal garments,
the holy festal attire of the priests of the Lord. So considered, how
beautifully it comes in here! The conquering King whom the psalm hymns
is a Priest for ever; and He is followed by an army of priests. The
soldiers are gathered in the day of the muster, with high courage and
willing devotion, ready to fling away their lives; but they are clad not
in mail, but in priestly robes--like those who wait before the altar
rather than like those who plunge into the fight--like those who
compassed Jericho with the ark for their standard, and the trumpets for
all their weapons. We can scarcely fail to remember the words which echo
these and interpret them: 'The armies which were in heaven followed Him
on white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean'--a strange
armour against sword-cut and spear-thrust.

The main purpose, then, of this part of our text seems to be to bring
out the priestly character of the Christian soldier--a thought which
carries with it many important considerations, on which I can barely
touch.

Mark, then, how the warfare which we have to wage is the same as the
priestly service which we have to render. The conflict is with our own
sin and evil; the sacrifice we have to offer is ourselves. As soldiers,
we have to fight against our selfish desires and manifold imperfections;
as priests, we have to lay our whole selves on His altar. The task is
the same under either emblem. We have a conflict to wage in the world,
and in the world we have a priestly work to do, and these are the same.
We have to be God's representatives in the world, bringing Him nearer to
men's apprehensions and hearts by word and work. We have to bring men to
God by entreaty, and by showing the path which leads to Him. That
priestly service for men is in effect identical with the merciful
warfare which we have to wage in the world. The Church militant is an
army of priests. Its warfare is its sacerdotal function. It fights for
Christ when it opposes the message of His grace and the power of His
blood to its own and the world's sins--and when it intercedes in the
secret place for the coming of His kingdom.

Does not this metaphor teach us also, what is to be our defence and our
weapon in this warfare? Not with garments rolled in blood, nor with
brazen armour do they go forth, who follow Him that conquered by dying.
Their uniform is the beauties of holiness, 'the fine linen clean and
white, which is the righteousness of saints.' Many great thoughts lie in
such words, which I must pass over. But this one thing is obvious--that
the great power which we Christian men are to wield in our loving
warfare is--_character_. Purity of heart and life, transparent simple
goodness, manifest in men's sight--these will arm us against dangers,
and these will bring our brethren glad captives to our Lord. We serve
Him best, and advance His kingdom most, when the habit of our souls is
that righteousness with which He invests our nakedness. Be like your
Lord, and as His soldiers you will conquer, and as His priests you will
win some to His love and fear. Nothing else will avail without that.
Without that dress no man finds a place in the ranks.

The image suggests, too, the spirit in which our priestly warfare is to
be waged. The one metaphor brings with it thoughts of strenuous effort,
of discipline, of sworn consecration to a cause. The other brings with
it thoughts of gentleness and sympathy and tenderness, of still waiting
at the shrine, of communion with Him who dwells between the Cherubim.
Whilst our work demands all the courage and tension of every power which
the one image presents, it is to be sedulously guarded from any tinge of
wrath or heat of passion, such as mingles with conflict, and is to be
prosecuted with all the pity and patience, the brotherly meekness of a
true priest. 'The wrath of men worketh not the righteousness of God.' If
we forget the one character in the other, we shall bring weakness into
our warfare, and pollution into our sacrifice. 'The servant of the Lord
must not strive.' We must not be animated by mere pugnacious desire to
advance our principles, nor let the heat of human eagerness give a false
fervour to our words and work. We cannot scold nor dragoon men to love
Jesus Christ. We cannot drive them into the fold with dogs and sticks.
We are to be gentle, long-suffering, not doing our work with passion and
self-will, but remembering that gentleness is mightiest, and that we
shall best 'adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour' when we go among men
with the light caught in the inner sanctuary still irradiating our
faces, and our hands full of blessings to bestow on our brethren. We are
to be soldier-priests, strong and gentle, like the ideal of those
knights of old who were both, and bore the cross on shield and helmet
and sword-hilt.

He, our Lord, is our pattern for both; and from Him we derive the
strength for each. He is the Captain of our salvation, and we fight
beneath His banner, and by His strength. He is a merciful and faithful
High Priest, and He consecrates His brethren to the service of the
sanctuary. To Him look for your example of heroism, of fortitude, of
self-forgetfulness. To Him look for your example of gentle patience and
dewy pity. Learn in Christ how possible it is to be strong and mild, to
blend in fullest harmony the perfection of all that is noble, lofty,
generous in the soldier's ardour of heroic devotion; and of all that is
calm, still, compassionate, tender in the priest's waiting before God
and mediation among men. And remember, that by faith only do we gain the
power of copying that blessed example, to be like which is to be
perfect--not to be like which is to fail wholly, and to prove that we
have no part in His sacrifice, nor any share in His victory.

III. The final point in this description must now engage us for a few
moments. The soldier-priests are as dew upon the earth.

'From the womb of the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth.' These
words are often misunderstood, and taken to be a description of the
fresh, youthful energy attributed by the psalm to the Priest-King of
this nation of soldier-priests. The misunderstanding, I suppose, has led
to the common phrase, 'The dew of one's youth.' But the reference of the
expression is to the army, not to its leader. 'Youth' here is a
collective noun, equivalent to 'young men.' The host of His
soldier-subjects is described as a band of young warriors whom He leads,
in their fresh strength and countless numbers and gleaming beauty, like
the dew of the morning.

There are two points in this last clause which may occupy us for a few
moments--that picture of the army as a band of youthful warriors; and
that lovely emblem of the dew as applied to Christ's servants.

As to the former--there are many other words of Scripture which carry
the same thought, that he who has fellowship with God, and lives in the
constant reception of the supernatural life and grace which come from
Jesus Christ, possesses the secret of perpetual youth. The world ages
us, time and physical changes tell on us all, and the strength which
belongs to the life of nature ebbs away, but the life eternal is subject
to no laws of decay and owes nothing to the external world. So we may be
ever young in heart and spirit. It is possible for a man to carry the
freshness, the buoyancy, the elastic cheerfulness, the joyful hope of
his earliest days, right on through the monotony of middle-aged
maturity, and even into old age, unshadowed by the lonely reflection of
the tombs which the setting sun casts over the path. It is possible for
us to get younger as we get older, because we drink more full draughts
of the fountain of life: and so to have to say at the last, 'Thou hast
kept the good wine until now.' 'Even the youths shall faint and be
weary, and the young men shall utterly fall. But they that wait upon the
Lord shall renew their strength.' If we live near Christ, and draw our
life from Him, then we may blend the hopes of youth with the experience
and memory of age; be at once calm and  joyous, wise and strong,
preserving the blessedness of each stage of life into that which
follows, and thus at last possessing the sweetness and the good of all
at once. We may not only bear fruit in old age, but have blossoms,
fruit, and flowers--the varying product and adornment of every stage of
life, united in our characters.

Then, with regard to the other point in this final clause--that emblem
of the dew leads to many considerations upon which I can but
inadequately touch.

It comes into view here, I suppose, mainly for the sake of its effect
upon the earth. It is as a symbol of the refreshing which a weary world
will receive from the conquests and presence of the King and His host,
that the latter are likened to the glittering morning dew. Another
prophetic Scripture gives us the same emblem when it speaks of Israel
being 'in the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord.' Such ought
to be the effect of our presence. We are meant to gladden, to adorn, to
refresh, this parched, prosaic world, with a freshness brought from the
chambers of the sunrise.

It is worth while to notice how we may discern a sequence of thought in
these successive features of description in our text. It began with that
inmost spirit and motive of the Christian life, the submission of will
and consecration of self to Christ. It advanced to the function and
character of His servants in the world. And now it deals finally with
the influence which they are to exert by this their soldier-like
obedience and priestly ministration.

There is progress of thought, too, in another way. We began with a
symbol that had in it something almost harsh and stern. We advanced to
one in which there was a predominance of gentle and gracious thoughts
and images. And now all that was severe, and all that reminded either of
opposition or of effort, has melted away into this sweet emblem. Instead
of the 'confused noise' of the battle of the warrior, we have the
silence of the dawn, and the noiseless falling of the dew amid the
solitudes of the wildernesses, or the recesses of the mountains. So the
highest thought of our Christian influence, is that it comes with silent
footfall and refreshes men's souls, like His, who will come down as
'rain upon the mown grass,' who will not strive nor cry, but in gentle
omnipotence and meek persistence of love, 'will not fail nor be
discouraged till He have set judgment in the earth.'

Remember other symbols by which the same general thought of Christian
influence upon the world is set forth with very remarkable variation.
'Ye are the light of the world.'--'Ye are the salt of the earth.' The
light guides and gladdens; the salt preserves and purifies; the dew
freshens and fertilises; the light, conspicuous; the salt, working
concealed; and the dew, visible like the former, but yet unobtrusive and
operating silently like the latter. Some of us had rather be light than
salt; prefer to be conspicuous rather than to diffuse a wholesome silent
influence around us. But these three types must all be blended, both in
regard to the manner of working, and in regard to the effects produced.
We shall refresh and beautify the world only in proportion as we save it
from its rottenness and corruption, and we shall do either only in
proportion as we bear abroad the name of Christ, in whom is 'life; and
the life is the light of men.'

Nor need we omit allusions to other associations connected with this
figure. The dew, formed in the silence of the darkness while men sleep,
falling as willingly on a bit of dead wood as anywhere, hanging its
pearls on every poor spike of grass, and dressing everything on which it
lies with strange beauty, each separate globule tiny and evanescent, but
each flashing back the light, and each a perfect sphere, feeble one by
one, but united, mighty to make the pastures of the wilderness
rejoice--so, created in silence by an unseen influence, weak when taken
singly, but strong in their myriads, glad to occupy the lowliest place,
and each 'bright with something of celestial light,' Christian men and
women are to be in the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord.

Brethren! that characteristic, like all else which is good, belongs to
us in proportion as we keep near to Christ Jesus, and are filled with
His fulness. All these emblems which have been occupying us now,
originally belonged to Him, and we receive from Him the grace that makes
us as He is in the world. He Himself is the Warrior King, the Captain of
the Lord's host, the true Joshua, whose last word ere His Cross was a
shout of victory, 'I have overcome the world'--whose promises from the
throne seven times crown the conqueror who overcomes as He overcame. He
makes us His soldiers and strengthens us for the war, if we live by
faith in Him. He Himself is the Priest--the only Eternal Priest of the
world--who wears on His head the mitre and the diadem, and bears in His
hand the sceptre and the censer; and He makes us priests, if faith in
His only sacrifice and all-prevalent intercession be in our souls. He is
the dew unto Israel--and only by intercourse with Him shall we be made
gentle and refreshing, silent blessings to all the weary and the parched
souls in the wilderness of the world.

Everything worth being or doing comes from Jesus Christ. Heroic courage;
then hold His hand, and He will strengthen your heart. Glad surrender;
then think of His sacrifice for us until ours to Him be our answering
gift. Priestly power; then let Him bring us nigh by His blood, that we
too may be able to have compassion on the ignorant and to draw them to
God. Dewy purity and freshness; then open your hearts for the reception
of His grace, for all the invigoration that we can impart to the world
is but the communication of that refreshing wherewith we ourselves are
refreshed of Christ. In every aspect of our relations to the world, we
draw all our fitness for all our offices from that Lord, who is and
gives everything that we can be or do. Then let us seek by humble faith
and habitual contact with Him and His truth, to have our emptiness
filled by His fulness, and our unfitness made ready for all service by
His all-sufficiency.

And let me close by reiterating what I have said already. There is a
twofold manner of subjection--the spurious and the real. The involuntary
is nought; the glad and cheerful surrender alone is counted submission.
This psalm shows us Christ surrounded by His friends who are glad to
obey. But it also shows us Christ ruling in the midst of His enemies.
They cannot help obeying; His dominion is established over them, but
they do not wish to have Him to reign over them, and therefore they are
enemies--even though they be subjects. Which is it with you, my brother?
Do you serve because you love--and love because He died for you? or do
you serve because you must? Then, remember, constrained service is no
service; and subjects without loyalty are rebel traitors. Our psalm
shows us Christ gathering His army in array. He is calling each of us to
a place there, in this day of His power, and day of His grace. Take heed
lest the day of His power should for you darken into that other day of
which this psalm speaks--the day of His wrath, when He strikes through
kings, and bruises the head over many countries. Put your trust in that
Saviour, my friend! cleave to that Sacrifice, then you will not be
amongst those whom He treads down in His march to victory, but one of
that happy band of priestly warriors who follow Him as He goes forth
'conquering and to conquer.'




GOD AND THE GODLY


    'His righteousness endureth for ever.'--PSALMS cxi. 3; cxii. 3.

These two psalms are obviously intended as a pair. They are identical in
number of verses and in structure, both being acrostic, that is to say,
the first clause of each commences with the first letter of the Hebrew
alphabet, the second clause with the second, and so on. The general idea
that runs through them is the likeness of the godly man to God. That
resemblance comes very markedly to the surface at several points in the
psalms, and pervades them traceably even where it is less conspicuous.
The two corresponding clauses which I have read as my text are the first
salient instances of it. But I propose to deal not only with them, but
with a couple of others which occur in the course of the psalms, and
will appear as I proceed.

The general underlying thought is a noteworthy one. The worshipper is to
be like his God. So it is in idolatry; so it should be with us. Worship
is, or should be, adoration of and yearning after the highest
conceivable good. Such an attitude must necessarily lead to imitation,
and be crowned by resemblance. Love makes like, and they who worship God
are bound to, and certainly will, in proportion to the ardour and
sincerity of their devotion, grow like Him whom they adore. So I desire
to look with you at the instances of this resemblance or parallelism
which the Psalmist emphasises.

I. The first of them is that in the clauses which I have read as our
starting-point, viz. God and the godly are alike in enduring
righteousness.

That seems a bold thing to say, especially when we remember how lofty
and transcendent were the Old Testament conceptions of the righteousness
of God. But, lofty as these were, this Psalmist lifts an unpresumptuous
eye to the heavens, and having said of Him who dwells there, 'His
righteousness endureth for ever,' is not afraid to turn to the humble
worshipper on this low earth, and declare the same thing of him. Our
finite, frail, feeble lives may be really conformed to the image of the
heavenly. The dewdrop with its little rainbow has a miniature of the
great arch that spans the earth and rises into the high heavens. And so,
though there are differences, deep and impassable, between anything that
can be called creatural righteousness, and that which bears the same
name in the heavens, the fact that it does bear the same name is a
guarantee to us that there is an essential resemblance between the
righteousness of God in its lustrous perfectness, and the righteousness
of His child in its imperfect effort.

But how can we venture to run any kind of parallelism between the
eternity of the one and that of the other? God's righteousness we can
understand as enduring for ever, because it is inseparable from His very
being; because it is manifested unbrokenly in all the works that for
ever pour out from that central Source, and because it and its doings
stand fast and unshaken amidst the passage of ages, and the 'wreck of
matter and the crash of worlds.' But may there not be, if not an
eternity, yet a perpetuity, in our reflection of the divine
righteousness which shall serve to vindicate the application of the same
mighty word to both? Is it not possible that, unbroken amidst the stress
of temptation, and running on without interruptions, there may be in our
hearts and in our lives conformity to the divine will? And is it not
possible that the transiencies of our earthly doings may be sublimed
into perpetuity if there is in them the preserving salt of
righteousness?

    'The actions of the just
  Smell sweet, and blossom in the dust.'

And may it not be, too, that though this Psalmist may have had no clear
articulate doctrine of eternal life beyond, he may have felt, and
rightly felt, that there were things that were too fair to die, and that
it was inconceivable that a soul which had been, in some measure, tinged
with the righteousness of God could ever be altogether a prey to the law
of transiency and decay which seizes upon things material and corporeal?
That which is righteous is eternal, be it manifested in the acts of the
unchanging God or in the acts of a dying man, and when all else has
passed away, and the elements have melted with fervent heat, 'he that
doeth the will of God,' and the deeds which did it, 'shall abide for
ever.' 'His righteousness endureth for ever.'

Now, brethren! there are two ways in which we may look at this
parallelism of our text: the one is as containing a stringent
requirement; the other as holding forth a mighty hope. It contains a
stringent requirement. Our religion does not consist in assenting to any
creed. Our religion is not wholly to consist of devout emotions and
loving and joyous acts of communion and friendship with God. There must
be more than these; these things there must be. For if a man is to be
guided mainly by reason, there must, first of all, be creed; then there
must be corresponding emotions. But creed and emotions are both meant to
be forces which shall drive the wheels of life, and conduct is, after
all, the crown of religion and the test of godliness. They that hold
communion with God are bound to mould their lives into the likeness of
His. 'Little children, let no man deceive you,' and let not your own
hearts deceive you. You are not a Christian because you believe the
truths of the Gospel. You are not such a Christian as you ought to be,
if your religion is more manifest in loving trust than in practical
obedience which comes from trust. 'He that doeth righteousness is
righteous,' and he is to be righteous 'even as He is righteous.' If you
are God's, you will be like God. Apply the touchstone to your lives, and
test your Christianity by this simple and most stringent test.

But again, we may look at the thought as holding forth a great hope. I
do not wish to force upon Old Testament writers New Testament truth. It
would be an anachronism and an absurdity to make this Psalmist
responsible for anything like a clear evangelistic statement of the way
by which a man may be made righteous. That waited for coming days, and
eminently for Jesus Christ. But it would be quite as great a mistake to
eviscerate the words of their plain implications. And when they put side
by side the light and the reflection, God and the godly, it seems to me
to be doing violence to their meaning for the sake of trying to make
them mean less than they do, if we refuse to recognise that they have at
any rate an inkling of the thought that the Original and Pattern of
human righteousness was likewise the Source of it. This at least is
plain, that the Psalmist thought that 'the fear of the Lord' was not
only, as he calls it at the close of the former of the two psalms, 'the
beginning of wisdom,' but also the basis of goodness, for he begins his
description of the godly with it.

I believe that he felt, what is assuredly true, that no man, by his own
unaided effort, can ever work out for himself a righteousness which will
satisfy his own conscience, and that he must, first of all, be in touch
with God, in order to receive from Him that which he cannot create. Ah,
brethren! the 'fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness
of saints,' is woven in no earthly looms; and the lustrous light with
which it glistens is such as 'no fuller on earth can white' men's
characters into. Another Psalmist has sung of the man who can stand in
the holy place, 'He shall _receive_ the blessing from the Lord, even
righteousness from the God of his salvation,' and our psalms hint, if
they do not articulately declare, how that reception is possible for us,
when they set forth waiting upon God as the condition of being made like
Him. We translate the Psalmist's feeling after the higher truth which we
know, when we desire 'that we may be found in Him, not having our own
righteousness which is of the law, but that which is of God by faith.'
So much, then, for the first point of correspondence in these two
psalms.

II. God and the godly are alike in gracious compassion.

If you will turn to the two psalms for a moment, and look at the last
clauses of the two fourth verses, you will see how that thought is
brought out. In the former psalm we read, 'The Lord is gracious and full
of compassion': in the latter we find, 'he' (the upright man) 'is
gracious and full of compassion, and righteous.'

I need not trouble you with any remarks about certain difficulties that
lie in the rendering of that latter verse. Suffice it to say that they
are such as to make more emphatic the intentional resemblance between
the godly as there described, and God as described in the previous one.
Of both it is said 'gracious and full of compassion.'

Now that great truth of which I have been speaking, the divine
righteousness, is like white Alpine snow, sublime, but cold, awful and
repellent, when taken by itself. Our hearts need something more than a
righteous God if we are ever to worship and draw near. Just as the white
snow on the high peak needs to be flushed with the roseate hue of the
morning before it can become tender, and create longings, so the
righteousness of the great white Throne has to be tinged with the ruddy
heart-hue of gracious compassion if men are to be moved to adore and to
love. Each enhances the other. 'What God hath joined together,' in
Himself, 'let not man put asunder'; nor talk about the stern Deity of
the Old Testament, and pit Him against the compassionate Father of the
New. He is righteous, but the proclaimers of His righteousness in old
days never forgot to blend with the righteousness the mercy; and the
combination heightens the lustre of both attributes.

The same combination is absolutely needful in the copy, as is
emphatically set forth in our text by the addition of 'and righteous,'
in the case of the man. For whilst with God the tyro attributes do lie,
side by side, in perfect harmony, in us men there is always danger that
the one shall trench upon the territory of the other, and that he who
has cultivated the habit of looking upon sorrows and sins with
compassion and tenderness shall somewhat lose the power of looking at
them with righteousness. So our text, in regard to man, proclaims more
emphatically than it needs to do in regard to the perfect God, that ever
his highest beauty of compassion must be wedded to righteousness, and
ever his truest strength of righteousness must be softened with
compassion.

But beyond that, note how, wherever there is the loving and childlike
contemplation of God, there will be an analogy in our compassion, to His
perfectness. We are transformed by beholding. The sun strikes a poor
little pane of glass in a cottage miles away, and it flashes with some
likeness of the sun and casts a light across the plain. The man whose
face is turned Godwards will have beauty pass into his face, and all
that look upon him will see 'as it had been the countenance of an
angel.'

If we have, in any real and deep measure, received mercy we shall
reflect mercy. Remember the parable of the unmerciful debtor. The
servant that cast himself at his lord's feet, and got the acquittal of
his debt, and went out and gripped his fellow-servant by the throat,
leaving the marks of his fingernails on his windpipe, with his 'Pay me
that thou owest!' had all the pardon cancelled, and all the debt laid
upon his shoulders again. If we owe all our hope and peace to a
forgiving God, how can we make anything else the law of our lives than
that, having received mercy, we should show mercy? The test of your
being a forgiven man is your forgivingness. There is no getting away
from that plain principle, which modifies the declaration of the freedom
of God's full pardon.

But I would have you notice, further, as a very remarkable illustration
of this correspondence between the gracious and compassionate Lord and
His servant, that in the verses which follow respectively the two about
which I am now speaking, the same idea is wrought out in another shape.
In the psalm dealing with the divine character and works we read,
immediately after the declaration that He is 'gracious and full of
compassion,' this--'He hath given meat to them that fear Him'; and the
corresponding clause in the second of our psalms is followed by this--to
translate accurately--'It is well with the man who showeth favour and
lendeth.' So man's open-handedness in regard to money is put down side
by side with God's open-handedness in regard to giving meat unto them
that fear Him. And again, in the ninth verse of each psalm, we have the
same thought set forth in another fashion. 'He sent redemption unto His
people,' says the one; 'He hath dispersed, He hath given to the poor,'
says the other. That is to say, our paltry giving may be paralleled with
the unspeakable gifts which God has bestowed, if they come from a love
which is like His. It does not matter though they are so small and His
are so great; there is a resemblance. The tiniest crystal may be like
the hugest. God gives to us the possession of things in order that we
may enjoy the luxury, which is one of the elements in the blessedness of
the blessed God, who is blessed because He is the giving God, the luxury
of giving. Poor though our bestowments must be, they are not unlike His.
The little burn amongst the heather carves its tiny bed, and impels its
baby ripples by the same laws which roll the waters of the Amazon, and
every fall that it makes over a shelf of rock a foot high is a miniature
Niagara.

III. So, lastly, we have still another point, not so much of resemblance
as of correspondence, in the firmness of God's utterances and of the
godly heart.

In the first of our two psalms we read, in the seventh verse, 'All His
commandments are _sure_.' In the second we read, in the corresponding
verse, 'his heart is _fixed_, trusting in the Lord.' The former psalm
goes on, 'His commandments _stand fast_ for ever and ever; and the next
psalm, in the corresponding verse, says 'his heart is _established_,'
the original employing the same word in both cases, which in our version
is rendered, in the one place, 'stand fast,' and in the other
'established.' So that the Psalmist is thinking of a correspondence
between the stability of God's utterances and the stability of the heart
that clasps them in faith.

His commandments are not only precepts which enjoin duty. All which God
says is law, whether it be directly in the nature of guiding precept, or
whether it be in the nature of revealing truth, or whether it be in the
nature of promise. It is sure, reliable, utterly trustworthy. We may be
certain that it will direct us aright, that it will reveal to us
absolute truth, that it will hold forth no flattering and false
promises. And it is 'established.' The one fixed point amidst the whirl
of things is the uttered will of God.

Therefore, the heart that builds there builds safely. And there should
be a correspondence, whether there is or no, between the faithfulness of
the Speaker and the faith of the hearer. A man who is doubtful about the
solidity of the parapet which keeps him from toppling over into the
abyss will lean gingerly upon it, until he has found out that it is
firm. The man that knows how strong is the stay on which he rests ought
to lean hard upon it. Lean hard upon God, put all your weight upon Him.
You cannot put too much, you cannot lean too hard. The harder the
better; the better He is pleased, and the more He breathes support and
strength into us. And, brethren! if thus we build an established faith
on that sure foundation, and match the unchangeableness of God in Christ
with the constancy of our faith in Him, then, 'He that believeth shall
never make haste,' and as my psalm says, 'He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings; his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord.'

The upshot of the whole matter is--we cannot work out for ourselves a
righteousness that will satisfy our own consciences, nor secure for
ourselves a strength that will give peace to our hearts, and stability
to our lives, by any other means than by cleaving fast to God revealed
in Jesus Christ.

We have borne the image of the earthly long enough; let us open our
hearts to God in Christ. Let us yield ourselves to Him; let us gaze upon
Him with fixed eyes of love, and labour to make our own what He bestows
upon us. Thus living near Him, we shall be bathed in His light, and show
forth something of His beauty. Godliness is God-likeness. It is of no
use to say that we are God's children if we have none of the family
likeness. 'If ye were Abraham's sons ye would do the works of Abraham,'
said Christ to the Jews. If we are God's sons we shall do the works of
God. 'Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father in heaven is perfect;' be
ye merciful as your Father is merciful. And if thus we here, dwelling
with Christ, are being conformed to the image of His Son, we shall one
day 'be satisfied' when we 'awake in His likeness.'




EXPERIENCE, RESOLVE, AND HOPE


    'Thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
    my feet from falling. 9. I will walk before the Lord in the land of
    the living.'--PSALM cxvi. 8, 9.

This is a quotation from an earlier psalm, with variations which are
interesting, whether we suppose that the Psalmist was quoting from
memory and made them unconsciously, or whether, as is more probable, he
did so, deliberately and for a purpose. The variations are these. The
words in the original psalm (lvi.) according to the Revised Version,
read, 'Thou hast delivered my soul from death; hast Thou not delivered
my feet from falling?' The writer of this psalm felt that that did not
say all, so he put in another clause: 'Thou hast delivered my soul from
death, _mine eyes from tears_, and my feet from falling.' It is not
enough to keep a man alive and upright. God will wipe away his tears;
and will often keep him from shedding them.

Then the original psalm goes on: 'Thou hast delivered ... my feet from
falling, that I may walk before God,' but the later Psalmist goes a step
further than his original. The first singer had seen what it is always a
blessing to see--what God meant by all the varieties of His providences,
viz. that the recipient might walk as in His presence; but the later
poet not only discerns, but accords with, God's purpose, yields himself
to the divine intention, and instead of simply saying 'That was what God
meant,' he says, 'That is what I am going to do--I will walk before the
Lord.' There is still another variation which, however, does not alter
the sense. The original psalm says, 'in the light of the living'; the
other uses another word, a little more intelligible, perhaps, to an
ordinary reader, and says, 'in the land of the living.'

Now, noting these significant variations, I would draw attention to this
expression of the Psalmist's acceptance of the divine purpose, and the
vision that it gave him of his future. It is hard to say whether he
means 'I will walk' or 'I shall walk'; whether he is expressing a hope
or giving utterance to a fixed resolve. I think there is an element of
both in the words. At all events, I find in them three things: a sure
anticipation, a firm resolve, and a far-reaching hope.

I. A sure anticipation.

'Thou hast'--'I will.' The past is for this Psalmist a mirror in which
he sees reflected the approaching form of the veiled future. God's past
is the guarantee of God's future. Godless people, who get wearied of the
monotony of life, begin to say before they have gone far in it, 'Oh!
there is nothing new. That which is to be hath already been. It is just
one continual repetition of the same sort of thing.' But that is only
partially true. There is only one man in the world who can truly and
certainly say, 'To-morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant';
and that is the man who says; 'He delivered my soul from death, mine
eyes from tears, and my feet from falling.' For the continuance of
things here is not guaranteed to us by the fact that they have lasted
for so long. Why, nobody knows whether the sun will rise to-morrow or
not--whether there will be a to-morrow or not. There will come one day
when the sun sets for the last time. What people call the 'uniformity of
nature' affords no ground on which to build certainty as to the future.
We all do it, but we have no right to do it. But when we bring God into
the future, that makes all the difference. His past is the guarantee and
the revelation of His future, and every person that grasps Him in faith
has the right to pray with assurance, 'Thou hast been my Helper; leave
me not, neither forsake me,' and to declare triumphantly, 'The Lord will
perfect that which concerneth me.'

So, brethren! all the past, as it is recorded for us in Scripture, lives
and throbs with faithful promises for us to-day. Though the methods of
the manifestation may alter, the essence of it remains the same. As one
of the Apostles says, 'Whatsoever things were written aforetime were
written for our advantage, that we, through the encouragement ministered
by the Scriptures, might have hope'; and looking forward into all the
future, might discern its wastes unknown, all lighted up by the one glad
certainty that He that is 'the same yesterday and to-day and for ever'
will be there, and we shall be beside Him. What God has done, He will
keep on doing. 'The Lord hath delivered mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling,' and therefore 'I shall walk before the Lord in the
land of the living.'

Our experience yields fuel for our faith. We have been near death many a
time; we have never fallen into it. Our eyes have been wet many a time;
God has dried them. Our feet have been ready to fall many a time, and if
at the moment when we were tottering on the edge of the precipice, we
have cried to Him and said, 'My feet have well-nigh slipped,' a strong
Hand has been held out to us. 'The Lord upholdeth them that are in the
act of falling,' as the old psalm, rightly rendered, has it, and if we
have pushed aside His hand, and gone down, then the next clause of the
same verse applies, for He 'raiseth up those that have fallen,' and are
lying prostrate.

As it has been, so it will be. 'Thou hast been with me in six troubles,'
therefore 'in the seventh Thou wilt not forsake me.' We can wear out
men; and we cannot argue that because a man has had long patience with
some unworthy recipient of his goodness, his patience will never give
out. But it is safe to argue thus about God. 'I say not unto thee, until
seven times, but until seventy times seven'--the two perfect numbers
multiplied into each other, and the product again multiplied by one of
them, to give the measureless measure of the exhaustless divine love,
and the sure guarantee that to His servant 'to-morrow shall be as this
day, and much more abundant.'

Then, again, if we put a little different meaning into the Psalmist's
words (and as I said, I think both meanings lie in them), they suggest
that he did not look forward into the future only with expectation, but
that along with expectation there was resolve. So we have here

II. A firm resolve.

'I will walk before the Lord.' What does 'walking before the Lord' mean?
There are two or three expressions very like each other, yet entirely
different from each other, in the Old and in the New Testament, about
this matter. We read of 'walking with God,' and of 'walking before God,'
and of 'walking after God.' And whilst there is much that is common to
all the expressions, they look at the same idea from different angles.
'Walking with God,' communion, fellowship, and companionship are implied
there. 'Walking after God,' guidance, direction, and example, and our
poor imitation and obedience, are most conspicuous there. And 'walking
before God' means, I suppose, mainly, feeling always that we are in His
presence, and have the light of His face, and the glance of His
all-seeing eye, falling upon us. 'If I take the wings of the morning,
and fly into the uttermost parts of the sea, Thou art there.' 'Thou art
acquainted with all my ways, search me, O God!' That is walking before
God. To put it into colder words, it means the habitual--I do not say
unbroken, but habitual--effort to feel in our conscious hearts that we
are in His sight; not only that we are with Him, but that we are 'naked
and open to the eyes of Him with whom we have to do.' And that is to be
the result, says our psalm, as it is the intention, of all that God has
been doing with us in His merciful providence, in His quickening,
sustaining, and comforting influences in the past. He sent all these
varying conditions, kept the psalmist alive, kept him from weeping, or
dried his tears, kept him from falling, with the intention that he
should be continually blessed in the continuous sunshine of God's
presence, and should open out his heart in it and for it, like a flower
when the sunbeams strike it. Oh! how different life would look if we
habitually took hold of all its incidents by that handle, and thought
about them, not as we are accustomed to do, according to whether they
tended to make us glad or sorry, to disappoint or fulfil our hopes and
purposes, but looked upon them all as stages in our education, and as
intended, if I might so say, to force us, when the tempests blow, close
up against God; and when the sunshine came, to woo us to His side. Would
not all life change its aspect if we carried that thought right into it,
and did not only keep it for Sundays, or for the crises of our lives,
but looked at all the trifles as so many magnets brought into action by
Him to attract us to Himself? Dear brother, it is not enough to
recognise God's purpose, we must fall in with it, accept the intention,
and co-operate with God in fulfilling it. It is a matter of purity and
of piety, to say, 'Thou hast delivered my soul from death, that I may
walk before Thee.'

But there has to be something more. There have to be a firm resolve, and
effort without which the firmest resolve will all come to nothing, and
be one more paving-stone for the road that is 'paved with good
intentions.' That firm resolve finds utterance in the not vain vow, 'I
will'--in spite of all opposition and difficulties--'I will walk before
the Lord,' and keep ever bright in my mind the thought, 'Thou God seest
me.'

Ay! and just in the measure in which we do so shall we have joy. In some
of those inhuman prisons where they go in for solitary confinement,
there is a little hole somewhere in the wall--the prisoner does not know
where--at which at any moment in the four-and-twenty hours the eye of
the gaoler may be, and they say that the thought of that unseen eye,
glaring in upon the felons, drives some of them half mad. The thought
that poor Hagar found to be her only comfort in the wilderness--and so
christened the well after it--'Thou God seest me,' must be the source of
our purest joy; or it must be a ghastly dread.  When He comes at last,
some men will lift up their faces to the sunshine and have their faces
irradiated by the light; and some will call on the rocks and the hills
to cover them from His face, and prefer rather to be crushed than to be
blasted by the brightness of His countenance. If we are right with God,
then the gladdest of thoughts is, 'Thou knowest me altogether, and Thou
hast beset me behind and before.' If we are right with God, 'Thou hast
laid Thine hand upon me' will mean for us support and blessing. If we
are wrong, it will mean a weight that crushes to the earth.

And if we are right with Him, that same thought brings with it security
and companionship. Ah! we do not need ever to say 'I am alone' if we are
walking before God. It brings with it, of course, an armour against
temptation. What mean, lustful, worldly seduction has any power when a
man falls back on the thought, 'God sees me, and God is with me'? Do you
remember the very first instance in Scripture of the use of this phrase?
The Lord said unto Abraham, 'Walk before Me, and be thou perfect.' That
was not only a commandment, but it was a promise, and we might as truly,
for the sense of the passage, read, 'Walk before Me, and thou shalt be
perfect.' That thought of the present God draws the teeth of all raging
lions, and takes the stings out of all serpents, and paralyses and
reduces to absolute nothingness every temptation. Clasp God's hand, and
you will not fall.

III. There is lastly here, a far-reaching hope.

I do not know whether the Psalmist had any notion of any land of the
living except the land of Earth, where men pass their natural lives. I
almost think that both he and his brother, whose words he was imitating,
had some glimpse of a future life of closer union, when eyes should no
more weep nor feet fall. At any rate, you and I cannot help reading that
hope into his words. When we read, 'I will walk before the Lord in the
land of the living,' we cannot but think of the true and perfect
deliverance, when it shall be said, with a depth and a fulness of
meaning with which it is never said here, 'Thou hast delivered my soul
from death,' and the black dread that towered so high, and closed the
vista of all human expectation of the future, is now away back in the
past, hull-down on the horizon as they say about ships scarcely visible,
and no more to be feared. We cannot but think of the perfect deliverance
of 'mine eyes from tears,' when 'God shall wipe away the tears from off
all faces, and the rebuke of His people from off all the earth.' We
cannot but think of the perfect deliverance of 'my feet from falling'
when the redeemed of the Lord shall stand firm, and walk at liberty on
the golden pavements, and no more dread the stumbling-blocks of earth.
We cannot but think of the perfect presence of God, the perfect
consciousness that we are near Him, when He shall 'present us faultless
before the presence of His glory with exceeding joy.' We cannot but
think of the perfect activity of that future state when we 'shall walk
with Him in white,' and 'follow the Lamb whithersoever He goeth.' And
one guarantee for all that far-reaching hope is in the tiny experiences
of the present; for He who hath delivered our souls from death, our eyes
from tears, and our feet from falling, is not going to expose Himself to
