approvers. In those countries where human knowledge has made some
progress; where, besides, a certain freedom of thinking is enjoyed, may
easily be found a great number of deicolists, theists, or incredulous
beings, who, contented with having trampled under foot the grosser
prejudices of the illiterate, have not dared to go back to the
source--to cite the more subtle systems before the tribunal of reason.
If these thinkers did not stop on the road, reflection would quickly
prove to them that those systems which they have not the fortitude
to examine, are equally injurious to sound ratiocination, fully
as revolting to good sense, quite as repugnant to the evidence
of experience, as any of those doctrines, mysteries, fables, or
superstitious customs, of which they have already acknowledged the
futility; they would feel, as we have already proved, that all these
things are nothing more than the necessary consequences of those
primitive errors which man has indulged for so many ages in succession;
that in admitting these errors, they no longer have any rational cause
to reject the deductions which the imagination has drawn from them. A
little attention would distinctly shew them, that it is precisely these
errors that are the true cause of all the evils of society; that those
endless disputes, those sanguinary quarrels, to which superstition and
the spirit of party every instant give birth, are the inevitable effects
of the importance they attach to errors which possess all the means of
distraction, that scarcely ever fail to put the mind of man into a state
of combustion. In short, nothing is more easy than to convince ourselves
that imaginary systems, not reducible to comprehension, which are always
painted under terrific aspects, must act upon the imagination in a
very lively manner, must sooner or later produce disputes--engender
enthusiasm--give birth to fanaticism--end in delirium.

Many persons acknowledge, that the extravagances to which superstition
lends activity, are real evils; many complain of the abuse of
superstition, but there are very few who feel that this abuse, together
with the evils, are the necessary consequences of the fundamental
principles of all superstition; which are founded upon the most grievous
notions, which rest themselves on the most tormenting opinions. We
daily see persons undeceived upon superstitious ideas, who nevertheless
pretend that this superstition "is salutary for the people;" that
without its supernatural magic, they could not be kept within due
bounds; in other words, could not be made the voluntary slaves of the
priest. But, to reason thus, is it not to say, poison is beneficial to
mankind, that therefore it is proper to poison them, to prevent them
from making an improper use of their power? Is it not in fact to pretend
it is advantageous to render them absurd; that it is a profitable course
to make them extravagant; wholesome to give them an irrational bias;
that they have need of hobgoblins to blind them; require the most
incomprehensible systems to make them giddy; that it is imperative
to submit them either to impostors or to fanatics, who will avail
themselves of their follies to disturb the repose of the world? Again,
is it an ascertained fact, does experience warrant the conclusion, that
superstition has a useful influence over the morals of the people? It
appears much more evident, is much better borne out by observation,
falls more in with the evidence of the senses, that it enslaves them
without rendering them better; that it constitutes an herd of ignorant
beings, whom panic terrors keep under the yoke of their task-masters;
whom their useless fears render the wretched instruments of towering
ambition--of rapacious tyrants; of the subtle craft of designing
priests: that it forms stupid slaves, who are acquainted with no other
virtue, save a blind submission to the most futile customs, to which
they attach a much more substantive value than to the actual virtues
springing out of the duties of morality; or issuing from the social
compact which has never been made known to them. If by any chance,
superstition does restrain some few individuals, it has no effect on
the greater number, who suffer themselves to be hurried along by the
epidemical vices with which they are infected: they are placed by it
upon the stream of corruption, and the tide either sweeps them away,
or else, swelling the waters, breaks through its feeble mounds, and
involves the whole in one undistinguished mass of ruin. It is in those
countries where superstition has the greatest power, that will always
be found the least morality. Virtue is incompatible with ignorance; it
cannot coalesce with superstition; it cannot exist with slavery: slaves
can only be kept in subordination by the fear of punishment; ignorant
children are for a moment intimidated by imaginary terrors. But freemen,
the children of truth, have no fears but of themselves; are neither to
be lulled into submission by visionary duties, nor coerced by fanciful
systems; they yield ready obedience to the evident demonstrations of
virtue; are the faithful, the invulnerable supporters of solid systems;
cling with ardour to the dictates of reason; form impenetrable
ramparts round their legitimate sovereigns; and fix their thrones on an
immoveable basis, unknown to the theologian; that cannot be touched with
unhallowed hands; whose duration will be commensurate with the existence
of time itself. To form freemen, however, to have virtuous citizens,
it is necessary to enlighten them; it is incumbent to exhibit truth to
them; it is imperative to reason with them; it is indispensable to make
them feel their interests; it is paramount to learn them to respect
themselves; they must be instructed to fear shame; they must be excited
to have a just idea of honour; they must be made familiar with the value
of virtue, they must be shewn substantive motives for following its
lessons. How can these happy effects ever be expected from the polluted
fountains of superstition, whose waters do nothing more than degrade
mankind? Or how are they to be obtained from the ponderous, bulky yoke
of tyranny, which proposes nothing more to itself, than to vanquish them
by dividing them; to keep them in the most abject condition by means of
lascivious vices, and the most detestable crimes?

The false idea, which so many persons have of the utility of
superstition, which they, at least, judge to be calculated to restrain
the licentiousness of the illiterate, arise from the fatal prejudice
that it is a useful error; that truth may be dangerous. This principle
has complete efficacy to eternize the sorrows of the earth: whoever
shall have the requisite courage to examine these things, will without
hesitation acknowledge, that all the miseries of the human race are to
be ascribed to his errors; that of these, superstitious error must he
the most prejudicial, from the importance which is usually attached to
it; from the haughtiness with which it inspires sovereigns; from the
worthless condition which it prescribes to subjects; from the phrenzy
which it excites among the vulgar. We shall, therefore, be obliged to
conclude, that the superstitious errors of man, rendered sacred by time,
are exactly those which for the permanent interest of mankind, for the
well-being of society, for the security of the monarch himself,
demand the most complete destruction; that it is principally to their
annihilation, the efforts of a sound philosophy ought to be directed. It
is not to be feared, that this attempt will produce either disorders or
revolutions: the more freedom shall accompany the voice of truth, the
more convincing it will appear; although the more simple it shall
be, the less it will influence men, who are only smitten with the
marvellous; even those individuals who most sedulously seek after truth,
who pursue it with the greatest ardour, have frequently an irresistible
inclination, that urges them on, and incessantly disposes them to
reconcile error with its antipode. That great master of the art of
thinking, who holds forth to his disciples such able advice, says, with
abundant reason, "that there is nothing but a good and solid philosophy,
which can, like another Hercules, exterminate those monsters called
popular errors: it is that alone which can give freedom to the human
mind."

Here is, unquestionably, the true reason why atheism, as it is called,
of which hitherto the principles have not been sufficiently developed,
appears to alarm even those persons who are the most destitute of
prejudice. They find the interval too great between vulgar superstition
and an absolute renunciation of it; they imagine they take a wise medium
in compounding with error; they therefore reject the consequences, while
they admit the principle; they preserve the shadow and throw away the
substance, without foreseeing that, sooner or later, it must, by its
obstetric art, usher into the world, one after another, the same
follies which now fill the heads of bewildered human beings, lost in
the labyrinths of incomprehensible systems. The major part of the
incredulous, the greater number of reformers, do no more than prune a
cankered tree, to whose root they dare not apply the axe; they do
not perceive that this tree will in the end produce the same fruit.
Theology, or superstition, will always be an heap of combustible matter:
brooded in the imagination of mankind, it will always finish by causing
the most terrible explosions. As long as the sacerdotal order shall have
the privilege of infecting youth--of habituating their minds to tremble
before unmeaning words--of alarming nations with the most terrific
systems, so long will fanaticism be master of the human mind; imposture
will, at its pleasure, cast the apple of discord among the members of
the state. The most simple error, perpetually fed, unceasingly modified,
continually exaggerated by the imagination of man, will by degrees
assume a collossal figure, sufficiently powerful to upset every
institution; amply competent to the overthrow of empires. Theism is a
system at which the human mind cannot make a long sojourn; founded upon
error, it will, sooner or later, degenerate into the most absurd, the
most dangerous superstition.

Many incredulous beings, many theists, are to be met with in those
countries where freedom of opinion reigns; that is to say, where the
civil power has known how to balance superstition. But, above all,
atheists as they are termed, will be found in those nations where,
superstition, backed by the sovereign authority, most enforces the
ponderosity of its yoke; most impresses the volume of its severity;
imprudently abuses its unlimited power. Indeed, when in these kind of
countries, science, talents, the seeds of reflection, are not entirely
stifled, the greater part of the men who think, revolt at the crying
abuses of superstition; are ashamed of its multifarious follies; are
shocked at the corruption of its professors; scandalized at the tyranny
of its priests: are struck with horror at those massive chains which
it imposes on the credulous. Believing with great reason, that they can
never remove themselves too far from its savage principles, the system
that serves for the basis of such a creed, becomes as odious as the
superstition itself; they feel that terrific systems can only be
detailed by cruel ministers; these become detestable objects to every
enlightened, to every honest mind, in which either the love of equity,
or the sacred fire of freedom resides; to every one who is the advocate
of humanity--the indignant spurner of tyranny. Oppression gives a spring
to the soul; it obliges man to examine closely into the cause of his
sorrows; misfortune is a powerful incentive, that turns the mind to
the side of truth. How formidable a foe must not outraged reason be to
falsehood? It at least throws it into confusion, when it tears away its
mask; when it follows it into its last entrenchment; when it proves,
beyond contradiction, that _nothing is so dastardly as delusion
detected, or tyrannic power held at bay._





CHAP. XIII.

_Of the motives which lead to what is falsely called Atheism.--Can this
System be dangerous?--Can it be embraced by the Illiterate?_


The reflections, as well as the facts which have preceded, will furnish
a reply to those who inquire what interest man has in not admitting
unintelligible systems? The tyrannies, the persecutions, the numberless
outrages committed under these systems; the stupidity, the slavery,
into which their ministers almost every where plunge the people; the
sanguinary disputes to which they give birth; the multitude of unhappy
beings with which their fatal notions fill the world; are surely
abundantly sufficient to create the most powerful, the most interesting
motives, to determine all sensible men, who possess the faculty of
thought, to examine into the authenticity of doctrines, which cause so
many serious evils to the inhabitants of the earth.

A theist, very estimable for his talents, asks, "if there can be any
other cause than an evil disposition, which can make men atheists?" I
reply to him, yes, there are other causes. There is the desire, a very
laudable one, of having a knowledge of interesting truths; there is the
powerful interest of knowing what opinions we ought to hold upon the
object which is announced to us as the most important; there is the fear
of deceiving ourselves upon systems which are occupied with the opinions
of mankind, which do not permit he should deceive himself respecting
them with impunity. But when these motives, these causes, should not
subsist, is not indignation, or if they will, an evil disposition, a
legitimate cause, a good and powerful motive, for closely examining the
pretensions, for searching into the rights of systems, in whose name so
many crimes are perpetrated? Can any man who feels, who thinks, who
has any elasticity in his soul, avoid being incensed against austere
theories, which are visibly the pretext, undeniably the source, of all
those evils, which on every side assail the human race? Are they not
these fatal systems which are at once the cause and the ostensible
reason of that iron yoke that oppresses mankind; of that wretched
slavery in which he lives; of that blindness which hides from him
his happiness; of that superstition, which disgraces him; of those
irrational customs which torment him; of those sanguinary quarrels which
divide him; of all the outrages which he experiences? Must not every
breast in which humanity is not extinguished, irritate itself against
that theoretical speculation, which in almost every country is made to
speak the language of capricious, inhuman, irrational tyrants?

To motives so natural, so substantive, we shall join those which are
still more urgent, more personal to every reflecting man: namely, that
benumbing terror, that incommodious fear, which must be unceasingly
nourished by the idea of capricious theories, which lay man open to the
most severe penalties, even for secret thoughts, over which he himself
has not any controul; that dreadful anxiety arising out of inexorable
systems, against which he may sin without even his own knowledge; of
morose doctrines, the measure of which he can never be certain of having
fulfilled; which so far from being equitable, make all the obligations
lay on one side; which with the most ample means of enforcing restraint,
freely permit evil, although they hold out the most excruciating
punishments for the delinquents? Does it not then, embrace the best
interests of humanity, become of the highest importance to the welfare
of mankind, of the greatest consequence to the quiet of his existence,
to verify the correctness of these systems? Can any thing be more
rational than to probe to the core these astounding theories? Is it
possible that any thing can be more just, than to inquire rigorously
into the rights, sedulously to examine the foundations, to try by
every known test, the stability of doctrines, that involve in their
operations, consequences of such colossal magnitude; that embrace, in
their dictatory mandates, matters of such high behest; that implicate
the eternal felicity of such countless millions in the vortex of their
action? Would it not be the height of folly to wear such a tremendous
yoke without inquiry; to let such overwhelming notions pass current
unauthenticated; to permit the soi-disant ministers of these terrific
systems to establish their power, without the most ample verification
of their patents of mission? Would it, I repeat, be at all wonderful, if
the frightful qualities of some of these systems, as exhibited by
their official expounders, whom the accredited functionaries of similar
systems, do not scruple, in the face of day, to brand as impostors,
should induce rational beings to drive them entirely from their hearts;
to shake off such an intolerable burden of misery; to even deny the
existence of such appalling doctrines, of such petrifying systems,
which the superstitious themselves, whilst paying them their homage,
frequently curse from the very bottom of their hearts?

The theist, however, will not fail to tell the atheist, as he calls him,
that these systems are not such as superstition paints them; that the
colours are coarse, too glaring, ill assorted, the perspective out of
all keeping; he will then exhibit his own picture, in which the tints
are certainly blended with more mellowness, the colouring of a more
pleasing hue, the whole more harmonious, but the distances equally
indistinct: the atheist, in reply, will say, that superstition itself,
with all the absurd prejudices, all the mischievous notions to which it
gives birth, are only corollaries drawn from the fallacious ideas, from
those obscure principles, which the deicolist himself indulges. That his
own incomprehensible system authorizes the incomprehensible absurdities,
the inconceivable mysteries, with which superstition abounds; that they
flow consecutively from his own premises; that when once the mind of
mortals is bewildered in the dark, inextricable mazes of an ill-directed
imagination, it will incessantly multiply its chimeras. To assure the
repose of mankind, fundamental errors must be annihilated; that he may
understand his true relations, be acquainted with his imperative duties,
primary delusions must be rectified; to procure him that serenity of
soul, without which there can be no substantive happiness, original
fallacies must be undermined. If the systems of the superstitious
be revolting, if their theories be gloomy, if their dogmas are
unintelligible, those of the theist will always be contradictory; will
prove fatal, when he shall be disposed to meditate upon them; will
become the source of illusions, with which, sooner or later, imposture
will not omit to abuse his credulity. Nature alone, with the truths she
discovers, is capable of lending to the human mind that firmness
which falsehood will never be able to shake; to the human heart that
self-possession, against which imposture will in vain direct its
attacks.

Let us again reply to those who unceasingly repeat that the interest of
the passions alone conduct man to what is termed atheism: that it is the
dread of future punishment that determines corrupt individuals to make
the most strenuous efforts to break up a system they have reason to
dread. We shall, without hesitation, agree that it is the interest of
man's passions which excites him to make inquiries; without interest,
no man is tempted to seek; without passion, no man will seek vigorously.
The question, then, to be examined, is, if the passions and interests,
which determine some thinkers to dive into the stability or the systems
held forth to their adoption, are or are not legitimate? These interests
have, already been exposed, from which it has been proved, that every
rational man finds in his inquietudes, in his fears, reasonable motives
to ascertain, whether or not it be necessary to pass his life in
perpetual dread; in never ceasing agonies? Will it be said, that an
unhappy being, unjustly condemned to groan in chains, has not the right
of being willing to render them asunder; to take some means to liberate
himself from his prison; to adopt some plan to escape from those
punishments, which every instant threaten him? Will it be pretended that
his passion for liberty has no legitimate foundation, that he does an
injury to the companions of his misery, in withdrawing himself from the
shafts of tyrannical infliction; or in furnishing, them also with means
to escape from its cruel strokes? Is, then, an incredulous man, any
thing more than one who has taken flight from the general prison,
in which despotic superstition detains nearly all mankind? Is not an
atheist, as he is called, who writes, one who has broken his fetters,
who supplies to those of his associates who have sufficient courage to
follow him, the means of setting themselves free from the terrors that
menace them? The priests unceasingly repeat that it is pride, vanity,
the desire of distinguishing himself from the generality of mankind,
that determines man to incredulity. In this they are like some of those
wealthy mortals, who treat all those as insolent who refuse to cringe
before them. Would not every rational man have a right to ask the
priest, where is thy superiority in matters of reasoning? What motives
can I have to submit my reason to thy delirium? On the other hand, way
it not be said to the hierarchy, that it is interest which makes them
priests; that it is interest which renders them theologians; that it is
for the interest of their passions, to inflate their pride, to gratify
their avarice, to minister to their ambition, &c. that they attach
themselves to systems, of which they alone reap the benefits? Whatever
it may be, the priesthood, contented with exercising their power over
the illiterate, ought to permit those men who do think, to be excused
from bending the knee before their vain, illusive idols.

We also agree, that frequently the corruption of morals, a life of
debauchery, a licentiousness of conduct, even levity of mind, may
conduct man to incredulity; but is it not possible to be a libertine, to
be irreligious, to make a parade of incredulity, without being on that
account an atheist? There is unquestionably a difference between those
who are led to renounce belief in unintelligible systems by dint of
reasoning, and those who reject or despise superstition, only because
they look upon it as a melancholy object, or an incommodious restraint.
Many persons, no doubt, renounce received prejudices, through vanity or
upon hearsay; these pretended strong minds have not examined any thing
for themselves; they act upon the authority of others, whom they suppose
to have weighed things more maturely. This kind of incredulous beings,
have not, then, any distinct ideas, any substantive opinions, and are
but little capacitated to reason for themselves; they are indeed hardly
in a state to follow the reasoning of others. They are irreligious in
the same manner as the majority of mankind are superstitious, that is to
say, by credulity like the people; or through interest like the
priest. A voluptuary devoted to his appetites; a debauchee drowned
in drunkenness; an ambitious mortal given up to his own schemes of
aggrandizement; an intriguer surrounded by his plots; a frivolous,
dissipated mortal, absorbed by his gewgaws, addicted to his puerile
pursuits, buried in his filthy enjoyments; a loose woman abandoned to
her irregular desires; a choice spirit of the day: are these I say,
personages, actually competent to form a sound judgment of superstition,
which they have never examined? Are they in a condition to maturely
weigh theories that require the utmost depth of thought? Have they the
capabilities to feel the force of a subtle argument; to compass the
whole of a system: to embrace the various ramifications of an extended
doctrine? If some feeble scintillations occasionally break in upon the
cimmerian darkness of their minds; if by any accident they discover
some faint glimmerings of truth amidst the tumult of their passions; if
occasionally a sudden calm, suspending, for a short season, the tempest
of their contending vices, permits the bandeau of their unruly desires
by which they are blinded, to drop for an instant from their hoodwinked
eyes, these leave on them only evanescent traces; scarcely sooner
received than obliterated. Corrupt men only attack the gods when they
conceive them to be the enemies to their vile passions. Arrian says,
"that when men imagine the gods are in opposition to their passions,
they abuse them, and overturn their altars." The Chinese, I believe, do
the same. The honest man makes war against systems which he finds are
inimical to virtue--injurious to his own happiness--baneful to that of
his fellow mortals--contradictory to the repose, fatal to the interests
of the human species. The bolder, therefore, the sentiments of the
honest atheist, the more strange his ideas, the more suspicious they
appear to other men, the more strictly he ought to observe his own
obligations; the more scrupulously he should perform his duties;
especially if he be not desirous that his morals shall calumniate his
system; which duly weighed, will make the necessity of sound ethics, the
certitude of morality, felt in all its force; but which every species of
superstition tends to render problematical, or to corrupt.

Whenever our will is moved by concealed and complicated motives, it is
extremely difficult to decide what determines it; a wicked man may be
conducted to incredulity or to scepticism by those motives which he dare
not avow, even to himself; in believing he seeks after truth, he
may form an illusion to his mind, only to follow the interest of his
passions; the fear of an avenging system will perhaps determine him to
deny their existence without examination; uniformly because he feels
them incommodious. Nevertheless, the passions sometimes happen to be
just; a great interest carries us on to examine things more minutely;
it may frequently make a discovery of the truth, even to him who seeks
after it the least, or who is only desirous to be lulled to sleep, who
is only solicitous to deceive himself. It is the same with a perverse
man who stumbles upon truth, as it is with him, who flying from an
imaginary danger, should encounter in his road a dangerous serpent,
which in his haste he should destroy; he does that by accident, without
design, which a man, less disturbed in his mind, would have done with
premeditated deliberation.

To judge properly of things, it is necessary to be disinterested; it
is requisite to have an enlightened mind, to have connected ideas to
compass a great system. It belongs, in fact, only to the honest man
to examine the proofs of systems--to scrutinize the principles of
superstition; it belongs only to the man acquainted with nature,
conversant with her ways, to embrace with intelligence the cause of the
SYSTEM OF NATURE. The wicked are incapable of judging with temper;
the ignorant are inadequate to reason with accuracy; the honest, the
virtuous, are alone competent judges in so weighty an affair. What do
I say? Is not the virtuous man, from thence in a condition to ardently
desire the existence of a system that remunerates the goodness of men?
If he renounces those advantages, which his virtue confers upon him
the right to hope, it is, undoubtedly, because he finds them imaginary.
Indeed, every man who reflects will quickly perceive, that for one timid
mortal, of whom these systems restrain the feeble passions, there are
millions whose voice they cannot curb, of whom, on the contrary, they
excite the fury; for one that they console, there are millions whom they
affright, whom they afflict; whom they make unhappy: in short, he finds,
that against one inconsistent enthusiast, which these systems, which
are thought so excellent, render happy, they carry discord, carnage,
wretchedness into vast countries; plunge whole nations into misery;
deluge them with tears.

However this may be, do not let us inquire into motives which may
determine a man to embrace a system; let us rather examine the system
itself; let us convince ourselves of its rectitude; if we shall find
that it is founded upon truth, we shall never, be able to esteem it
dangerous. It is always falsehood that is injurious to man; if error be
