-it may not be in words, but in feelings too deep for words,--"Yes; this 
is indeed noble, indeed Godlike, worthy of a God, and worthy therefore to 
be at once imitated and adored:" then, indeed, the Cross of Christ must 
have lost that miraculous power which it has possessed, for more than 
eighteen hundred years, as the highest "moral ideal" which ever was seen, 
or ever can be seen, by the reason and the heart of man.



SERMON XXXVIII.  THE LORD'S PRAYER



Windsor Castle, 1867.  Chester Cathedral, 1870.

Matthew vi. 9, 10.  "After this manner, therefore, pray ye, Our Father 
which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be 
done, on earth as it is in heaven."

Let us think for a while on these great words.  Let us remember that some 
day or other they will certainly be fulfilled.  Let us remember that 
Christ would not have bidden us use them, unless He intended that they 
should be fulfilled.  And let us remember, likewise, that we must help to 
fulfil them.  We need to be reminded of this from time to time, for we 
are all inclined to forget it.  We are inclined to forget that mankind 
has a Father in heaven, who is ruling, and guiding, and educating us, His 
human children, to


   "One far off divine event,
Toward which the whole creation moves."


We are apt to fancy that the world will always go on very much as it goes 
on now; that it will be guided, not by the will of God, but by the will 
of man; by man's craft; by man's ambition; by man's self-interest; by 
man's cravings after the luxuries, and even after the mere necessities of 
this life.  In a word, we are apt to fancy that man, not God, is the 
master of this earth on which we live, and that men have no king over 
them in heaven.

The Lord's Prayer tells us that men HAVE a king over them in heaven, and 
that that king is a Father likewise--a Father whose name will one day be 
hallowed above all names.  That the world will not always go on as it 
goes on now, but that the Father's kingdom will come.  That above the 
will of man, there is a will of God, which must be done, and therefore 
will be done some day.  In a word, the Lord's Prayer tells us that this 
world is under a Divine government; that the Lord, even Jesus Christ our 
Saviour, is King, be the people never so impatient.  That He sitteth 
between the cherubim, master of all the powers of nature, be the earth 
never so unquiet.  That His power loves justice.  That He has prepared 
equity.  That He has executed, and therefore will execute to the end, 
judgment and righteousness in the earth.  That Christ reigns in justice 
and in love.  That He has for those who disobey His laws the most 
terrible penalties; for those who obey them blessings such as eye hath 
not seen nor ear heard, nor hath it entered into the heart of man to 
conceive.  That He must reign till He has put all enemies under His feet 
and delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father.  That on that great 
day He will prove His royalty, and His Father's royalty, in the sight of 
all heaven and earth, and make every soul of man aware, in a fashion 
which none shall mistake, that He is Lord and King.  This is the message 
which the Lord's Prayer brings--a message of mingled fear and joy.

But a message of more joy than fear.  Else why does our Lord bid us pray 
for it that it may come to pass?--pray daily, before we even pray for our 
daily bread, or the forgiveness of our sins--that His Father's name may 
be hallowed, His Father's kingdom come, His Father's will be done?

He bids us pray for that because it will bring blessings.  Blessings to 
every soul of man who desires to be good and true.  Because it will 
satisfy every aspiration which has ever risen up from the heart of man 
after what is noble, what is generous, what is just, what is useful, what 
is pure.  Surely it is so.  Consider but these short words of my text, 
and think what the world would be like if they were fulfilled; what the 
next world will actually be like when they are fulfilled.

"Hallowed be thy name."  But what name?  The name of Father.  If that 
name were hallowed by men, there would be an end of all superstitions.  
The root of all superstitions, fanaticisms, and false religions is this--
that they do not hallow the name of Father.  They do not see that it is a 
Holy name, a beautiful and tender as well as an awful and venerable name.  
They think of fathers, like too many among themselves, proud, and 
arbitrary, selfish and cruel.  They say in their hearts, even such 
fathers as we are, such is God.  Therefore, they shrink from God, and 
turn from Him to idols, to the Virgin Mary, or Saints, or any other 
beings who can deliver them (as they fancy) out of the hands of their 
Father in heaven.  If men once learnt to hallow the name of Father, to 
think of a father as one who not only possessed power but felt love, who 
not only had rights which he would enforce, and issued commands which 
must be obeyed, but who felt yearning sympathy for his children's 
weakness, an active interest in their education, and was ready to labour 
for, to sacrifice himself for, his family--That would be truly to hallow 
the name of Father, and look on it as a holy thing, whether in heaven 
above or in earth beneath.

To hallow the Father's name would abolish all the superstition of the 
world.  And so the coming of the Father's kingdom would abolish all the 
misrule and anarchy of the world.  For the kingdom of God the Father is a 
kingdom of perfect order, perfect justice, perfect usefulness.  Surely 
the first consequences of that kingdom's coming would be, that every one 
would be exactly in his right place, and that every one would get his 
exact deserts.  That would indeed be the kingdom of God on earth.  The 
prospect of such a kingdom would be painful enough to those who were in 
their wrong place, to those who were undeserving.  All who were useless, 
taking wages either from man or from God, without doing any work in 
return, all these would have but too good reason to dread the coming of 
the kingdom of God.

But those who were trying earnestly to do their work, though amid many 
mistakes and failures, why should they dread the coming of the kingdom of 
God?  Why should they shrink from remembering that, though God's kingdom 
is not come in perfection and fulness, it is here already, and they are 
in it?  Why should they shrink from that thought?  They will find it full 
of comfort, of strength, and hope, if they will but hallow their Father's 
name, and remember the fact of all facts--that they have a Father in 
heaven.  There are thousands on earth, from the highest to the lowest, 
who can say honestly--to take the commonest instance--every parent can 
say it--"I have a heavy work to do, a heavy responsibility to fulfil.  
God knows I did not seek it, thrust myself into it; it was thrust upon 
me.  It came to me in the course of nature or of society, and 
circumstances over which I had no control.  In one word it was MY DUTY.  
But now that I have my duty to do, behold I cannot do it.  I try my best, 
but I fail.  I come short daily of my own low standard of duty.  How much 
more of God's perfect standard of it!  And the burden of responsibility, 
the regret for failure, is more than I can bear.

To such we may answer, hallow your Father's name, and be of good cheer.  
YOUR FATHER has given you your work.  Because He is a Father, He is 
surely educating you for your work.  Because He is a Father, He will 
surely set you no task which you are unable to fulfil.  Because He is a 
Father, He will help you to fulfil your task.  Your station and calling 
is His will; and because it is a Father's will it is a good will.

And the Judge of your work--He is no stern taskmaster, no unfeeling 
tyrant, but Jesus Christ, your Lord, who died for you on the Cross.  He 
knows what is in man.  He remembereth that we are but dust.  Else the 
spirit would fail before Him and the souls which He has made.  He can be 
touched with the feeling of our infirmities, seeing that He was tempted 
in all things like as we are, yet without sin.  He can sympathise 
utterly; He can make all just allowances; He will judge not by outward 
results, but by the inward will and desire.  He will judge not by the 
hearing of the ear, nor the seeing of the eye, as the shallow cruel world 
judges, but He will judge righteous judgment.  Trust your cause to Him, 
and trust yourself to Him.  Believe that if He can sympathise, He can 
also help; for from Him, as well as from His Father, proceeds the Holy 
Spirit, the Lord and giver of life, the spirit of wisdom and 
understanding, the spirit of power and might, the spirit of knowledge and 
the fear of the Lord, and He will inspire you to see your duty, and do 
your duty, and rejoice in your duty, in spite of weariness and failure, 
and all the burdens of the flesh and of the spirit.

"Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven."  If that were done, it 
would abolish all the vice of the world, and therefore the misery which 
springs from vice.  Ah, that God's will were but done on earth as it is 
in the material heaven overhead, in perfect order and obedience, as the 
stars roll in their courses, without rest, yet without haste; as all 
created things, even the most awful, fire and hail, snow and vapour, wind 
and storm, fulfil God's word, who hath made them sure for ever and ever, 
and given them a law which shall not be broken.  But above them; above 
the divine and wonderful order of the material universe, and the winds 
which are God's angels, and the flames of fire which are His messengers; 
above all, the prophets and apostles have caught sight of another divine 
and wonderful order of RATIONAL beings, of races, loftier and purer than 
man--angels and archangels, thrones and dominions, principalities and 
powers, fulfilling God's will in heaven as it is not alas! fulfilled on 
earth.

And beside them, beside the innumerable company of angels, are there not 
the spirits of just men made perfect, freed from the fetters of the gross 
animal body, and now somewhere in that boundless universe in which this 
earth is but a tiny speck, doing God's will, as they longed to do it on 
earth, with clearer light, fuller faith, deeper love, mightier powers of 
usefulness?  Ah, that we were like to them!  Ah, that we could perform 
the least part of our day's work on earth as it is performed by saints 
and angels for ever in heaven!  When we think of what this poor confused 
world is, and then what it might be, were God's will done therein as it 
is done in heaven; what it might be if even the little of God's will 
which we already know, the little of God's laws which are proved already 
to be certain, were carried out with any earnestness by the majority of 
mankind, or even of one civilized nation--when we think--to take the very 
lowest ground--of the health and wealth, the peace and happiness, which 
would cover this earth did men only do the will of God; then, if we have 
human hearts within us--if we care at all for the welfare of our fellow-
men--ought not this to be the prayer of all our prayers, and ought we not 
to welcome any event, however awful, which would bring mankind to reason 
and to virtue, and to God, and abolish the sin and misery of this unhappy 
world?

To abolish the superstition, the misrule, the vice, the misery of this 
world.  That is what Christ will do in the day when He has put all 
enemies under His feet.  That is what Christ has been doing, step by 
step, ever since that day when first He came to do His Father's will on 
earth in great humility.  Therefore, that is what we must do, each in our 
place and station, if we be indeed His subjects, fellow-workers with Him 
in the improvement of the human race, fellow-soldiers with Him in the 
battle against evil.

But what we wish to do for our fellow-creatures, we must do first for 
ourselves.  We can give them nothing save what God has already given us.  
We must become good before we can make them good, and wise before we can 
make them wise.  Let us pray, then, the Lord's Prayer in spirit and in 
truth.  Let us pray that we may hallow the name of God, our Father.  Let 
us pray that His kingdom may come in our own hearts.  Let us pray that we 
may do His will on earth as those whom we love and honour do it in 
heaven.  Let us keep that before us, day and night, as the aim and 
purpose of our lives.  Let us pray for forgiveness of our failures in 
that; for help to do that better as our years run on.  So we shall be 
ready for the day in which Christ shall have accomplished the number of 
His elect, and hastened His kingdom.  So we shall be found in that dread 
day, not on the side of evil, but of God; not on the side of darkness, 
anarchy, and vice, but on the side of light, of justice, and of virtue, 
which is the side of Christ and of God.  And so we, with all those that 
are departed in the faith of His holy name, shall have our perfect 
consummation and bliss in His eternal and everlasting glory, to which may 
He, of His great mercy, bring us all.  Amen.



SERMON XXXIX.  THE DISTRACTED MIND



Eversley. 1871.

Matthew vi. 34.  "Take no thought for the morrow, for the morrow shall 
take thought for the things of itself.  Sufficient unto the day is the 
evil thereof."

Scholars will tell you that the words "take no thought" do not exactly 
express our Lord's meaning in this text.  That they should rather stand, 
"Be not anxious about to-morrow."  And doubtless they are right on the 
whole.  But the truth is, that we have no word in English which exactly 
expresses the Greek word which St Matthew uses in his gospel, and which 
we are bound to believe exactly expresses our Lord's meaning, in whatever 
language He spoke.  The nearest English word, I believe, is--distracted.  
Be ye not distracted about to-morrow.  I do not mean the vulgar sense of 
the word--which is losing one's senses.  But the old and true sense, 
which is still used by those who speak good English.

To distract, means literally to pull a thing two different ways--even to 
pull it asunder.  We speak of distracting a man's attention, when we call 
him off from looking at one thing to make him look at something else, and 
we call anything which interrupts us in our business, or puts a thought 
suddenly out of our heads, a distraction.  Now the Greek word which St 
Matthew uses, means very nearly this--Be not divided in your thoughts--do 
not think of two things at once--do not distract your attention from to-
day's work, by fearing and hoping about to-morrow.  Sufficient for the 
day is the evil thereof; and you will have quite trouble enough to get 
through to-day honestly and well, without troubling yourself with to-
morrow--which may turn out very unlike anything which you can dream.  
This, I think, is the true meaning of the text; and with it, I think, 
agrees another word of our Lord's which St Luke gives--And be ye not of 
doubtful mind.  Literally, Do not be up in the air--blown helpless hither 
and thither, by every gust of wind, instead of keeping on the firm 
ground, and walking straight on about your business, stoutly and 
patiently, step after step.  Have no vain fears or vain hopes about the 
future; but do your duty here and now.  That is our Lord's command, and 
in it lies the secret of success in life.

For do we not find, do we not find, my friends, in practice, that our 
Lord's words are true?  Who are the people who get through most work in 
their lives, with the least wear and tear, not merely to their bodily 
health, but to their tempers and their characters?  Are they the anxious 
people?  Those who imagine to themselves possible misfortunes, and ask 
continually--What if this happened--or that?  What would become of me 
then?  How should I be able to pull through such a trouble?  Where shall 
I find friends?  How shall I make myself safe against the chances and 
changes of life?  Do we not know that those people are the very ones who 
do little work, and often less than none, by thus distracting their 
attention and their strength from their daily duty, daily business?  That 
while they are looking anxiously for future opportunities, they are 
neglecting the opportunities which they have already.  While they are 
making interest with others to help them, they forget to help themselves.  
That in proportion as they lose faith in God and His goodness, they lose 
courage and lose cheerfulness; and have too often to find a false courage 
and a false cheerfulness, by drowning their cares in drink, or in mean 
cunning and plotting and planning, which usually ends in failure and in 
shame?

Are those who do most work, either the plotting or intriguing people?  I 
do not mean base false people.  Of them I do not speak here.  But really 
good and kind people, honest at heart, who yet are full of distractions 
of another sort; who are of double mind--look two ways at once, and are 
afraid to be quite open, quite straightforward--who like to COMPASS their 
ends, as the old saying is, that is to go round about, towards what they 
want, instead of going boldly up to it; who like to try two or more ways 
of getting the same thing done; and, as the proverb has it, have many 
irons in the fire; who love little schemes, and plots, and mysteries, 
even when there is no need for them.  Do such people get most work done?  
Far, far from it.  They take more trouble about getting a little matter 
done, than simpler and braver men take about getting great matters done.  
They fret themselves, they weary themselves, they waste their brains and 
hearts--and sometimes their honesty besides--and if they fail, as in the 
chances and changes of this mortal life they must too often fail, have 
nothing for all their schemings save vanity and vexation of spirit.

But the man who will get most work done, and done with the least trouble, 
whether for himself, for his family, or in the calling and duty to which 
God has called him, will be the man who takes our Lord's advice.  Who 
takes no thought for the morrow, and leaves the morrow to take thought 
for itself.  That man will believe that this world is a well-ordered 
world, as it needs must be, seeing that God made it, God redeemed it, God 
governs it; and that God is merciful in this--that He rewardeth every man 
according to his works.  That man will take thought for to-day, earnestly 
and diligently, even at times anxiously and in fear and trembling; but he 
will not distract, and divide, and weaken his mind by taking thought for 
to-morrow also.  Each day he will set about the duty which lies nearest 
him, with a whole heart and with a single eye, giving himself to it for 
the time, as if there was nothing else to be done in the world.  As for 
what he is to do next, he will think little of that.  Little, even, will 
he think of whether his work will succeed or not.  That must be as God 
shall will.  All that he is bound to do is to do his best; and his best 
he can only do by throwing his whole soul into his work.  As his day, he 
trusts his strength will be; and he must not waste the strength which God 
has given him for to-day on vain fears or vain dreams about to-morrow.  
To-day is quite full enough of anxiety, of care, of toil, of ignorance.  
Sufficient for the day is the evil thereof.  Yes; and sufficient for the 
day is the good thereof likewise.  To-day, and to-morrow, too, may end 
very differently from what he hoped.  Yes; but they may end, too, very 
differently from what he feared.  Let him throw his whole soul into the 
thing which he is about, and leave the rest to God.

For so only will he come to the day's end in that wholesome and manful 
temper, contented if not cheerful, satisfied with the work he has had to 
do, if not satisfied with the way in which he has done it, which will 
leave his mind free to remember all his comforts, all his blessings, even 
to those commonest of all blessings, which we are all too apt to forget, 
just because they are as necessary as the air we breathe; which will show 
him how much light there is, even on the darkest day.

He has not got this or that fine thing, it may be, for which he longed:  
but he has at least his life, at least his reason, at least his 
conscience, at least his God.  Are not they enough to possess?  Are not 
they enough wherewith to lie down at night in peace, and rise to-morrow 
to take what comes to-morrow, even as he took what came to-day?  And will 
he not be most fit to take what comes to-morrow like a Christian man, 
whether it be good or evil, with his spirit braced and yet chastened, by 
honest and patient labour, instead of being weakened and irritated by 
idling over to-day, while he dreamed and fretted about to-morrow?

Ah!  I fancy that I hear some one say--perhaps a woman--"So easy to 
preach, but so difficult to practise.  So difficult to think of one thing 
at a time.  So difficult not to plot, not to fret, with a whole family of 
children dependent on you!  What does the preacher know of a woman's 
troubles?  How many things she has to think of, day by day, not one of 
which she dares forget--and yet can seldom or never, for all her 
recollecting, contrive to get them all done?  How can she help being 
distracted by the thought of to-morrow?  Can he feel for frail me?  Does 
he know what I go through?"  Yes.  I do know; and I wonder, and admire.  
To me the sight of any poor woman managing her family respectably and 
thriftily, is one of the most surprising sights on earth, as it is one of 
