depart in peace?" "No, no, Philip; we can not spare you yet," was the
reply. He then ordered some soup, and when pressed to take it,
Melancthon declined, again saying, "Dear Luther, why will you not let me
go home and be at rest." "We can not spare you yet, Philip," was the
reply. He then added, "Philip, take this soup, or I will excommunicate
you." He took the soup, regained his wonted health, and labored for
years afterwards in the cause of the Reformation; and when Luther
returned home he said to his wife with joy, "God gave me my brother
Melancthon back in direct answer to prayer."

In this incident is given this extraordinary statement that while death
has really seized a man, who too wished to die, and did not want to live
longer on the earth, yet his life was given back to him again in answer
to the prayer of faith of another.


THE WONDERFUL POWER OF FAITH AND TRUST IN THE LORD TO DELIVER WHOLLY
FROM BAD HABITS.


A victim of licentiousness and sensuousness, who often, amid his sinful
pleasures, had the memory of Christian parents before him, felt his was
indeed a life of shame. But the downward steps had destroyed his will,
his self-control, his manliness, his virtue. He had no power to resist,
all was wickedness, irresolution, constant yielding. In vain he hung
back, and tried to save himself from the cursed appetite; at last he
realized that in a few weeks' time he must go to the grave; strength
could not stand such a waste of life. "What a miserable life. What
wicked ways, what wicked thoughts; how I wish I was pure; O, that I
might get free; I do not love this sin any more, I don't want it, but I
can't stop it. O, I wish I could be a Christian, and wholly free."

Such were his constant thoughts. In mercy, the Lord who had been reading
his thoughts, sent him a great reverse in business, and in agony of
heart, he knew not where to turn but to the Lord, and pray for relief.
His prayer, too, asked to be emancipated from his wickedness, and his
strength and health restored. "_Lord, save me and I will_ be thine
forever. I am lost unless thou wilt come and save."

By gradual degrees, in the absorption of his thoughts over other
distresses, his mind was diverted from his usual ways and thoughts of
sinful living; gradually the habits of lust grew less and less strong,
and finally ceased altogether. But the body still remained under
excessive weakness. But faith that the Lord who had saved others, could
save him too, led him to pray, not only for the destruction of the
habit, but entire recovery from its evil effects. His perseverance was
persistent, and met with a _triumphant reward_. After a long; time, he
felt himself wholly healed. New strength, new life, came back to him.
"It seems as if my life had been put back again ten years, and I was
young again." "I never have any more wicked thoughts or imaginations,
while I was once full of them. Since I learned to seek the Lord and love
his Bible, I have never had such peace, or purity. I love the name and
tender mercies of my God." If in a few months, prayer saved that man's
life, and so wholly changed it from a foul blot to a thing of purity,
what can it not do again. _No sin can ever be conquered until in
humility either saint or sinner_ gets down upon his knees, and implores
the love and power of the Lord in _never ceasing prayer_, to wholly
emancipate him from the control of the evil habit. _The Lord will surely
hear it_. He can as truly deliver the body from the most persistent and
enchaining habit, as he can wholly convert the mind and heart. The
result is not always instantaneous; more often gradual, but _always
sure_ if the sufferer _always prays_.

It is simple enough for the sinning one to believe that the _Lord can_,
and seeking the Bible _for the Lord's own promise that he, will; to
cling to it and never surrender_.

The sin may be repeated when you can not resist it, and do not desire
for it, but take all pains to avoid; still pray though you often fail;
still try, still trust the Lord to loose your chains and remove your
desire, and deliverance is sure to come at last.


RECOVERY FROM PARALYSIS.


"Between two and three years ago, the writer was struck down by
paralysis, disabling entirely the limbs of the left side. In this
apparently helpless state, I employed a man to take care of me, and felt
that unless God should interpose, I must be a continuous burden on my
friends. My kind physician gave me no hope of _entire recovery_.

"In this state I made my prayer to God continually, that he would so far
restore my strength as to enable me to take care of myself.

"This prayer he was pleased to answer, for in eight weeks I dismissed my
attendant, finding myself able to take care of myself. I now walk more
than half a mile each day, and attend to all the associations of home
life. I record with thankfulness this restoration of my disabled frame
in answer to prayer."


THE STOLEN BONDS RETURNED.


The _New York Observer_ relates a remarkable instance of the return of
stolen property, which in its extraordinary way can be accounted for
only by the control of a Supreme Will, and all in answer to prayer.

"On February 16, 1877, United States and railroad bonds and mortgages to
the amount of $160,000, belonging to Edgar H. Richards, were stolen from
the banking house of James G. King's Sons, of this city. No clue
whatever to the robbers could be obtained. Several parties were arrested
on suspicion, but nothing could be proved, and the mystery remained
unsolved.

"Mr. Richards, being a member of one of our most prominent churches,
made it a subject of constant prayer, that the Lord would wholly prevent
the thieves from any use of the property and cause it to be returned to
him. When asked if he was ever incredulous, he said, 'No, I have never
lost my faith in recovering this property. I believe in prayer, and I
have made it from the first a subject of prayer, and it will be
answered.'

"Meanwhile some curious influences must have been at work among the
thieves, for they acted in an extraordinary manner as follows:

"One day last week a stranger, well dressed, modest looking,
gentlemanly, walked into the office of Elliott F. Shepard, Esq., one of
Messrs. King's counsel, and tendered his services for the recovery of
the property, asserting he knew nothing about the robbery, nor the
thieves, but that he could get the treasure. He was told that a reward
would be paid for the capture of the thieves, but he earnestly protested
that it was entirely out of his power to obtain any clue to the person
or whereabouts of the thief; and no inquiries ever disclosed that this
was not a perfectly true statement. Indeed, it proved that he had been
selected as an agent to do this work, and that there were at least five
or six connecting intermediaries between him and the robbers, each
exercising that virtue which is called honor among thieves, and which on
this occasion proved a wall of adamant to every attempt to pierce it or
break it down.

"True to his word the stranger caused the delivery at Mr. Shepard's
office, at the appointed hour to a second, of an ordinary pasteboard
bandbox, wrapped in newspaper, by the hands of a little boy. He had come
in a pelting rain-storm, and part of the newspaper had become torn, and
disclosed the blue, unsuspected hat box. The boy knew nothing about it,
except that a gentleman had given him a dime in the street to bring the
box.

"Mr. Richards being present, opened the bandbox, examined and checked
off the contents with one of Messrs. King's head clerks, and found every
single item of his missing securities, stocks, bonds, mortgages,
accounts, bank books, wills, everything. A most remarkable thing! The
parties could hardly believe their eyes."


MR. MOODY'S ANSWERS TO PRAYERS.


Mr. D.L. Moody, the Evangelist, when a boy, was possessed of an unusual
amount of muscular strength and animal spirits, and a strong will that
knew little of impossibility or submission. When only six years old,
being wistful to do something to help his mother, he was set to drive
the cows of a neighboring farmer to and from their mountain pasture. On
one occasion, a heavy fence fell upon him from which he could not
extricate himself. After trying his utmost and crying as loud as he
could for help, but in vain, the thought struck him that God would help
him if he asked him. In his own simple language he prayed to his
mother's God for help, and made another effort, and succeeded in getting
free. This, his first answer to prayer, made a vivid impression on his
heart, which gave a decided turn to his opening life.


NO FLOUR IN THE HOUSE--IN THE DAYS OF FAMINE, HIS SOUL SHALL BE
SATISFIED.


Mr. Moody's domestic life has always been a happy one, but in the early
days of his marriage, he was very poor, and his faith was often put to
the severest tests.

One day, on leaving home in his missionary work and labors of love, he
remarked to his wife, "I have no money, and the house is without
supplies. It looks dark; is it possible that the Lord has had enough of
me in this mission work, and is going to send me back again to sell
boots and shoes." But he prayed. In a day or two, a Stranger sent him
two checks of $50 each--one for himself, and one for his school.

On another occasion his wife informed him that they had no flour for the
day's use, and asked him to order some on his way. Having no money in
his possession, he was perplexed how to proceed to raise the required
amount; but meeting a person in whose spiritual welfare he was
concerned, he forgot all about such sublunary considerations as money
and flour, and went heart and soul into the Lord's work before him.

On his return home at night, he felt somewhat nervous about his
reception on account of his not having sent the flour, but to his joyful
surprise, he found that on his arrival the table was spread with a
bountiful repast.

It seems that a friend of his was powerfully impressed that morning, and
without seeing the family or knowing anything about their need, had
packed up a barrel of flour and sent it.

Others of his friends, who were interested in his work, and felt
confidence in his work, _unknown to him_, selected a new house, and
furnished it throughout with every facility for convenience and comfort,
and when all was completed invited him and his family to it, and made
him a present of the loan of his house, and all its contents.

Thus the _Great Helper_ remembered him and answered his daily prayer,
"Give us this day our daily bread."


PERSEVERING PRAYER.


At one of the prayer-meetings at the Brooklyn tabernacle, Mr. Moody
closed by narrating an instance of persevering prayer by a Christian
wife for an infidel husband. She resolved to pray for him at noon for
eighteen months, and at the expiration of that time, her knocking not
having been responded to, she exclaimed, "_Lord, I will pray for him,
every day, and at all hours, as long as life lasts_."

That day the Lord heard her knock, and gave her the desire of her heart,
in the conversion of her husband. When the Lord saw her faith would not
give up, he sent the answer immediately.


NOAH'S PRAYER.--HE DID NOT GET DISCOURAGED.


The life of faith and the necessity of uncompromising hold on the
promise's, expecting their fulfillment, is admirably explained in the
illustration of Noah's prayer. One day Mr. Moody was much discouraged,
and it was as dark a Sabbath as ever he had, and a friend suggested to
him to study the life of Noah.

"I got out my Bible, and the thought came over me, 'Here is a man who
labored and talked a hundred years, and didn't succeed; didn't get a
convert notwithstanding all his efforts, all his prayers, but he didn't
get discouraged.'

"But he took God at his word; he worked right on; he prayed right on;
and he waited God's time. And, my friends, from that time, I have never
been discouraged. Whenever I think of him, it lifts me up out of the
darkness into the light. Don't get discouraged."

The lesson of Noah's life is briefly this: He never converted a soul
outside of his own family. That was the work God gave him to do, and he
prayed and waited and worked, and never gave up, and he was saved and
all his family with him.

So every Christian must recognize that his field is not far off, but
right around him, in his house, among his friends, working, praying,
waiting, but never getting discouraged. The Lord will never fail those
who "_abide in Him_."


SAMUEL HICK'S PRAYER FOR RAIN.


Samuel Hick was one of the men of "_mighty faith_" in the Lord, and as a
preacher among the Methodists of England. He was of great eminence for
his happy spirit, remarkable trust, powerful and practical preaching,
and unbounded liberality. Among the many incidents connected with his
life of faith, we quote a few to illustrate with what simplicity he
expected always an answer to his prayer, and was not satisfied until he
got it:

In the course of a Summer of excessive drought a few years back, when
the grain suffered greatly, and many of the cattle, especially in
Lincolnshire, died. Samuel Hick was much affected. He visited
Knaresborough, at which place he preached on the Lord's day.

Remaining in the town and neighborhood over the Sabbath, he appeared
extremely restless in the house in which he resided, during the whole of
Monday. He spoke but little--was full of thought, now praying, now
walking about the room, next sitting in a crouching posture--then
suddenly starting up and going to the door, turning his eyes toward
heaven, as if looking for some celestial phenomenon, when he would
return again, groan in spirit, and resume his seat. The family, being
impressed with his movements, asked him whether there was anything the
matter with him or whether he expected any person, as the occasion of
his going to the door so frequently.

"Bless you Bairns," was his reply, "do you not recollect that I was
praying for rain last night in the pulpit, and what will the infidel at
Knaresborough think if it do not come; if my Lord should fail me, and
not stand by me." But it must have time; it can not be here yet; it has
to come from the sea. Neither can it be seen at first. The prophet only
saw a bit of cloud like a man's hand. By and by it spread along the sky.
I am looking for an answer to my prayer, but it must have time.

He continued in the same unsettled state, occasionally going out, and
looking with intensity on the pure azure over his head; for _a more
unclouded sky was rarely ever seen_. Contrary to all external signs of
rain, and contrary to the expectations of all, except himself, the sky
became overcast toward evening, and the clouds dropped the fullness of a
shower upon the earth. His very soul seemed to drink in the falling
drops. The family grouped around him, like children around their father,
while he gave out his favorite hymn, "_I'll praise my Maker while I've
breath_;" "and after singing it with a countenance all a-glow, through
the sunshine of heaven upon his soul, he knelt down and prayed. All were
overpowered; it was a season of refreshing from the presence of the
Lord.

His biographer says of him: "Samuel had no weather glass upon which to
look except the Bible, in which he was taught to believe, and expect
_that_ for which he prayed; nothing on which he could depend but God,
and _his faith_ was set in God for _rain_."


PRAYING FOR THE WIND TO COME.


A remarkable incident, showing how God makes the winds to obey him in
obedience to the prayer of his righteous ones, and the expectations of
their faith, occurred also in Samuel Hick's life, which is really an
astonishing proof of God's supernatural power.

A church gathering was to take place at Micklefleld, and Samuel had
promised two loads of corn for their use. The day fixed drew near, but
there was no flour in the house, and the wind-mills, in consequence of a
long calm, stretched out their arms in vain to catch the rising breezes.
In the midst of this death-like quiet, Samuel carried his corn to the
mill nearest his own residence, and requested the miller to unfurl his
sails. The miller objected, stating that there was "no wind." Samuel, on
the other hand, continued to urge his request, saying, "_I will go and
pray while you spread the cloth._" More with a view of gratifying the
applicant than of any faith he had, the man stretched his canvas. _No
sooner had he done this than, to his utter astonishment, a fine breeze
sprung up, the fans whirled around, the corn was converted into meal,
and Samuel returned with his burden rejoicing,_ and had everything in
readiness for the festival.

In the mean time, a neighbor who had seen the fan in vigorous motion,
took also some corn to be ground; but the wind had dropped, and the
miller remarked to him, "You must send for Sammy Hick to pray for the
wind to blow again."


SNAILS IN THE ARK.


To many who with despondency protest that they have not faith enough,
get along so slow, are too weak, &c, the following sharp retort of Hick
will prove a bright lining to their dark cloud of failing, and lead them
to plod on in prayer.

"To a gentleman laboring under great nervous depression, whom he had
visited, and who was moving along the streets as though he was
apprehensive that every step would shake his system in pieces, he was
rendered singularly useful. They met, and Samuel, having a deeper
interest in the soul than the body, asked: 'Well, how are you getting on
your way to Heaven.'"

The poor invalid, in a dejected, half desponding tone, replied, "But
slowly I fear," intimating that he was creeping along only at a poor
pace.

"Why bless you Bairn," returned Samuel, "_there were snails in the
ark_."

The reply was so earnest, so unexpected, and met the dispirited man so
immediately on his own ground, that the temptation broke away, and he
was out of his depression.

It was a resurrection to his feelings, inferring that if the snail
reached the ark and was saved, he too, "faint yet pursuing," might gain
admission into heaven.


HE GAVE ALL THE MONEY HE HAD.


At one time he attended a missionary meeting near Harrowgate. "We had a
blessed meeting," said Samuel, "I was very happy and gave all the money
I had in my pocket." After the meeting was concluded, he mounted his
horse to return home. No one had offered to pay his expenses--he had not
a farthing in his pocket. Advanced in life--a slow rider, and not a very
sprightly horse--in the night--alone--twenty miles from home. Think of
the lonesomeness; the time for the tempter to come and lead him to
distrust in his Lord. But he struggled; the trial was short and the
victory complete, for, said he, "Devil, I never stuck fast yet."

Just as he entered Harewood, a gentleman took his horse by the bridle,
asked him where he had been, talked with him long, and to whom Samuel's
talk was a wonderful consolation. Said Sammy:

"I have not wanted for any good thing, and could always pray with Job,
'The Lord gave and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the
Lord.'"

The gentleman asked, "Can you read?"

"Yes," returned Samuel.

"Then," replied the gentleman, holding a piece of paper in his hand,
which was rendered visible by the glimmering light of the stars,

"There is a five pound note for you. You love God and his cause, and I
believe you will never want."

And Sammy said, "I cried for joy. This was a fair salvation from the
Lord. When I got home, I told my wife. She burst into tears, and we
praised the Lord together," and he added: "You see, we never give to the
Lord but He gives in return."


"THE LORD WILL PROVIDE."


A poor but pious widow in Boston, in her eighty-seventh year, said to a
friend, "When I was left a widow with three little children, I was
brought into such extremity that they were crying for bread, and I had
nothing for them to eat. As I arose on a Sabbath morning, I knew not
what to do but to ask my heavenly Father to feed my little ones, and
commit myself and them to his care.

"I then went out to the well to get a pail of water, and saw on the
ground a six cent piece, which I took up; and learning that it did not
belong to any of those who lived in the same house with me, I thought I
might take it to feed my famishing children. Though it was a Sabbath
morning, I felt that it would be right to go to a baker who lived in the
neighborhood, tell him our circumstances, and buy bread with the money
Providence had thus cast in my way. The baker not only did this, but the
Lord opened his heart to add a bountiful supply; and from that hour to
the present, which is nearly fifty years, I have never doubted that _God
would take care of his children_."


ABRAHAM LINCOLN'S FAITH IN PRAYER.


When President Lincoln left his home in Springfield, Ill., February 11,
1861, on his way to Washington, he made the following farewell address
to his friends and neighbors: "My friends, no one not in my position can
appreciate the sadness I feel at this parting. To this people I owe all
I am. Here I have lived more than a quarter of a century; here my
children were born, and here one of them lies buried. I know not how
soon I shall see you again. A duty devolves upon me which is perhaps
greater than that which has devolved upon any other man since the days
of Washington. He would never have succeeded except for the aid of
Divine Providence, upon which he at all times relied. I feel that I
cannot succeed without the same Divine aid which sustained him, and on
the same Almighty Being I place my reliance for support; and I hope you,
my friends, will all pray that I may receive that Divine assistance,
without which I cannot succeed, but with which success is certain.
Again, I bid you all an affectionate farewell." That simple but earnest
request sent an electric thrill through every Christian heart, and
without doubt, in response to it, more prayer was offered for him
throughout his administration, than for any one who ever before occupied
the Presidential chair.

At a Sabbath-school convention in Massachusetts, a speaker stated that a
friend of his, during an interview with Mr. Lincoln, asked him if he
loved Jesus. The President buried his face in his handkerchief and wept.
He then said, "When I left home to take this chair of state, I requested
my countrymen to pray for me. I was not then a Christian. When my son
died--the severest trial of my life--I was not a Christian. But when I
went to Gettysburg, and looked upon the graves of our dead heroes who
had fallen in defense, of their country, I then and there consecrated
myself to Christ. _I do love Jesus."_ Rev. Mr. Adams, of Philadelphia,
