bud, and as the fruit fulfils the flower. The sense of the fulness of life
in Jesus and in the Gospel seems to have struck the minds of the early
disciples, and powerfully impressed them. Hence the frequency with which
they use this verb and noun, signifying fulness. Jesus fulfilled the law,
the prophets, all righteousness, the Scriptures. He came in the fulness of
time. His joy was fulfilled. Paul prays that the disciples may be filled
full of joy, peace, and hope, with the fruits of righteousness, with all
knowledge, with the spirit of God, and with all the fulness of God. He
teaches that love fulfils the law, that the Church is the fulness of
Christ, that Christ fills all things full of himself, and that in him
dwells all the fulness of the godhead bodily.

One great distinction between Christianity and all other religions is in
this pleroma, or fulness of life which it possesses, and which, to all
appearance, came from the life of Jesus. Christianity is often said to be
differenced from ethnic religions in other ways. They are natural
religions: it is revealed. They are natural: it is supernatural. They are
human: it is divine. But _all_ truth is revealed truth; it all comes from
God, and, therefore, so far as ethnic religions contain truth, they also
are revelations. Moreover, the supernatural element is to be found in all
religions; for inspiration, in some form, is universal. All great births
of time are supernatural, making no part of the nexus of cause and effect.
How can you explain the work of Confucius, of Zoroaster, of the Buddha, of
Mohammed, out of the existing state of society, and the educational
influences of their time? All such great souls are much more the makers of
their age than its result; they are imponderable elements in civilization,
not to be accounted for by anything outside of themselves. Nor can we urge
the distinction of human and divine; for there is a divine element in all
ethnic religions, and a broadly human element in Christianity. Jesus is
as much the representative of human nature as he is the manifestation of
God. He is the Son of man, no less than the Son of God.

One great fact which makes a broad distinction between other religions and
Christianity is that _they_ are ethnic and _it_ is catholic. They are the
religions of races and nations, limited by these lines of demarcation, by
the bounds which God has beforehand appointed. Christianity is a catholic
religion: it is the religion of the human race. It overflows all
boundaries, recognizes no limits, belongs to man as man. And this it does,
because of the fulness of its life, which it derives from its head and
fountain, Jesus Christ, in whom dwells the fulness both of godhead and of
manhood.

It is true that the great missionary work of Christianity has long been
checked. It does not now convert whole nations. Heathenism, Mohammedanism,
Judaism, Brahmanism, Buddhism, stand beside it unmoved. What is the cause
of this check?

The catholicity of the Gospel was born out of its fluent and full life. It
was able to convert the Greeks and Romans, and afterward Goths, Vandals,
Lombards, Franks, Scandinavians, because it came to them, not as a creed,
but as a life. But neither Roman Catholics nor Protestants have had these
large successes since the Middle Ages. Instead of a life, Christianity
became a church and a creed. When this took place, it gradually lost its
grand missionary power. It no longer preached truth, but doctrine; no
longer communicated life, but organized a body of proselytes into a rigid
church. Party spirit took the place of the original missionary spirit.
Even the majority of the German tribes was converted by Arian
missionaries, and orthodoxy has not the credit of that last grand success
of Christianity. The conversion of seventy millions of Chinese in our own
day to the religion of the Bible was not the work of Catholic or
Protestant missionaries, but of the New Testament. The Church and the
creed are probably the cause of this failure. Christianity has been
partially arrested in its natural development, first by the Papal Church,
and secondly by the too rigid creeds of orthodoxy.

If the swarming myriads of India and Mongolia are to be converted to
Christianity, it must be done by returning to the original methods. We
must begin by recognizing and accepting the truth they already possess. We
must be willing to learn of them, in order to teach them. Comparative
Theology will become the science of missions if it help to show to
Christians the truth and good in the creeds outside of Christendom. For to
the Church and to its sects, quite as much as to the world, applies the
saying, "He that exalteth himself shall be abased, but he that humbleth
himself shall be exalted."



Sec. 8. Christianity as a Religion of Progress and of Universal Unity.


As long as a tree or an animal lives it continues to grow. An arrest of
growth is the first symptom of the decline of life. Fulness of life,
therefore, as the essential character of Christianity, should produce a
constant development and progress; and this we find to be the case. Other
religions have their rise, progress, decline, and fall, or else are
arrested and become stationary. The religions of Persia, Egypt, Greece,
Rome, Scandinavia, have come to an end. As ethnic religions, they shared
the fortunes of the race or nation with which they were associated. The
systems of Confucius, of the Buddha, of Brahmanism, of Judaea, of
Mohammed, are arrested. They remain stationary. But, thus far,
Christianity and Christendom advance together. Christianity has developed;
out of its primitive faith, several great theologies, the mediaeval
Papacy, Protestantism, and is now evidently advancing into new and larger
forms of religious, moral, and social activity.

The fact of a fulness of divine and human life in Jesus took form in the
doctrines of the incarnation and the Trinity. The fact of the reconciling
and uniting power of this life took form in the doctrine of the atonement.
Both of these doctrines are illogical and false, in their form, as church
doctrines. But both of them represent most essential facts. We have seen
the truths in the doctrines of incarnation and the Trinity. The truth in
the atonement is, as the word itself signifies, the at-one-making power of
the Gospel. The reconciliation of antagonist truths and opposing
tendencies, which philosophy has always unsuccessfully endeavored to state
in theory, Christianity accomplishes in practice. Christianity continually
reproduces from its depths of life a practical faith in God, both as law
and as love, in man, both as a free and yet as a providentially guided
being. It gives us God as unity and as variety, as the substance and as
the form of the world. It states the reality of evil as forcibly as any
system of dualism, and yet produces a practical faith in good as being
stronger than evil and sure to conquer it. In social life it reconciles
the authority of human law with the freedom of individual thought and
action. In the best Christian governments, we find all the order which a
despotism can guarantee, with all the freedom to which a democracy can
aspire. No such social organization is to be found outside of Christendom.
How can this be, unless it is somehow connected with Christianity?

The civilization of Christendom consists in a practical reconciliation of
antagonist tendencies. It is a "pleroma" in social life, a fulness of
concord, a harmony of many parts. The harmony is indeed by no means
complete, for the millennium has not arrived. As yet the striking feature
of Christendom is quantity, power, variety, fulness; not as yet
co-operation, harmony, peace, union. Powers are first developed, which are
afterward to be harmonized. The sword is not yet beaten into a
ploughshare, nor has universal peace arrived. Yet such is the inevitable
tendency of things. As knowledge spreads, as wealth increases, as the
moral force of the world is enlarged, law, more and more, takes the place
of force. Men no longer wear swords by their sides to defend themselves
from attack. If attacked, they call the policeman. Towns are no longer
fortified with walls, nor are the residences of noblemen kept in a state
of defence. They are all folded in the peaceful arms of national law. So
far the atonement has prevailed. Only nations still continue to fight; but
the time is at hand when international law, the parliament of the world,
the confederation of man, shall take the place of standing armies and
iron-clad navies.

So, in society, internal warfare must, sooner or later, come to an end.
Pauperism and crime must be treated according to Christian methods.
Criminals must be reformed, and punishment must be administered in
reference to that end. Co-operation in labor and trade must take the place
of competition. The principles by means of which these vast results will
be brought about are already known; the remaining difficulties are in
their application. Since slavery fell in the United States, one great
obstacle to the progress of man is removed. The next social evils in order
will be next assailed, and, one by one, will be destroyed. Christianity is
becoming more and more practical, and its application to life is
constantly growing more vigorous and wise.

The law of human life is, that the development of differences must precede
their reconciliation. Variety must precede harmony, analysis must prepare
the way for synthesis, opposition must go before union. Christianity, as a
powerful stimulus applied to the human mind, first develops all the
tendencies of the soul; and afterward, by its atoning influence on the
heart, reconciles them. Christ is the Prince of Peace. He came to make
peace between man and God, between man and man, between law and love,
reason and faith, freedom and order, progress and conservatism. But he
first sends the sword, afterward the olive-branch. Nevertheless, universal
unity is the object and end of Christianity.




Index of the Principal Authors Consulted in the Preparation of this
Work.



ACKERMANN (D. C.). Das Christliche im Plato. Hamburg. 1835. (Translated in
Clark's Theological Library.) (Greece.)

AESCHYLUS, and other Greek Poets. (Greece.)

ALGER (WM. R.). A Critical History of the Doctrine of a Future Life.
Philadelphia: Childs. 1864.

ALLEN (JOSEPH H.). Hebrew Men and Times. Boston. 1861. (Judaea.)

American Oriental Society, Journal of the. New Haven; published annually.
(Oriental Religions.)

AMPERE (J. J. A.). L'Histoire Romaine. Paris. 1864. (Rome.)

------ ------ La Science en Orient.

Anthropological Society of London, Memoirs of (commenced in 1863-64).

Asiatic Journal, 1816-1843. London.

Asiatic Researches (commenced London. 1801).

BALDWIN (JOHN D.). Pre-Historic Nations. New York. 1869.

BANHERJEA (Rev. K. M.). Dialogues on Hindoo Philosophy, comprising the
Nyaya, Sankhya, and Vyasa. London. 1861. (Brahmanism.)

BAUR (F. C.). Symbolik und Mythologie. Stuttgart. 1829.

BLEEK (ARTHUR HENRY). Avesta. The religious Books of the Parsees.
Translated into English from Spiegel's German translation. Hertford. 1864.
(Zoroaster.)

BOeEKH. Manetho und der Hundstern period. Berlin. 1840. (Egypt.)

BURNOUF (EUGENE). Commentaire sur le Yacna. Paris. 1823.

------ ------ Introduction a l'Histoire du Buddhisme Indien. Paris. 1844.

------ ------ Le Bhagavata Purana, on Histoire Poetique de Krichna. Paris.
1840.

BURNOUF (EMILE). Essai sur le Veda. 1863.

BRUGSCH. Histoire de l'Egypte. Leipzig. 1859. ------- Aus dem Orient.

BUNSEN (C. C. J.). Bibelwerk. Leipzig: Brockhaus. 1858. (Judaea.)

------ ------ Gott in der Geschichte. Leipzig. 1857.

------ ------ AEgypten's Stelle in der Weltgesehichte. Hamburg. 1845-1867.
English translation, 1868.

CHABAS (F.). Les Pasteurs en Egypt. Amsterdam. 1868.

CHASTEL (ETIENNE). Histoire de la Destruction du Paganisme dans l'Empire
d'Orient. Paris. 1850.

Chinese Reeorder and Missionary Journal. Foochow.

COCKER (B. F.). Christianity and Greek Philosophy. New York 1870.
(Greece.)

COLEBROOKE (H. T.). Miscellaneous Essays; in two vols. London. 1837.
(India.)

CREUZER (FRIEDRICH). Symbolik und Mythologie der alten Voelker. Leipzig.
1836. (Greece, India, Persia.)

CUDWORTH (RALPH). The True Intellectual System of the Universe. American
edition. 2 vols. 1837.

CUNNINGHAM (ALEXANDER). The Ancient Geography of India. London. 1871.
(Buddhism.)

------ ------ Bhilsa Topes of India. (Buddhism.)

Dabistan, The. Translated from the Persian. Oriental Translation Fund.
1843. (Persia, Brahmanism, Judaea, Islam.)

DALL (Mrs. CAROLINE H.). Egypt's Place in History. Boston. 1868.

DAUMAS (LE GENERAL E.). La vie Arabe et la Societe Musulmane. Paris. 1869.

DAVID (EMERIC). Jupiter et sa Culte. Paris. 1833. (Rome.)

DE ROUGE (VICOMTE DE). Examen critique de l'ouvrage de M. Bunsen. Paris.
1847. (Egypt.)

------ ------ Etudes sur le rituel Funeraire. Paris. 1860.

------ ------ Le poeme de Pentaour. Paris. 1856. (Egypt.)

------ ------ Memoire sur les Monuments des six premieres dynasties.
Paris. 1866. (Egypt.)

DOLLINGER (JOHN J. I.). The Gentile and the Jew. London. Longman, 1862.
(Greece, Rome, Judaea, Egypt, &c.)

DUNCKER (MAX). Geschichte des alterthums. Berlin. 1863. (Egypt, Babylon,
Judaea, Assyria, India, Persia.)

DUPERRON (ANQUETIL). Le Zendavesta. Paris. 1771. 3 vols. (Zoroaster.)

DUTT (SHOSHEE CHUNDER). Essays. Calcutta. 1854. (Brahmanism.)

EBERS. AEgypten und die Buecher Mosis. 1870.

EWALD (HEINRICH). Geschichte des volkes Israel (the first two volumes
translated by Russell Martineau). Goettingen. 1845-1851. (Judaea.)

FARRAR (F. W.). Families of Speech. London. 1870.

FAUCHE (HIPPOLYTE). Le Maha-Bharata, traduit completement du Sanscrit en
Francais. Paris. 1863.

------ ------ Le Ramayana, traduit en Francais. Paris. 1864. (Brahmanism.)

FERGUSSON (JAMES). The Illustrated Handbook of Architecture. London. 1855.

FRIEDLIEB (J. H.). Die Sibyllinischen Weissagungen. Leipzig. 1852. (Rome.)

GOBINEAU. Les Religions et les Philosophies dans l'Asie Centrale. 1866.

GERHARD (EDUARD). Griechische Mythologie, 3 Banden. Berlin. 1854.
(Greece.)

GIBBON (EDWARD). Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.

GRIMM (JACOB). Deutsche Mythologie, Dritte Ausgabe. Goettingen. 1854.
(Germany.)

GROTE (GEORGE). History of Greece. New York: Harper and Brothers. 1854.
(Greece.)

------ ------ Plato and the other Companions of Socrates. London: Murray.
1867. (Greece.)

HARDWICK (CHARLES). Christ and other Masters. London: Macmillan. 1863.
(Judaea, India, China, Egypt, Persia.)

HARDY (R. SPENCE). Eastern Monachism. London: Partridge and Oakey. 1850.
(Buddhism.)

------ ------ A Manual of Buddhism in its Modern Development. London:
Partridge and Oakey. 1853. (Buddhism.)

HARIVANSA. Appendix to the Mahabharata, translated by Langlois. Oriental
Translation Fund. London. 1834. (India.)

HARTUNG, (J. A.). Die Religion der Roemer. Erlangen. 1836.

------ ------ Die Religion und Mythologie der Griechen. Leipzig. 1865.

HAUG (MARTIN). Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion of
the Parsees. Bombay. 1862. (Persia.)

HEDGE (F. H.). The Primeval World of Hebrew Tradition. Boston: Roberts &
Brothers. 1870. (Judaea.)

HEEREN (A. H. L.). Historical Researches into the Polities, Intercourse,
and Trade of the Principal Nations of Antiquity. (English translation.)
Oxford. 1833.

HEFFTER (M. W.). Mythologie der Griechen und Roemer. Leipzig. 1854. (Greeks
and Romans.)

HERODOTUS, and other Greek Historians. (Greece.)

HIGGINSON (EDWARD). The Spirit of the Bible. London. 1863. (Judaea.)

Hitopadesa. Translated by Francis Johnson. London and Hertford. 1848.
(India.)

HUC (L'ABBE EVARISTE REGIS). Souvenirs d'un voyage dans la Tartaric, le
Thibet et la Chine pendant les annees 1844, 1845, et 1846. Paris. 1852.

------ ------ Le Christianisme en Chine. (1857.) (Both these works have
been translated into English.) (Buddhism.)

INMAN (F.). Ancient Faiths embodied in Ancient Names. 2 vols. London.
1868.

JONES (Sir WILLIAM). Works. 13 vols. 1807.

JULIEN (M. STANISLAS). Memoires sur les contrees occidentales, traduites
du Chinois en Francais. Paris. 1857. (China.)

------ ------ Le Livre des Recompenses et des Peines. Paris. 1835.
(Oriental Translation Fund.) (China.)

------ ------ Le Tao-te King, le livre de la voie, et de la vertu, par le
philosophe Lao-tseu. Paris. 1842. (China.)

KENRICK (JOHN). Ancient Egypt under the Pharaohs. Redfield. New York.
1852.

KLAUSSEN (R. H.). Aeneas und die Penaten. (Influence of the Greek Religion
on Italian Religions.) 1839.

KLEUKER (JOHANN FRIEDRICH). Anhang zum Zend-avesta. Leipzig und Riga.
1781.

------ ------ Zend-avesta, Zoroaster's Lebendiges Wort. Riga. 1777. (From
the French of A. Du Perron.)

KNOX (R.). The Races of Men. London. 1850.

KOEPPEN (C. F.). Die Religion des Buddha. Berlin. 1857.

------ ------ Die Lamaische hierarchie. Berlin. 1859.

KREMER (ALFRED VON). Geschichte der herrchenden Ideen des Islams. Leipzig.
1868.

KURTZ (FRIEDRICH). Allgemeine Mythologie. Leipzig. 1869.

LAING (SAMUEL). Chronicle of the Kings of Norway. London: Longman. 1844.
(Scandinavia.)

LANDSEER (JOHN). Sabaean Researches. London. 1823.

LANE (EDWARD WILLIAM). Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians. 2
vols. 5th edition. London. 1848.

------ ------ Selections from the Kuran, with an interwoven Commentary.
London. 1843.

LANOYE (F. DE). Rameses the Great. New York: Scribner. 1870. (Egypt.)

LASSEN (C.). Indische Alterthumskunde. (4 Bande.) Bonn. 1847.

LATHAM (R. G.). The Natural History of the Varieties of Man. London. 1850.

Descriptive Ethnology. London. 1859.

LEGGE (JAMES). The Chinese Classics, with a Translation, Critical and
Exegetical Notes, Prolegomena, and copious Indexes. Hongkong. 1861-1865.

LENORMANT (FRANCOIS). A Manual of the Ancient History of the East. London:
Asher & Co. 1869. (Judaea, Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Phoenicia,
Carthage, Arabia.)

LEPSIUS (RICHARD). Letters from Egypt, Ethiopia, and the Peninsula of
Sinai. London: Bohn. 1853. (Egypt.)

------ ------ Uber die gotter der vier elemente. Berlin. 1856. (Egypt.)

------ ------ Das Todtenbuch der AEgypter. Leipzig. 1842.

LESLEY (J. P.). Man's Origin and Destiny. Philadelphia: Lippincott & Co.
1868. (Egypt, &c.)

LIN-LE. The History of the Ti-Ping Revolution. London. 1866. (China.)

MAINE. Ancient Law. London.

MALAX (S. C.). God in China. Shin or Shangte? London (no date).

MACKAY (ROBERT WILLIAM). The Progress of the Intellect as exemplified in
the Religious Development of the Greeks and Hebrews. 2 vols. London. 1850.

MAURY (L. J. ALFRED). Histoire des Religions de la Grece Antique. Park.
1857. (Greece.)

------ ------ Croyance et l'Antiquite. Paris. 1863.

MARIETTE (A. E.). Choix des Monuments decouverts pendantle deblayement du
Serapeum de Memphis. Paris. 1856.

------ ------ Memoire sur le mere d'Apis. 1856.

MEADOWS (T. TAYLOR). The Chinese and their Rebellions. 1856. (China.)

MILMAN (HENRY HART). The History of the Jews. London. 1835. (Judaea.)

------ ------ The History of Latin Christianity. 4th edition. London.
1867.

Mohammedan Dynasties in Spain. Oriental Translation Fund. London. 1840.
(Islam.)

MOMMSEN (THEODORE). Romische Geschichte. 3d edition. Berlin. 1861. 3 vols.
8vo. Translated into English. London. 1862. (Rome.)

MUIR (J.). Original Sanskrit Texts on the Origin and Progress of the
Religion and Institutions of India. Four parts. Williams and Nordgate.
1857-1863.

MUIR (W.). Life of Mahomet and History of Islam to the Era of the Hegira.
London. 1858.

MULLENS (Rev. JOSEPH). The Religious Aspects of Hindu Philosophy stated
and discussed. London. 1860.

MUeLLER (C. OTTTFRIED). Ancient Art and its Remains. London: Bonn. 1852.
(Greece.)

Literature of Ancient Greece. London: Baldwin. 1850. (Greece.)

Die Dorier. Breslau. 1825. Translated into English by Sir G. C. Lewis.
Oxford. 1830.


MULLER (MAX). Rig-Veda Sanhita, translated and explained. Volume I. Hymns
to the Maruts, or Storm Gods. London. 1869.

History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature. 1860.

Chips from a German Workshop. 1870.


MUeLLER (WILHELM). Geschichte und System der Altdeutschen Religion.
Gottingen. 1844. (Germany.)


NIEBUHR. Lectures on the History of Rome. London. 1852.


NOeLDEKE (THEODOR). Geschiehte des Quoran. Gottingen. 1860.


NOTT (J. C.) and GLIDDON (Geo.R.). Types of Mankind. Philadelphia. 1854.

Indigenous Races of the Earth. Philadelphia. 1857.


OUVAROFF (M.). Essai sur les Mysteres d'Eleusis. Paris. 1816.


PALGRAVE (WILLIAM GIFFORD). A Year's Journey through Central and Eastern
Arabia. Third edition. 1866. London. (Islam.)


PAUTHIER (G.). Les Livres sacres de l'Orient (containing the Chou-king,
the four books of Confucius and Mencius, the Laws of Manu, and the Coran).
Paris. 1843.


PERCEVAL (CAUSSIN DE). Essai sur l'Histoire des Arabs, avant Islamisme,
pendant l'epoque de Mahomet, et jusqu'a la reduction de toutes les tribus
sous la loi Mussalmane. Paris. 3 vols. 8vo. 1847-48. (Islam.)


PICKERING (CHARLES). The Races of Men. Boston. 1846.


PICTET (A.). Les Origines Indo-Europeennes, on les Aryas primitives.
Paris. 1859.

PIGOTT (GRENVILLE). A Manual of Scandinavian Mythology. London: Pickering.
1839.


POOLE (MRS.). Englishwoman in Egypt. Letters from Cairo. First and Second
Series. London, republished in Philadelphia. (Islam.)


PRELLER (L.). Griechische Mythologie. Leipzig. 1854.


PRIAULX (OSMOND DE B.). Quaestiones Mosaicae. London. 1842.


PRICHARD (JAMES COWLES). The Eastern Origin of the Celtic Nations. Edited
by R. G. Latham. London. 1857.


PRICHARD (J. C.) The Natural History of Man. London: Balliere. 1855.
(Egypt.)


PRINSEP (JAMES). Essays on Indian Antiquities. 2 vols. London. 1858.


RAPP (ADOLPH). Die Religion und Sitte der Perser. 1865.


RAWLINSON (GEORGE). Herodotus.

Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern World. London. 1862-1868.

Manual of Ancient History. New York: Harper and Brothers. 1871. (Assyria,
Egypt, Greece, Rome, etc.)


RENAN (J. E.). Articles in the Revue des Deux Mondes.

Etudes d'Histoire religieuse. Paris, 1857. Translated by O. B.
Frothingham. New York. 1864.

Histoire generale et systemes compares des langues Semitiques. Paris.
1863.

Revue Archeologique. Paris (containing the principal articles of De Rouge
on Egypt).


RHODE (J. G.). Die heilige Sage und Religions-System der alten Baktrer,
Meder und Perser. Frankfurt am Main. 1820.


RITTER (CARL). The Comparative Geography of Palestine and the Sinaitic
Peninsula. Translated by William L. Gage. New York: D. Appleton & Co.
1866. (Judasa.)


Ritual of the Buddhist Priesthood. (In Miscellaneous Oriental
Translations.) Oriental Translation Fund. 1834.


RIXNER (T. A.). Haudbuch der Geschichte der Philosophic. (3 vols.) 1829.


RODWELL (Rev. I. M.). The Coran, translated from the Arabic. The Suras,
arranged in Chronological Order. London. 1861.


ROeTH (EDUARD). Die Aegyptische und die Zoroastrische Glaubenslehre.
Mannheim. 1846.


SALVADOR (J.). Histoire des Institutions de Moise. Paris. 1862. (Judaea.)


SAINT-HILAIRE (J. BARTHELEMY). Mahomet et le Coran. Paris. 1865. (Islam.)

Le Bouddha et sa religion. Paris. 1860. (Buddhism.)


SALE (GEORGE). The Koran, with preliminary Dissertations. Philadelphia.
1833. (Islam.)


Sankhya Karika, The, translated by Colebrooke and Wilson. Oriental
Translation Fund. 1837. (India.)


SCHLAGINTWEIT (EMIL). Buddhism in Thibet. Leipzig and London. 1863.


SCHLEICHER (AUGUST). Compendium der vergleichenden Grammatik der
Indo-Germanischen Sprachen. Weimar. 1866.


SCHWENCK (KONRAD). Die Mythologie der Roemer. Frankfurt am Main. 1846.
(Rome.)

Die Mythologie der AEgypter. Frankfurt am Main. 1846. (Egypt.)


SMITH (WILLIAM). Dictionary of the Bible. Boston: Little, Brown, & Co.
1860. (Judaea.)


SMITH (Lieut.-Col. C. H.). Natural History of the Human Species.


SPIEGEL (F.). Avesta, die heiligen schriften der parsen. Vienna. 1860,
1863. (Persia.)

Eran, das Land zwischen dem Indus und Tigris.

Commentar uber das Avesta. Leipzig. 1864. (Persia.)

SPRENGER (Dr. A.). Das Leben und die Lehre des Mohammed. Berlin. 1861.
(Islam.)


STANLEY (ARTHUR P.). Lectures on the History of the Jewish Church. New
York: Scribner. 1863. (Judaea.)


STEVENSON (Rev. J.) Translation of the Sanhita of the Sama-Veda. Oriental
Translation Fund. 1842. (India.)


TACITUS, The Works of. (Rome and Germany.)


THORPE (BENJAMIN). Northern Mythology. London. 1851. (Scandinavia.)


TOWNLEY (JAMES). The Reasons of the Laws of Moses. London. 1827.


TURNOUR (Hon. GEO.). The Mahawanso, with an introductory Essay on
Pali-Buddhistic Literature, in 2 vols. Ceylon. 1837.


TZSCHIRNER (H. G.). Der Fall der Heidenthums.

UPHAM (EDWARD). Sacred and Historical Books of Ceylon. 3 vols. 1833.


URQUHART (D.). The Spirit of the East. 2 vols. London. 1839.


VAMBERY. Travels in Turkistan.


WASSILJEW (W.). Der Buddhismus, seine Dogmen, Geschichte, und Literatur.
St. Petersburg. 1860.


WEBER (ALBRECHT). Indische Skizzen. Berlin. 1857. (Buddhism.)


WEIL (Dr. G.). Mohammed der Prophet, sein Leben und seine Lehre.
Stuttgart. 1843.


WELCKER (F. G.). Griechische Goetterlehre. 3 Banden. Goettingen. 1857.


WESTCOTT (B. A.). Introduction to the Study of the Gospels. Boston. 1862.


WESTERGAARD (N. L.). Ueber Buddha's Todesjahr. Breslau. 1862.


WHEELER (J. TALBOYS). History of India from the Earliest Times. London.
1869.


WILKINS (CHARLES). The Bhagvat-Gheeta. London. 1785.
