commonness. We are exposed to them just as the Pharisees of His day
were. If there is less fasting now than then, Christians still need to
take care that they do not get up a certain 'sad countenance' for the
sake of being seen of men, and because such is understood to be the
proper thing for a religious man. They have to take care, too, not to
parade the feelings, of which fasting used to be the expression, as, for
instance, a sense of their own sinfulness, and sorrow for the nation's
or the world's sins and sorrows. There are deep and sorrowful emotions
in every real Christian heart, but the less the world is called in to
see them, the purer and more blessed and purifying they will be. The man
who has a sidelong eye to spectators in expressing his Christian (or any
other) emotion, is very near being a hypocrite. Expressing emotion with
reference to bystanders, is separated by a very thin line from feigning
emotion. The sidelong glance will soon become a fixed gaze, seeing
nothing else, and the purpose of fasting will slip out of sight. The man
who only wishes to attract attention easily succeeds in that shabby aim,
and has his reward, but misses all the true results, which are only
capable of being realised when he who fasts is thinking of nothing but
his own sin and his forgiving God.


TWO KINDS OF TREASURE

     'Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and
     rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: 20.
     But lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven.'--MATT. vi. 19-20.

The connection with the previous part is twofold.

The warning against hypocritical fastings and formalism leads to the
warning against worldly-mindedness and avarice. For what
worldly-mindedness is greater than that which prostitutes even religious
acts to worldly advantage, and is laying up treasure of men's good
opinion on earth even while it shams to be praying to God? And there is
a close connection which the history of every age has illustrated
between formal religious profession and the love of money, which is the
vice of the Church. Again, the promise of rewarding openly naturally
leads on to the positive exhortation to make that reward our great
object.

The connection with what follows is remarkable. The injunction and
prohibition of the text refer to two species of the same genus, one the
vice of avarice, the other the vice of anxiety.

I. The Two Treasures.

These are--on earth, all things which a man can possess;--in heaven,
primarily God Himself, the reward which has been spoken of in previous
verses, viz. God's love and approbation, a holy character, and all those
spiritual and personal graces, beauties, perfections and joys which come
to the good man from above.

This command and prohibition require of Christ's disciples--

1. A rectification of their judgment as to what is the true good of man.

(a) Sense and flesh tend to make us think the visible and material the
best.

(b) Our peculiar position here in a great commercial centre powerfully
reinforces this tendency.

(c) The prevailing current of this age is all in the same direction.
The growth of luxury, the increase of wealth, and set of thought,
threaten us with a period when not only religious thought will fail, but
when all faith, enthusiasm, all poetry and philosophy, the very
conception of God and duty, all idealism, all that is unseen, will be
scouted among men. Naturalism does not fulfil its own boast of dealing
with facts; there are more facts than can be seen. So the first thing is
to settle it in our minds, in opposition to our own selves and to
prevailing tendencies, that truth is better than money, that pure
affections and moderate desires and a heart set on God are richer wealth
than all external possessions.

2. Desire that follows the corrected judgment. It is one thing to know
all this, another to wrench our wishes loose from earth.

3. A practical life that obeys the impulse of the desire. Christ's
command and prohibition here do not refer only to a certain course of
action, but to a certain motive and purpose in action, and to actions
drawn from these. If we obey Christ we shall lead lives obviously
different from those which are based upon an estimate which we are to
reject; but the main thing is to live and work with an eye to the
eternal, not the temporal, results of our doings. We are to administer
our lives as God does His providence, using the temporal only as means
to an end, the eternal. We are to live to be God-like, to love God, and
be loved by Him.

There is here the idea of which we are somewhat too much afraid, that
our life on earth adds to the rewards of blessedness in heaven. The idea
of reward is emphatically and often inculcated in Scripture, however
much a mistaken jealousy for 'the doctrines of Grace' may be chary of
it. We need only recall such words as 'They shall walk with Me in white,
for they are worthy'; or, 'Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation'; or, 'Thou shalt have treasure in heaven.' If people would
only think of heaven less carnally, and would regard it as the
perfection of holiness, there would be no difficulty in the notion of
reward. Men get there what they have made themselves fit for here.
'Their works do follow them.'

II. The foes of the earthly, which are powerless against the heavenly.

The imagery implies a comparatively simple state of society and
primitive treasures. Moths gnaw rich garments. Rust, or more properly
corruption, would get into a man's barns and vineyards, hay-crops and
fruits. Thieves would steal the hoard that he had laid by, for want of
better investment. Or to generalise, corruption, the natural process of
wearing away, natural enemies proper to each kind of possession, human
agency which takes away all external possessions--these multifarious
agents co-operate to render impossible the permanent possession of any
'treasure on earth.'

On the other hand, what a man has laid up in heaven, and what he is
partially here, have no tendency to grow old. Men never weary of God,
never find Him failing, never exhaust truth, never drink the love of God
to the dregs, never find purity palling upon the taste, 'Age cannot
wither, nor custom stale, "their" infinite variety.'

'Treasure in heaven' has no enemies which destroy it. Every earthly
possession has its own foes, every earthly joy has its own destructive
opposite; but nothing touches this treasure in heaven.

It has nothing to fear from men. Nobody can take it out of a man's soul
but himself. The inmost circle of our life is inviolable. It is
incorruptible and undefiled and fadeth not away, for it all comes from
the eternal God and our eternal union to Him. He is our portion for
ever.

III. The madness of fastening the heart down to earth.

The heart must be in heaven in order to find its true home. It is
unnatural, contrary to the constitution of the 'heart' that it should be
fettered to earth.

If it is, it will be restless and unsatisfied.

If it is, it will be at the mercy of all these enemies.

If it is, what will happen when the man is no longer on earth? 'What
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world and lose his own soul?'


HEARTS AND TREASURES

     'For where your treasure is, there will your heart be
     also.'--MATT. vi. 21.

'Your treasure' is probably not the same as your neighbour's. It is
yours, whether you possess it or not, because you love it. For what our
Lord means here by 'treasure' is not merely money, or material good, but
whatever each man thinks best, that which he most eagerly strives to
attain, that which he most dreads to lose, that which, if he has, he
thinks he will be blessed, that which, if he has it not, he knows he is
discontented.

Now, if that is the meaning of 'treasure,' then this great saying of nay
text is, as a matter of course, true. For what in each case makes the
treasure is precisely the going out of the heart to grapple it, and it
is just because the heart is there that a thing is the treasure.

Now, I need not do more than remind you, I suppose, that in Scripture
'heart' means a great deal more than it does in our modern usage, for we
employ it as an expression for the affections, whereas the Bible takes
it as including the whole inner man. For instance, we read, 'As a man
_thinketh_ in his heart, so is he'; and of 'the thoughts and intents of
the heart.' So then the affections, as with us, but also thoughts,
purposes, volitions, are all included in the word; and as one passage of
Scripture says, 'Out of it are the issues of life.' It is the central
reservoir, the central personality, the indivisible unit of the
thinking, willing, feeling, loving person which I call 'myself.' So what
Christ says is that where a man's treasure lies, not merely his
affections will twine round it, but his whole self will be, as it were,
implicated and intertwisted with it, so as that what befalls it will
befall him.

Now, further, notice that this saying, so obviously true, is introduced
by a 'for,' and that it is the broad basis on which rest the obligation
and the wisdom of the double counsel which has preceded, on the one
hand, the warning against choosing perishable and uncertain good for our
treasure, and mixing ourselves up with that, and on the other the loving
counsel to choose for ourselves the wealth which is perpetual,
unprecarious, and certain.

So I think we may look at these words from a threefold point of view,
and see in them a mirror that will show us ourselves, a dissuasive and a
persuasive. Let us take these three aspects.

I. Here, then, is a mirror that a man may hold up before himself, and
find out something about himself by it.

For, like other general statements of the same sort, you can turn this
saying round about, and take it the other way, and not only say, as the
text says, 'where your treasure is, there will your heart be also,' but,
'where your heart is, there is your treasure.' A man's real god is the
thing that he counts best, and for which he works most earnestly, and
which, as I said, he most longs to have, and trembles to think he will
lose. That is his god, and his treasure, whatever his professions may
be. Where your heart is, there is your treasure.

Now, of course, for the larger part of the lives of all of us, there are
certain lines laid down by our circumstances, our trades, our various
duties, on which the train of our thoughts and efforts must run. But the
question is, When I am set free from the constraint of my daily
avocations and pressing duties, and am at liberty to go as I like, where
do I go? When the weight is taken off the sapling in the nursery garden,
which has been hung on it to turn it into a weeping-tree, its elastic
stem springs to the erect position. Where do I spring to when the
weights are taken off? The mother bird will hover over her nest. Where
her treasure is, there is her maternal instinct. The needle follows the
drawing of the pole-star; the sunflower turns to the sun. 'Being let go,
they went to their own company.' Where do _you_ go? The reins laid upon
the horse's neck, it will trot straight home to its stable; 'the ox
knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib,' and our instincts are
not less sure than theirs. You go 'home' when you are left to
yourselves; where do you go?

We call ourselves Christians. If our treasure is in Christ, our hearts
will turn to Him. And what does that mean? 'Hearts,' as I said, mean
thoughts. Now, can you and I say, 'In the multitude of my thoughts
within me, Thy comforts delight my soul'? Does there come stealing into
my mind often and often the blessed contemplation of my wealth in Jesus
Christ? The river of thought brings down, in its continual flow, much
mire and sand. Does it bring any gold? Do I think about Christ, and find
it to be my refreshment to do so? An old mystic said, 'If I can tell how
often I have thought of God to-day, I have not thought of Him often
enough.' 'Where your treasure is, there will your thoughts be also.'

The heart means love. Where do my affections turn when I am set free?
The heart means the will. Is my will all saturated with, and so made
pliant by, the will and commandment of Jesus Christ? If He is my
treasure, then thoughts, affection, obedience will all turn to Him, and
the current of my being, whatever may be the surface-ripple--ay, or the
surface-storm--will be ever sliding surely, though it may be silently,
towards Himself. Ah! brethren, if we would be honest with ourselves and
look into this mirror, we should have cause to be ashamed, some of us,
of our very profession of being Christians, and all of us to feel that
we have far too much heaped up for ourselves other treasures and
forgotten our true wealth, and we should all have to pray, 'Unite my
heart to fear Thy name.' The Assyrians had a superstition that a demon,
if he saw his own reflection in a mirror, would fly. I think if some of
us professing Christians saw ourselves, as the looking-glass of my text
might give us to see ourselves, we should shudderingly depart from that
self, and seek to have a better self formed within us. 'Where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also.'

II. Now let me ask you to look at this saying, in the connection in
which our Lord adduced it, as being a dissuasive.

He applies it to both branches of His previous advice. He had just said,
'Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust doth
corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal.' These are very
primitive methods of depriving men of their treasures, arguing a
comparatively simple state of society. The moth is that which destroys
wealth in garments, which was a great part of ancient Eastern wealth.
Rust rather means corrosion, or corruption, and applies to the other
great kind of primitive wealth, in food and the stores of the harvest.
And the thieves who dig through the mud wall of the house, and carry
away the owners' little hoard of gold and silver, point also to a
primitive condition of society. But whatever may be the special force of
these different words, they suggest to us this, that all that is here
has its own particular and special enemy which wars against its
permanence. There are _bacteria_ of all sorts, every vegetable has its
own kind. Every growth has to fear the gnawing of some foe. And so every
treasure that I can gather into my heart, excepting one, is threatened
by some kind of danger.

No man can have lived as long in a great commercial community, as some
of us have done, without knowing that there are a great many besides
professional and so-called thieves in it, that take away the gold and
silver. How many instances I can look back upon, of lords of the
exchange and magnates of trade, who carved their names, as they thought,
in imperishable marble on the doors of their warehouses, and then became
bankrupt and fugitive, and were lost sight of. We all know the
uncertainty of riches.

And are the other kinds of treasure that we cleave to more reliable?
Have they not their moths and their rusts? Is it pleasure? Well, I say
nothing about the diseases that fill the bones of many a young man who
flings himself into dissipation; but I remind you of just this one
thing, that all that pleasure tends to become flat, stale, and
unprofitable. That which the poet said of his own class, that it 'begins
in gladness, and thereof cometh in the end despondency and madness,' is
true of every delight of sense, ay! and of more than sense, of taste
and of intellect. As the Book of Proverbs has it, 'the end of that mirth
is heaviness.'

Brethren, the moth and the rust claim as their prey all treasures except
one. Is it love-pure, blessed, soul-filling, soul-resting as it is? Yes,
and on a hundred walls in any city there hangs, and in a thousand hearts
there hangs, that great picture where the feeble form of Love is trying
to repel from entrance into the rose-covered portal of the home the
inevitable and mighty shrouded form of Death. Is it culture? 'Whether
there be tongues they shall cease; whether there be knowledge it shall
vanish away.' The last illuminator and teacher, which is Death,
antiquates and brushes aside, as of no use in the new conditions, most
of the knowledge which men, wisely in a measure, but foolishly if
exclusively, have sought to acquire for themselves here below.

And when the moth and the rust come, and the separating, bony fingers of
the skeleton Death filch away at last your treasure, what about you who
are wrapped up with it, implicated in it; so grown into it, and it into
you, that to wrench you from it opens your veins, and you bleed to
death? There is a pathetic inscription in one of the rural churches of
this country, in which two parents record the death of their only child,
and add, 'All our hopes were in this frail bark, and the shipwreck is
total.' I have heard of a man that might have been saved from a
foundering ship, but he lashed his money-bags round him, and he sank
along with them. 'Where your treasure is, there will your heart be
also,' pierced by all the wounds, gnawed by all the moths, rotted by all
the corruption that affects it, and when the thief, the last great thief
of all, comes, you will only have to say, 'They have taken away my
gods, and what have I more?' And the answer out of the waste places of
an echoing universe will be, 'Nothing! Nothing!'

III. Now, lastly, let me show you the persuasive in my text.

'Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also,' therefore, says
Christ, 'lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth
nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and
steal.' If my treasure is in heaven it is secure. And oh! brethren, we
need for our blessedness, we need for our rest, we need for our peace
and joy, to know that the thing which we count best shall never be taken
away from us, and we cannot have that certainty in regard to any
treasure except the treasure that is in God. All outward things which we
say we possess are incompletely possessed, because they remain outside
us. However intertwined with them, we are separate from them, and we are
just so much intertwined with them that the separation from them is
agony, even if it is not death. What we need is to be so incorporated
with, and infused into, what is our treasure, that we are quite sure
that as long as we last it will last, and that nothing can rend it from
us. 'I bear all my goods with me,' said the old heathen. We should be
able to say more than that. I carry all my good in me, because my good
is God, who is in the heavens, and though in the heavens, dwells in the
hearts that love Him. Then in all changes, 'life, or death, or things
present or things to come, height or depth, or any other creature,' we
can afford to smile on, and say: 'You cannot take my wealth from me, for
I am in God, and God is in me.'

Further, if our hearts are in heaven, then heaven will be in our hearts,
and here we shall know the joy and the peace that come from 'sitting in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus,' even whilst on earth. There is no
blessedness, no stable repose, no victorious independence of the buffets
and blows of life, except this, that my heart is lifted above them all,
and, I was going to say, is inhaled and sucked into the life of Jesus
Christ. Then if my heart is where my treasure is, and He is my
treasure,' my life is hid with Christ in God.' If my heart is in heaven,
heaven is in my heart.

Further, my text is a promise as well as a statement of a present fact.
Where your treasure now is there will your whole self one day be. A man
who has by God's grace, through faith and love and the wise use of
things temporal, chosen God his chief good, and possessed in some degree
the good which he has chosen, even Jesus Christ in his heart, that man
bears in himself the pledge and the foretaste of eternal life. So the
old psalmist found out, who lived in a time when that future world was
shrouded in far thicker clouds of darkness than it is to us, for when he
had risen to the height of saying, 'My flesh and my heart faileth, but
God is the strength of my heart and my portion for ever,' he immediately
sprang to this assurance--an assurance of faith before it was a fact
certified by Revelation--'Thou wilt guide me by Thy counsel, and
afterwards receive me to glory.' The possession of Christ for our
treasure, which possession always follows on our estimating Him as such,
and desiring to have Him, that possession bears in its bosom the germ of
the assurance that, whatever befalls my physical life, I shall not be
less immortal than my treasure, and that where my heart to-day, by
aspiration and desire and faith and love, has built its nest, thither I
shall follow in His own time. They that have laid up treasure in heaven
will at last be brought to the enjoyment of the treasure that they have
laid up, and to the possession of 'the inheritance that is incorruptible
and undefiled, and that fadeth not away.'


ANXIOUS CARE

     'Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. 25. Therefore I say unto you. Take
     no thought for your life.'--Matt. vi. 24-25.

Foresight and foreboding are two very different things. It is not that
the one is the exaggeration of the other, but the one is opposed to the
other. The more a man looks forward in the exercise of foresight, the
less he does so in the exercise of foreboding. And the more he is
tortured by anxious thoughts about a possible future, the less clear
vision has he of a likely future, and the less power to influence it.
When Christ here, therefore, enjoins the abstinence from thought for our
life and for the future, it is not for the sake of getting away from the
pressure of a very unpleasant command that we say, He does not mean to
prevent the exercise of wise and provident foresight and preparation for
what is to come. When this English version of ours was made, the phrase
'taking thought' meant solicitous anxiety, and that is the true
rendering and proper meaning of the original. The idea is, therefore,
that here there is forbidden for a Christian, not the careful
preparation for what is likely to come, not the foresight of the storm
and taking in sail while yet there is time, but the constant occupation
and distraction of the heart with gazing forward, and fearing and being
weakened thereby; or to come back to words already used, foresight is
commanded, and, _therefore_, foreboding is forbidden. My object now
is to endeavour to gather together by their link of connection, the
whole of those precepts which follow my text to the close of the
chapter; and to try to set before you, in the order in which they stand,
and in their organic connection with each other, the reasons which
Christ gives for the absence of anxious care from our minds.

I mass them all into three. If you notice, the whole section, to the end
of the chapter, is divided into three parts, by the threefold repetition
of the injunction, 'Take no thought.' 'Take no thought for your life,
what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body, what
ye shall put on.' The reason for the command as given in this first
section follows:--Is not the life more than meat, and the body than
raiment?' The expansion of that thought runs on to the close of the
thirtieth verse. Then there follows another division or section of the
whole, marked by the repetition of the command, 'Take no
thought,'--saying, 'What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or,
Wherewithal shall we be clothed?' The reason given for the command in
this second section is--'(for after all these things do the Gentiles
seek): for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these
things. But seek ye first the kingdom of God.' And then follows a third
section, marked by the third repetition of the command, 'Take no
thought--for the morrow.' The reason given for the command in this third
section is--'for the morrow shall take thought for the things of
itself.'

Now if we try to generalise the lessons that lie in these three great
divisions of the section, we get, I think, first,--anxious thought is
contrary to all the lessons of nature, which show it to be unnecessary.
That is the first, the longest section. Then, secondly, anxious thought
is contrary to all the lessons of revelation or religion, which show it
to be heathenish. And lastly, anxious thought is contrary to the whole
scheme of Providence, which shows it to be futile. You do not _need_ to
be anxious. It is _wicked_ to be anxious. It is _of no use_ to be
anxious. These are the three points,--anxious care is contrary to the
lessons of Nature; contrary to the great principles of the Gospel; and
contrary to the scheme of Providence. Let us try now simply to follow
the course of thought in our Lord's illustration of these three
principles.

I. The first is the consideration of the teaching of Nature. 'Take no
thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor
yet for your body, what ye shall put on. Is not the life more than meat,
and the body than raiment?' And then comes the illustration of the fowls
of the air and the lilies of the field.

The whole of these verses fall into these general thoughts: You are
obliged to trust God for your body, for its structure, for its form, for
its habitudes, and for the length of your being; you are obliged to
trust Him for the foundation--trust Him for the superstructure. You are
obliged to trust Him, whether you will or not, for the greater--trust
Him gladly for the less. You cannot help being dependent. After all your
anxiety, it is only directed to the providing of the things that are
needful for the life; the life itself, though it is a natural thing,
comes direct from God's hand; and all that you can do, with all your
carking cares, and laborious days, and sleepless nights, is but to adorn
a little more beautifully or a little less beautifully, the allotted
span--but to feed a little more delicately or a little less delicately,
the body which God has given you. What is the use of being careful for
food and raiment, when down below these necessities there lies the awful
question--for the answer to which you have to hang helpless, in
implicit, powerless dependence upon God,--Shall I live, or shall I die?
shall I have a body instinct with vitality, or a body crumbling amidst
the clods of the valley? After all your work, your anxiety gets but such
a little way down; like some passing shower of rain, that only softens
an inch of the hard-baked surface of the soil, and has no power to
fructify the seed that lies feet below the reach of its useless
moisture. Anxious care is foolish; for far beyond the region within
which your anxieties move, there is the greater region in which there
must be entire dependence upon God. 'Is not the life more than meat? Is
not the body more than raiment?' You _must_ trust Him for these;
you may as well trust Him for all the rest.

Then, again, there comes up this other thought: Not only are you
compelled to exercise unanxious dependence in regard to a matter which
you cannot influence--the life of the body--and that is the greater;
but, still further, _God gives you that_. Very well: God gives you
the greater; and God's great gifts are always inclusive of God's little
gifts. When He bestows a thing, He bestows all the consequences of the
thing as well. When He gives a life, He swears by the gift, that He will
give what is needful to sustain it. God does not stop half way in any of
His bestowments. He gives royally and liberally, honestly and
sincerely, logically and completely. When He bestows a life, therefore,
you may be quite sure that He is not going to stultify His own gift by
retaining unbestowed anything that is wanted for its blessing and its
power. You have had to trust Him for the greater; trust Him for the
less. He has given you the greater--no doubt He will give you the less.
'The life is more than meat, and the body than raiment.' 'Which of you,
by taking thought, can add one cubit unto his stature? And why take ye
thought for raiment?'

Then there is another thought. Look at God's ways of doing with all His
creatures. The animate and the inanimate creation are appealed to, the
fowls of the air and the lilies of the field, the one in reference to
food and the other in reference to clothing, which are the two great
wants already spoken of by Christ in the previous verses. I am not going
to linger at all on the exquisite beauty of these illustrations. Every
sensitive heart and pure eye dwell upon them with delight. The 'fowls of
the air,' the lilies of the field,' 'they toil not, neither do they
spin'; and then, with what an eye for the beauty of God's
universe,--'Solomon, in all his glory, was not arrayed like one of
these!' Now, what is the force of this consideration? It is
this--_There_ is a specimen, in an inferior creation, of the divine care
which _you_ can _trust_, you men who are 'better than they.' And not
only that:--_There_ is an instance, not only of God's giving things that
are necessary, but of God's giving more, lavishing beauty upon the
flowers of the field. I do not think that we sufficiently dwell upon the
moral and spiritual uses of beauty in God's universe. That everywhere
His loving, wooing hand should touch the flower into grace, and deck all
barren places with glory and with fairness--what does that reveal to us
about Him? It says to us, He does not give scantily: it is not the mere
measure of what is wanted, absolutely needed, to support a bare
existence, that God bestows. He 'taketh pleasure in the prosperity of
His servants.' Joy, and love, and beauty, belong to Him; and the smile
upon His face that comes from the contemplation of His own fairness
flung out into His glorious creation, is a prophecy of the gladness that
comes into His heart from His own holiness and more ethereal beauty
adorning the spiritual creatures whom He has made to flash back His
likeness. The flowers of the field are so clothed that we may learn the
lesson that it is a fair Spirit, and a loving Spirit, and a bountiful
Spirit, and a royal Heart, that presides over the bestowments of
creation, and allots gifts to men.

But notice further, how much of the force of what Christ says here
depends on the consideration of the inferiority of these creatures who
are thus blessed; and also notice what are the particulars of that
inferiority. We read that verse, 'They sow not, neither do they reap,
nor gather into barns,' as if it marked out a particular in which their
free and untoilsome lives were superior to ours. It is the very
opposite. It is part of the characteristics that mark them as lower than
we, that they have not to work for the future. They reap not, they sow
not, they gather not;--are ye not much better than they? Better in this,
amongst other things, that God has given us the privilege of influencing
the future by our faithful toil, by the sweat of our brow and the labour
of our hands. These creatures labour not, and yet they are fed. And the
lesson for us is--much more may we, whom God has blessed with the power
of work, and gifted with force to mould the future, be sure that He will
bless the exercise of the prerogative by which He exalts us above
inferior creatures, and makes us capable of toil. You can influence
to-morrow. What you can influence by work, fret not about, for you _can_
work. What you cannot influence by work, fret not about, for it is vain.
'They toil not, neither do they spin.' You are lifted above them because
God has given you hands that can grasp the tool or the pen. Man's crown
of glory, as well as man's curse and punishment, is, 'In the sweat of
thy brow shalt thou eat bread.' So learn what you have to do with that
great power of anticipation. It is meant to be the guide of wise work.
It is meant to be the support for far-reaching, strenuous action. It is
meant to elevate us above mere living from hand to mouth; to ennoble our
whole being by leading to and directing toil that is blessed because
there is no anxiety in it, labour that will be successful since it is
according to the will of that God who has endowed us with the power of
putting it forth.

Then there comes another inferiority. 'Your heavenly Father feedeth
them.' They cannot say '_Father!_' and yet they are fed. You are above
them by the prerogative of toil. You are above them by the nearer
relation which you sustain to your Father in heaven. He is their Maker,
and lavishes His goodness upon them: He is your Father, and He will not
forget His child. They cannot trust: you can. They might be anxious, if
they could look forward, for they know not the hand that feeds them; but
you can turn round, and recognise the source of all blessings. So,
doubly ought you to be guarded from care by the lesson of that free
joyful Nature that lies round about you, and to say, 'I have no fear of
famine, nor of poverty, nor of want; for He feedeth the ravens when they
cry. There is no reason for distrust. Shame on me if I am anxious, for
every lily of the field blows its beauty, and every bird of the air
carols its song without sorrowful foreboding, and yet there is no
Father in heaven to them!'

And the last Inferiority is this; 'To-day it is, and to-morrow it is
cast into the oven.' Their little life is thus blessed and brightened.
Oh, how much greater will be the mercies that belong to them who have a
longer life upon earth, and who never die! The lesson is not--These are
the plebeians in God's universe, and you are the aristocracy, and you
may trust Him; but it is--They, by their inferior place, have lesser and
lower wants, wants but for a bounded being, wants that stretch not
beyond earthly existence, and that for a brief span. They are blessed in
the present, for the oven to-morrow saddens not the blossoming to-day.
You have nobler necessities and higher longings, wants that belong to a
soul that never dies, to a nature which may glow with the consciousness
that God is your Father, wants which 'look before and after,' therefore,
you are 'better than they'; and 'shall He not much more clothe you, O ye
of little faith?'

II. And now, in the second place, there is here another general line of
considerations tending to dispel all anxious care--the thought that it
is contrary to all the lessons of Religion, or Revelation, which show it
to be heathenish.

There are three clauses devoted to the illustration of this thought:
'After all these things do the Gentiles seek'; 'your heavenly Father
knoweth that ye have need of all these things'; 'seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and His righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you.'

The first clause contains the principle, that solicitude for the future
is at bottom heathen worldly-mindedness. The heathen tendency in us all
leads to an overestimate of material good, and it is a question of
circumstances whether that shall show itself in heaping up earthly
treasures, or in anxious care. These are the same plant, only the one is
growing in the tropics of sunny prosperity, and the other in the arctic
zone of chill penury. The one is the sin of the worldly-minded rich man,
the other is the sin of the worldly-minded poor man. The character is
the same in both, turned inside out! And, therefore, the words, 'ye
cannot serve God and Mammon,' stand in this chapter in the centre
between our Lord's warning against laying up treasures on earth, and His
warning against being full of cares for earth. He would show us thereby
that these two apparently opposite states of mind in reality spring from
that one root, and are equally, though differently, 'serving Mammon.' We
do not sufficiently reflect upon that. We say, perhaps, this intense
solicitude of ours is a matter of temperament, or of circumstances. So
it may be: but the Gospel was sent to help us to cure worldly
temperaments, and to master circumstances. But _the_ reason why we are
troubled and careful about the things of this life lies here, that our
hearts have taken an earthly direction, that we are at bottom heathenish
in our lives and in our desires. It is the very characteristic of the
Gentile (that is to say, of the heathen) that earth should bound his
horizon. It is the very characteristic of the worldly man that all his
anxieties on the one hand, and all his joys on the other, should be
'cribbed, cabined and confined' within the narrow sphere of the visible.
When a Christian is living in the foreboding of some earthly sorrow
coming down upon him, and is feeling as if there would be nothing left
if some earthly treasure were swept away, is that not, in the very root
of it, idolatry--worldly-mindedness? Is it not clean contrary to all
our profession that for us 'there is none upon earth that we desire
besides Thee'? Anxious care rests upon a basis of heathen
worldly-mindedness.

Anxious care rests upon a basis, too, of heathen misunderstanding of the
character of God. 'Your heavenly Father knoweth that you have need of
all these things.' The heathen thought of God is that He is far removed
from our perplexities, either ignorant of our struggles, or
unsympathising with them. The Christian has the double armour against
anxiety--the name of the Father, and the conviction that the Father's
knowledge is co-extensive with the Father's love. He who calls us His
children thoroughly understands what His children want. And so, anxiety
is contrary to the very name by which we have learned to call God, and
to the pledge of pitying care and perfect knowledge of our frame which
lies in the words 'our Father.' Our Father is the name of God, and our
Father intensely cares for us, and lovingly does all things for us.

And then, still further, Christ points out here, not only what is
the real root of this solicitous care--something very like
worldly-mindedness, heathen worldly-mindedness; but He points out what
is the one counterpoise of it--'seek first the kingdom of God.' It is of
no use only to tell men that they ought to trust, that the birds of the
air might teach them to trust, that the flowers of the field might
preach resignation and confidence to them. It is of no use to attempt to
scold them into trust, by telling them that distrust is heathenish. You
must fill the heart with a supreme and transcendent desire after the
one supreme object, and then there will be no room or leisure left for
anxious care after the lesser. Have inwrought into your being, Christian
man, the opposite of that heathen over-regard for earthly things. 'Seek
first the kingdom of God.' Let all your spirit be stretching itself out
towards that divine and blessed reality, longing to be a subject of that
kingdom, and a possessor of that righteousness; and 'the cares that
infest the day' will steal away from out of the sacred pavilion of your
believing spirit. Fill your heart with desires after what is worthy of
desire; and the greater having entered in, all lesser objects will rank
themselves in the right place, and the 'glory that excelleth' will
outshine the seducing brightness of the paltry present. Oh! it is want
of love, it is want of earnest desire, it is want of firm conviction
that God, God only, God by Himself, is enough for me, that makes me
careful and troubled. And therefore, if I could only attain unto that
sublime and calm height of perfect conviction, that He is sufficient for
me, that He is with me for ever,--the satisfying object of my desires
and the glorious reward of my searchings,--let life and death come as
they may, let riches, poverty, health, sickness, all the antitheses of
human circumstances storm down upon me in quick alternation, yet in them
all I shall be content and peaceful. God is beside me, and His presence
brings in its train whatsoever things I need. You cannot cast out the
sin of foreboding thoughts by any power short of the entrance of Christ
and His love. The blessings of faith and felt communion leave no room
nor leisure for anxiety.

III. Finally, Christ here tells us, that thought for the morrow is
contrary to all the scheme of Providence, which shows it to be vain.
'The morrow shall take thought for the things of itself. Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof.'

I interpret these two clauses as meaning this: To-morrow has anxieties
enough of its own, alter and in spite of all the anxieties about it
to-day by which you try to free it from care when it comes. _Every_
day--every day will have its evil, have it to the end. And every day
will have evil enough to task all the strength that a man has to cope
with it. So that it just comes to this: Anxiety,--it is all vain. After
all your careful watching for the corner of the heaven where the cloud
is to come from, there will be a cloud, and it will rise somewhere, but
you never know beforehand from what quarter. The morrow shall have its
own anxieties. After all your fortifying of the castle of your life,
there will be some little postern left unguarded, some little weak place
in the wall left uncommanded by a battery; and there, where you never
looked for him, the inevitable invader will come in. After all the
plunging of the hero in the fabled waters that made him invulnerable,
there was the little spot on the heel, and the arrow found its way
_there_? There is nothing certain to happen, says the proverb, but
the unforeseen. To-morrow _will have_ its cares, spite of anything
that anxiety and foreboding can do. It is God's law of Providence that a
man shall be disciplined by sorrow; and to try to escape from that law
by any forecasting prudence, is utterly hopeless, and madness.

And what does your anxiety do? It does not empty to-morrow, brother, of
its sorrows; but, ah! it empties to-day of its strength. It does not
enable you to escape the evil, it makes you unfit to cope with it when
it comes. It does not bless to-morrow, but it robs to-day. For every
day has its own burden. Sufficient for each day is the evil which
properly belongs to it. Do not add to-morrow's to to-day's. Do not drag
the future into the present. The present has enough to do with its own
proper concerns. We have always strength to bear the evil when it comes.
We have not strength to bear the foreboding of it. 'As thy day, thy
strength shall be.' In strict proportion to the existing exigencies will
be the God-given power; but if you cram and condense to-day's sorrows by
experience, and to-morrow's sorrows by anticipation, into the narrow
round of the one four-and-twenty hours, there is no promise that 'as
_that_ day thy strength shall be.' God gives us (His name be
praised!)--God gives us power to bear all the sorrows of His making; but
He does not give us power to bear the sorrows of our own making, which
the anticipation of sorrow most assuredly is.

Then: contrary to the lessons of Nature, contrary to the teachings of
Religion, contrary to the scheme of Providence; weakening your strength,
distracting your mind, sucking the sunshine out of every landscape, and
casting a shadow over all the beauty--the curse of our lives is that
heathenish, blind, useless, faithless, needless anxiety in which we do
indulge. Look forward, my brother, for God has given you that royal and
wonderful gift of dwelling in the future, and bringing all its glories
around your present. Look forward, not for life, but for heaven; not for
food and raiment, but for the righteousness after which it is blessed to
hunger and thirst, and wherewith it is blessed to be clothed. Not for
earth, but for heaven, let your forecasting gift of prophecy come into
play. Fill the present with quiet faith, with patient waiting, with
honest work, with wise reading of God's lessons of nature, of
providence, and of grace, all of which say to us, Live in God's future,
that the present may be bright: work in the present, that the future may
be certain! _They_ may well look around in expectation, sunny and
unclouded, of a blessed time to come, whose hearts are already 'fixed,
trusting in the Lord.' He to whom there are a present Christ, and a
present Spirit, and a present Father, and a present forgiveness, and a
present redemption, may well live expatiating in all the glorious
distance of the unknown to come, sending out (if I may use such a
figure) from his placid heart over all the weltering waters of this
lower world, the peaceful seeking dove, his meek hope, that shall come
back again from its flight with some palm-branch broken from the trees
of Paradise between its bill. And he that has no such present has a
future dark, chaotic, a heaving, destructive ocean; and over it there
goes for ever--black-pinioned, winging its solitary and hopeless
flight--the raven of his anxious thoughts, which finds no place to rest,
and comes back again to the desolate ark with its foreboding croak of
evil in the present and evil in the future. Live in Christ, 'the same
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever'; and _His_ presence shall make all
_your_ past, present, and future--memory, enjoyment, and hope--to be
bright and beautiful, because all are centred in Him.


JUDGING, ASKING, AND GIVING

     'Judge not, that ye be not judged. 2. For with what judgment ye
     judge, ye shall be judged: and with what measure ye mete, it shall
     be measured to you again. 3. And why beholdest thou the mote that
     is in thy brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in
     thine own eye? 4. Or how wilt thou say to thy brother, Let me pull
     out the mote out of thine eye; and, behold, a beam is in thine own
     eye! 5. Thou hypocrite, first cast out the beam out of thine own
     eye; and then shalt thou see clearly to cast out the mote out of
     thy brother's eye. 6. Give not that which is holy unto the dogs,
     neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them
     under their feet, and turn again and rend you. 7. Ask, and it shall
     be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be
     opened unto you: 8. For every one that asketh receiveth; and he
     that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened.
     9. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he
     give him a stone? 10. Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a
     serpent? 11. If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
     unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in
     heaven give good things to them that ask Him? 12. Therefore all
     things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
     to them: for this is the law and the prophets.'--MATT. vii. 1-12.

I. How can we help 'judging,' and why should we not 'judge'? The power
of seeing into character is to be coveted and cultivated, and the
absence of it makes simpletons, not saints. Quite true: but seeing into
character is not what Jesus is condemning here. The 'judging' of which
He speaks sees motes in a brother's eye. That is to say, it is
one-sided, and fixes on faults, which it magnifies, passing by virtues.
Carrion flies that buzz with a sickening hum of satisfaction over sores,
and prefer corruption to soundness, are as good judges of meat as such
critics are of character. That Mephistophelean spirit of detraction has
wide scope in this day. Literature and politics, as well as social life
with its rivalries, are infested by it, and it finds its way into the
church and threatens us all. The race of fault-finders we have always
