
[259:3] Acts xx. 31.

[259:4] Acts xx. 25. Demetrius says to the craftsmen--"Ye see and hear
that _not alone at Ephesus, but almost throughout all Asia_, this Paul
hath persuaded and turned away much people." Acts xix. 26.

[259:5] See Period I. sec. i. chap. viii. p. 123.

[259:6] 1 Cor. xvi. 19.

[259:7] Gal. i. 2.

[259:8] Gal. v. 13.

[259:9] Gal. vi. 2.

[259:10] 1 Pet. i. 1.

[260:1] 1 Pet. v. i, 2.

[260:2] In Acts xx. 28, these designations are identical. The
exhortation in 1 Pet. v. 5--"Yea, all of you be _subject one to
another_"--is obviously addressed to _ministers_, and implies their
mutual subordination. This command can be acted upon only by ministers
who are confederated and who hold the same ecclesiastical status.
Lachmann adopts a somewhat different reading of this verse without
changing the sense, for he puts a semi-period after [Greek: allelois].
According to his Larger Edition of the Greek Testament, the commencement
of the verse should be rendered thus--"Likewise ye younger (presbyters)
submit yourselves unto the elder, AND ALL TO ONE ANOTHER." I here
suppose _presbyters_ to be understood, as the apostle is speaking to
them in all the preceding part of the chapter.

[260:3] 2 Cor. viii. 5, 18, 22; Phil. ii. 25, 28; Col. iv. 7-9; 2 Tim.
iv. 9-12.

[260:4] 2 Cor. iii. 1.

[261:1] 2 John 10.

[261:2] 1 John iv. 1.

[261:3] Phil. i. 15-18.

[263:1] Rev. i. 1.

[264:1] Rev. i. 11.

[264:2] Rev. i. 12-16.

[264:3] Rev. i. 20.

[264:4] This was the opinion of Gregory Nazianzen, as well as others.
There is an ingenious article on this subject in the "Bibliotheca Sacra"
for April 1855. Its author, the Rev. Isaac Jennings, advocates the view
propounded in this chapter.

[265:1] This is the opinion of Prideaux, Vitringa, and many others. See
Prid. "Connec." part. i. book vi.; and Vitringa, "De Synagoga," lib.
iii. par. 2, cap. 3.

[265:2] Acts xiii. 15.

[265:3] Luke iv. 16.

[265:4] Luke iv. 20.

[266:1] Prideaux, part i. book vi. vol. i. p. 385. Edit. London, 1716.

[266:2] "The hours of public devotions in them on their synagogue days
were, as to morning and evening prayers, the same hours in which the
morning and evening sacrifices were offered up at the temple."--Prideaux,
part i. book vi.

[266:3] Maurice, in his work on Diocesan Episcopacy in reply to
Clarkson, admits (p. 257) that in our Saviour's time, Laodicea had "but
few inhabitants." Philadelphia is described by Strabo as a place with a
small population.

[266:4] Acts xix. 20.

[266:5] Acts xix. 26.

[267:1] Prideaux speaks of the angel of the synagogue, in relation to
the rulers, as "_next to them_, or perchance one of them."--Part i. book
vi. vol. i. p. 385.

[267:2] It appears never to have occurred to Tertullian that the angels
of the Churches were bishops. He obviously considered the angel of the
Church an invisible intelligence. Thus he says of Paul--"Lusit igitur et
de suo spiritu, et de ecclesiae angelo, et de virtute Domini, si quod de
consilio eorum pronunciaverat rescidit."--_De Pudicitia_, c. xiv. ad
finem. See also Tertullian "De Baptismo," c. vi. Such, too, was the
opinion of Origen.--"De Principiis," lib. i. c. 8, and "De Oratione,"
11. The fact that, _long after the hierarchy was formed_, in two or
three rare cases a bishop is called an angel, in reference to the angels
of the Apocalypse, is nothing to the purpose. See Bingham, i. 79.

[268:1] Phil. iv. 14, 18.

[269:1] Phil. ii. 25.

[269:2] 2 Cor. viii. 23, [Greek: apostoloi ekklesion]. In after-times it
was deemed proper that those messengers should be of the clerical
order.--See Cyprian, epist. xxiv., lxxv., and lxxix.

[269:3] Luke vii. 27, [Greek: ton angelon mou].

[269:4] James ii, 25, [Greek: tous angelous].

[269:5] John xxi. 7, 20.

[270:1] Thus Hippolytus speaks of a certain elder, named Hyacinthus, who
was sent to the governor of Sardinia with a letter for the release of
the Christians banished there. "Philosophumena," p. 288. The _legate_ of
the bishop of Rome is a species of memorial of the angel of the ancient
Church.

[270:2] Rev. ii. 7, 11, 17, 29, iii. 6, 13, 22.

[270:3] Rev. i. 11.

[271:1] Rev. i. 1.

[271:2] Isa. xlix. 15, 16.

[271:3] The Christians of Hierapolis are mentioned Col. iv. 13.

[271:4] Acts xx. 4.

[272:1] Lev. xxvi. 11, 12.

[272:2] Rev. i. 16.

[272:3] Ps. lxvii. 1, 2.

[275:1] A.D. 96 to A.D. 98.

[275:2] A.D. 98 to A.D. 117.

[276:1] Origen, "Contra Celsum," i. Sec. 67. See also i. Sec. 26.

[276:2] Origen, "Contra Celsum," iii. Sec. 29.

[277:1] Justin Martyr, "Apol." ii. 61. Edit, Paris, 1615.

[277:2] The Peshito, or old Syriac version, is supposed to have been
made in the first half of the second century.--Westcott "On the Canon,"
pp. 264, 265. There are traces of the existence of a Latin version in
the time of Tertullian, or before the close of the second
century.--Ibid., p. 275. "Two versions into the dialects of Upper and
Lower Egypt--the Thebaic (Sahidic) and Memphitic--date from the close of
the third century."--Ibid. pp. 415, 416.

[278:1] See Middleton's "Inquiry," pp. 3, 9.

[278:2] See Kaye's "Tertullian," pp. 98-101. Edition, Cambridge, 1826.

[278:3] Tertullian states that the Emperor Marcus Aurelius became
friendly to the Christians, in consequence of a remarkable interposition
of Providence in favour of his army, in a war with the Marcomanni and
the Quadi. It was alleged that, in answer to the prayers of a body of
Christian soldiers, afterwards known as the _Thundering Legion_, the
imperial troops were relieved by rain, whilst a thunderstorm confounded
the enemy. It is quite certain that the Roman army was rescued from
imminent peril by a seasonable shower; but it is equally clear that the
emperor attributed his deliverance, not to the God of the Christians,
but to Jupiter Pluvius, and that a certain section of the Roman soldiers
was known long before by the name of the Thundering Legion. There is no
evidence that Marcus Aurelius ever became friendly to the Christians.
See Lardner. "Heathen Testimonies," "Works," vii. 176-188.

[279:1] See Middleton's "Inquiry," p. 84. Edition, Dublin, 1749. Bishop
Kaye has remarked that, in the writings of Tertullian, "the only power
of the exercise of which specific instances are alleged, was that of
exorcising evil spirits." "Kaye's Tertullian," p. 461. From the symptoms
mentioned it would appear that the individuals with whom the exorcists
succeeded were epileptics.

[279:2] Irenaeus, who seems to have been not unfavourable to the
Montanists, speaks of the gift of tongues as possessed by some in his
age, and yet he himself, as a missionary, was obliged to struggle with
the difficulties of a foreign language. "Adv. Haeres," v., c. 6, and
"Praef." ad. 1.

[279:3] When Theophilus of Antioch, towards the end of the second
century, was invited by Autolycus to point out a single person who had
been raised from the dead, he did not accept the challenge. See Kaye's
"Justin Martyr," p. 217.

[279:4] Middleton's "Inquiry," Preface, p. iv.

[279:5] Middleton, pp. 22, 23.

[280:1] Plinii, "Epist." lib. x. epist. 97.

[280:2] Tertullian, "Ad Scapulam," c. 5.

[280:3] "Spicilegium Syriacum" by Cureton, p. 31. The correspondence
between Abgar and our Lord, given by Eusebius, is manifestly spurious.

[281:1] Gregory of Tours, "Hist. Francorum," lib. i. c. 28.

[281:2] Sozomen, "Hist. Eccles." ii. 6, and Philostorgius, "Hist.
Eccles." ii. 5.

[281:3] "Adversus Judaeos," c. 7.

[282:1] Justin Martyr, "Dialogue with Trypho," Opera, p. 345.

[282:2] Theophilus, "Ad Autolycum," lib. ii. See also Origen, "In
Matthaeum," Opera, tom. iii. p. 858.

[282:3] "Life of Alexander Severus," by Lampridius.

[282:4] Euseb. viii. 1.

[284:1] Cyprian, "De Laude Martyrii," Opera, pp. 620, 621. See also
Tertullian, "Ad Scapulam," c. 5. _ad finem_.

[285:1] Tertullian, "Apol." 50.

[287:1] Tertullian, "De Idololatria," c. 17.

[287:2] Matt. x. 35, 36.

[287:3] Tertullian, "Apol." c. 3, and "Ad Nationes," i. Sec. 4.

[287:4] 1 Cor. xv. 19.

[288:1] The Christians long gloried in the fact that Nero was their
first persecutor. See Tertullian, "Apol." c. 5.

[289:1] Plinii, "Epist." lib. x. epist. 97.

[290:1] Matt. xiii. 55; Mark vi. 3. That Simon and Simeon are the same,
see Acts xv. 7, 14.

[290:2] Trajan died A.D. 117, and if Simeon was born a year after Jesus,
he entered upon the 120th year of his age about the close of this
Emperor's reign. See Greswell's "Dissertations," vol. ii. pp. 127, 128.
It was the opinion of Tertullian that Mary had other sons after she gave
birth to our Lord. See Neander's "Antignostikus," and Tertullian "De
Monogamia," c. 8.

[293:1] The account of the trial of himself and his companions, as given
in the "Acta Sincera Martyrum" by Ruinart, bears all the marks of truth.

[293:2] An account of his martyrdom is given in a circular letter of the
Church of Smyrna. See Jacobson's "Patres Apostolici," tom. ii. p. 542.
Euseb. iv. 15.

[294:1] These places are distant from each other about seventeen miles.

[296:1] Euseb. v. 1.

[296:2] Among the Romans a concubine held a certain legal position, and
was in fact a wife with inferior privileges. Converted concubines were
admitted to the communion of the ancient Church. See Bunsen's
"Hippolytus," iii. 7.

[296:3] Mosheim ("Commentaries" by Vidal. ii. 52, note) and many others,
refer the transaction recorded in the text to the reign of Hadrian, but
without any good cause. Tertullian, who tells the story ("Ad Scapulani,"
c. 5), evidently alludes to a transaction which had recently occurred.
In the reign of Commodus there was a proconsul named Arrius Antoninus
who was put to death. See Lamprid, "Vita Commodi," c. 6, 7. See also
Kaye's "Tertullian," p. 146, note; and "Neander's General History" by
Torrey, i. 162, note.

[296:4] Clemens Alexandrinus apparently refers to the times immediately
following the death of Commodus when he says--"Many martyrs are daily
burned, crucified, and decapitated before our eyes." Strom, lib. ii. p.
414.

[297:1] Tertullian, "Ad Scapulam," c. 4.

[297:2] Compare Justin Martyr, "Apol." ii. pp. 70, 71, and "Dial, cum
Tryphone," p. 227, with Tertullian, "Apol." c. 7.

[297:3] Called _libellos_.

[297:4] These parties sometimes appealed to Acts xvii. 9, in
justification of their conduct.

[298:1] The _sacrificati_, or those who had sacrificed, as well as
offered incense, were considered still more guilty.

[298:2] "Acta Perpetuae et Felicitatis." The martyrs appear to have been
Montanists. See Gieseler, by Cunningham, i. 125, note. Tertullian
mentions Perpetua, and his language countenances the supposition that
she was a Montanist. "De Anima," c. 55.

[300:1] See the "Chronicon" of Eusebius, par. ii., adnot. p. 197. Edit.
Venet, 1818.

[301:1] The Roman clergy speak of "the remnants and ruined heaps of the
fallen lying on all sides." Cyp. "Epist." xxxi. p. 99. Cyprian complains
of _"thousands_ of letters given _daily_" in behalf of the lapsed by
misguided confessors and martyrs. "Epist." xiv. p. 59. The writer here
probably speaks somewhat rhetorically, and evidently does not mean, as
some have thought, that all these letters were written at Carthage. He
speaks of what was done "everywhere," including Italy, as well as the
cities of Africa. "Epist." xiv., xxii., xxvi.

[301:2] Dionysius of Alexandria, quoted by Euseb., vi. 41.

[302:1] Euseb. vi. 39.

[302:2] A.D. 249 to A.D. 251.

[302:3] Cyprian, Epist. 82, ad Successum.

[302:4] Cyprian, who seems to have been much respected personally by the
high officers of government at Carthage, was, when taken prisoner,
granted as great indulgence as his circumstances would permit; but
Gibbon, who describes his case with special minuteness, most uncandidly
represents it as affording an average specimen of the style in which
condemned Christians were treated. As an evidence of the social position
of the bishop of Carthage we may refer to the testimony of Pontius his
deacon, who states that "numbers of eminent and illustrious persons, men
of rank and family and secular distinction, for the sake of their old
friendship with him, urged him many times to retire." "Life," Sec. 14.

[303:1] Euseb. vii. 13.

[303:2] See Bingham, ii. p. 451.

[304:1] "De Mortibus Persec." c. 10.

[304:2] Euseb. viii. 2; "De Mort. Persec." c. 13. See also "Neander," by
Torrey, i. 202, note.

[305:1] Eusebius, "Martyrs of Palestine," c. 4.

[305:2] Eusebius, "Martyrs of Palestine," c. 9.

[305:3] The Vatican Manuscript, the oldest in existence, was probably
written shortly after this persecution. It possesses internal evidences
that its date is anterior to the middle of the fourth century. See
Horne, iv. 161, 10th edition.

[306:1] Eusebius, viii. 6, 9, 10, 12.

[307:1] Firmilian refers to a noted persecution which "did not extend to
the whole world, _but was local_." Cyprian, "Epist." lxxv. p. 305.

[308:1] The treatise "De Mortibus Persecutorum" is generally attributed
to Lactantius who flourished in the early part of the fourth century.
The authorship is doubtful.

[308:2] Ps. ix. 16.

[308:3] Herodian, iii. 23. This circumstance, as well as some others
here stated, is not mentioned in the work "De Mort. Persec." Tertullian
mentions some other remarkable facts, "Ad Scapulam," c. 3.

[308:4] "De Mortib. Persec.," c. 49.

[309:1] Tertullian, "Apol." c. 46.

[310:1] Tertullian, "Apol." 28.

[310:2] Tertullian, "Ad Scapulam," Sec. 2.

[311:1] John xviii. 36.

[312:1] Phil. iii. 18, 19.

[313:1] Cyprian, "De Lapsis," p. 374.

[313:2] Cyprian, "Ad Cornelium," epist. xlix. p. 143. Cyprian also
charges one of his deacons with fraud, extortion, and adultery. Epist.
xxxviii. p. 116.

[313:3] Cornelius of Rome in Euseb. vi. 43.

[315:1] See Eusebius, v. 3, vi. 9.

[315:2] See Neander's "Antignostikus," part ii. sect. ii. at the end. It
appears that the Christian ascetics adopted the dress of the pagan
philosophers.

[315:3] Cyprian, "De Habitu Virginum," pp. 354, 361.

[315:4] Still, in the time of Origen, the sons of bishops, presbyters,
and deacons valued themselves upon their parentage.--Origen in
"Matthaeum" xv. opera, tom. in. p. 690. Even Cyprian bears honourable
testimony to certain married presbyters. See "Epist." xxxv. p. 111. See
also "Epist." xviii. p. 67. Cyprian himself was indebted for his
conversion to an eminent presbyter, named Caecilius, who had a wife and
children. "Life of Cyprian," by Pontius the Deacon, Sec. 5.

[315:1] Cyprian, "Epist." lxii. p. 219. Concerning the _Subintroductae_,
see also the letter relating to Paul of Samosata in Euseb. vii. 30.

[316:1] Jerome and Athanasius.

[316:2] See Medhurst's "China," p. 217. The symbol of the cross was
engraved on the walls of the temple of Serapis. "When the temple of
Serapis was torn down and laid bare," says Socrates, "there were found
in it, engraven on stones, certain characters, which they call
hieroglyphics, having the forms of crosses. _Both the Christians and
Pagans on seeing them, thought they had reference to their respective
religions_." "Ecc. Hist." v. 17.

[316:3] Prescott, "Conquest of Mexico," in. 338-340. See also note, p.
340. Sir Robert Ker Porter mentions a block of stone found among the
ruins of Susa, having, on one side, inscriptions in the cuneiform
diameter; and, on another, hieroglyphical figures with a cross in the
corner. See his "Travels," vol. ii. p. 415. Among the ancient pagans,
the cross was the symbol of eternal life, or divinity. On medals and
monuments of a date far anterior to Christianity, it is found in the
hands of statues of victory and of figures of monarchs. See also
Tertullian, "Apol." c. 16.

[317:1] Tertullian, "De Praescrip. Haeret." c. 40. See also Kaye's
Tertullian, p. 441. "The ancient world was possessed by a dread of
demons, and under an anxious apprehension of the influence of charms,
sought for external preservatives against the powers of evil, and
accompanied their prayers with external signs and gestures." Bunsen's
"Hippolytus," iii. 351.

[317:2] See Justin Martyr, "Dialogue with Trypho," pp. 259, 318, and
"Apol." ii. p. 90. Tertullian, "Adv. Judaeos," c. 10. In the "Octavius"
of Minucius Felix, the following remarkable passage occurs:--"What are
your military ensigns, and banners, and standards, but crosses gilded
and ornamented? _Your trophies of victory not only imitate the
appearance of a cross, but also of a man fixed to it_. We discern the
sign of a cross in the very form of a ship, whether it is wafted along
with swelling sails, or glides with its oars extended. When a military
yoke is erected there is a sign of a cross, and, in like manner, when
one with hands stretched forth devoutly addresses his God. _Thus, there
seems to be some reason in nature for it, and some reference to it in
your own system of religion_." The monogram [symbol: Chi-Rho], composed
of the initial Greek capitals [Greek: Chi] and [Greek: Rho] of the name
[Greek: christos], was in use among the heathen long before our era. It
is to be found on coins of the Ptolemies. Aringhus, "Roma Subterranea,"
ii. p. 567.

[318:1] Tertullian maintains ("Ad Jud." c. xi.) that the _mark_
mentioned Ezekiel ix. 4 was the letter T, or the sign of the cross. See
a Dissertation on this subject by Vitringa, "Observationes Sacrae," lib.
ii. c. 15. See also Origen. "In Ezechielem," Opera, tom. iii. p. 424,
and Cyprian to Demetrianus, Sec. 12. It would appear that the worshippers
of Apollo used to mark themselves on the forehead with the letters
[Greek: CHI ETA]. See Kitto's "Cyclopaedia of Bib. Lit." art. FOREHEAD.

[318:2] Tertullian, "De Corona." c. 3. By the Romans, crosses were
erected in conspicuous places to intimidate offenders, just in the same
way as the drop is now exhibited in the front of a jail. It is not
improbable that some of these crosses were afterwards worshipped by the
Christians! Aringhi mentions a stone, to be seen in his own time in the
Vatican, which was treated with the same absurd reverence. On this stone
many of the early Christians were said to have suffered martyrdom,
probably by decapitation; but it was afterwards held "in very great
honour" at Rome, and regarded as "a sacred thing!" "Roma Subterranea,'"
i. 219.

[319:1] Minucius Felix, "Octavius," c. 24. There is a similar passage in
Tertullian, "Apol." c. 12.

[319:2] Clemens Alexandrinus, "Paedagog." iii. Opera, pp. 246, 247.

[319:3] Clemens Alexandrinus, "Stromat." v. Opera, p. 559.

[320:1] Canon 30. The comment of the Roman Catholic Dupin upon this
canon is worthy of note. "To me," says he, "it seems better to
understand it in the plainest sense, and to confess that the Fathers of
this Council did not approve the use of images, no more than that of wax
candles lighted in full daylight."--_History of Ecclesiastical Writers,
Fourth Century_.

[320:2] Tertullian, "De Pudicitia," c. 7. But all were not so
scrupulous, for Tertullian elsewhere complains that the image-makers
were chosen to church offices. "De Idololatria," c. 7.

[320:3] Tertullian, "De Idololatria," c. 6.

[321:1] Cyprian, "Ad Donatum," Opera, p. 5.

[321:2] Tertullian, "De Spectaculis," c. 4. According to the English
Liturgy the person baptized "renounces the devil and all his works, the
vain pomp and glory of the world." This was originally intended to apply
to such exhibitions as those mentioned in the text.

[322:1] Tertullian, "De Pudicitia," c. 7. Theophilus to Autolycus, book
iii.

[322:2] Tertullian "Apol." c. 44. Minucius Felix, in his "Octavius,"
makes a similar statement:--"The prisons are crowded with criminals of
your religion, but no Christian is there, unless he is either accused on
account of his faith, or is a deserter from his faith."

[322:3] Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, says to
him--"Your blind and foolish teachers even to this day permit every one
of you to have _four or five wives_."--_Opera_, p. 363.

[323:1] 1 Tim. iii. 2, 12.

[323:2] Rom. vii. 1-3; 1 Cor. vii. 2.

[323:3] The Montanists, in their extravagance, insisted that any one who
contracted a second marriage after the death of his first wife should be
excommunicated.

[323:4] 2 Cor. vi. 14.

[324:1] Tertullian, "Ad Uxorem," ii. 4.

[324:2] Gibbon, "Decline and Fall," chap. ii. Some writers, such as
Zumpt and Merivale, consider this estimate quite extravagant. Others
again think it quite too low. See Schaff's "History of the Christian
Church," p. 316. New York, 1859.

[324:3] Gal. iii. 28.

[325:1] Onesimus, the slave mentioned Philem. 10, 16, probably became a
Christian minister.

[325:2] 1 Cor. vii. 21.

[325:3] 1 Cor. vii. 20-22.

[325:4] 1 Tim. vi. 1, 2.

[325:5] Kindness to slaves was particularly enjoined by the early Church
teachers. See Cyprian, "Lib. Tres. Test. adv. Judaeos," lib. iii. Sec. 72,
73.

[325:6] It is stated in the "Octavius" of Minucius Felix that, in the
estimation of the heathen, "for a slave to be partaker in certain
religious ceremonies is deemed abominable impiety." (c. 25.)

[326:1] One of the laws made by Constantine shortly after his conversion
sanctioned the manumission of slaves on the Lord's day.

[326:2] Thus, on one occasion, Cyprian raised a contribution of about
L900 in Carthage to purchase the release of some Christians of Numidia.
Cyprian, Epist. lx. p. 216. Tertullian said to the heathen, "Our charity
dispenses more in every street, than your religion in each
temple."--_Apol._ c. 42.

[327:1] About A.D. 252.

[327:2] Cyprian, "Ad Demetrianum," and "De Mortalitate." "Vita Cypriani
per Pontium," c. 9.

[327:3] Euseb. vii. 22.

[328:1] Athanasius, "Hist. Arian. ad Monachos," Sec. 64.

[329:1] Luke xxii. 24-26.

[329:2] Rom. i. 8, 13.

[330:1] Gal. ii. 7-9.

[330:2] Rom. xvi. 3-15.

[330:3] Acts ii. 10.

[330:4] Euseb. ii. 22.

[330:5] Period 1. sec. i. chap. x.

[331:1] Hegesippus seems to have been the first who attempted to draw up
a list of the bishops, or presiding presbyters of Rome. See Pearson's
Criticism on Euseb. iv. 22, in his "Minor Works," vol. ii. p. 319,
Oxford, 1844; and Routh's "Reliquiae," i. pp. 270, 271.

[331:2] Thus, Irenaeus (i. 27) speaks of Hyginus as the _ninth_, and
again (iii. 3), as the _eighth_ in succession from the apostles.

[331:3] Thus, Irenaeus affirms (iii. 3) that Linus was the immediate
successor of the apostles, whilst Tertullian, who was his contemporary,
and who possessed equally good means of information, assigns that
position to Clement. "De Praescrip. Haeret." c. 32.

[331:4] Euseb. iii. 4.

[332:1] Irenaeus, "Contra Om. Haer." iii. 3, Sec. 3. Bunsen has justly
remarked that, "with Telesphorus the most obscure period of the Roman
Church terminates."--_Hippolytus_, iv. pp. 209, 210.

[332:2] Irenaeus, iii. 4, Sec. 3.

[332:3] This name continued to be given to the Roman bishop until at
least the close of the second century. See Irenaeus quoted in Euseb. v.
24.

[332:4] [Greek: katholikos]. See this subject more fully illustrated in
Period II. sec. iii. chap. viii.

[333:1] "Qui absistunt a principali successione, et quocunque loco
colligunt, suspectos habere (oportet) vel quasi haereticos et malae
sententiae; vel quasi scindentes et elatos et sibi placentes; aut rursus
ut hypocritas, quaestus gratia et vanae gloriae hoc operantes."
Irenaeus, iv. 26, Sec. 2.

[333:2] See Period II. sec. iii. chap. vii.

[333:3] Blondel's "Apologia pro sententia Hieronymi," p. 18. Under
ordinary circumstances the new president, or bishop, was often elected
before his predecessor was buried. See Bingham, book ii. c. xi. Sec. 2.

[333:4] See Pearson's "Minor Works," ii. 520.

[333:5] This method of appointment continued to be observed long
afterwards in some parts of the Church. See Bingham, book iv. chap. i.
sec. i. At Alexandria in the beginning of the fourth century the
presbyters selected three of their senior members, of whom the people
chose one. Cotelerius, ii., app. p. 180.

[334:1] [Greek: Ton tes episkopes kleron]. "Irenaeus," ed. Stieren, i.
p. 433.

[334:2] The Paschal feast. Irenaeus admits that this point formed only a
subordinate topic of discussion. See Stieren's "Irenaeus," i. p. 826,
note 6.

[334:3] See Period II. sec. iii. chap. vii.

[334:4] Euseb. iv. 14.

[335:1] Cyprian speaks of sending messengers to Rome "to ascertain and
report as to any rescript published respecting" the Christians. "Epist.
ad Successum." The Roman clergy could at once supply the information.

[336:1] Extract of a letter from Dionysius of Corinth, preserved in
Eusebius, iv. 23.

[336:2] The testimonies to this fact may be found discussed in Minter's
"Primordia Eccelesiae Africanae," p. 10. Herodian, who flourished in the
third century, speaks of Carthage as the next city after Rome in size
and wealth. Lib. vii. 6.

[336:3] In this way we may readily account for various statements in
Tertullian and Cyprian.

[337:1] We here see how a father who wrote so soon after the apostolic
age, blunders egregiously respecting the history of the Apostolic
Church.

[337:2] So I understand "his qui sunt undique." See Wordsworth's
"Hippolytus," p. 200. We have thus a remarkable proof that the word
_catholic_ was not in use when Irenaeus wrote, for he here expresses the
idea by a circumlocution.

[337:3] "Propter potentiorem principalitatem."

[337:4] Irenaeus iii. 3. See on this passage Gieseler, by Cunningham, i.
97, note. See also Period II. sec. iii. chap. viii.

[337:5] The circular letter relating to the martyrdom of Polycarp quoted
in Euseb. iv. 15. It was probably written a considerable time after the
death of the martyr, as it speaks of the way in which his _memory_ was
cherished when it was drawn up. Sec. 19. As it uses the word _catholic_ it
must have been written after the appearance of the work of Irenaeus.

[337:6] Irenaeus quoted in Euseb. v. 24. See Period II. sec. iii. chap.
viii.

[339:1] We have an extract from them in Euseb. v. 4.

[339:2] Period II. sec. i. chap. ii. p. 296.

[339:3] Hippolytus, "Refut. Om. Haeres." book ix.

[340:1] This probably occurred early in the reign of Septimius Severus,
who at first is said to have been very favourable to the Church. Shortly
before, many in Rome of great wealth and eminent station had become
Christians.--Euseb. v. c. 21.

[340:2] See a more minute account of this controversy in Period II. sec.
iii. chap. xii.

[340:3] This is evident from the fact that Hippolytus is scarcely
willing to recognise some of the Roman bishops, his contemporaries. But
meanwhile both parties probably belonged to the same synod. Hippolytus
seems to have been the leader of a formidable opposition.

[341:1] Matt. xvi. 18.

[341:2] See the Muratorian fragment in Bunsen's "Analecta Ante-Nicaena,"
i. 154, 155. This, according to Bunsen, is a fragment of a work of
Hegesippus, and written about A.D. 165. Hippolytus, i. 314.

[341:3] "Hermae Pastor," lib. iii. simil. ix. Sec. 12-14. "Petra haec....
Filius Dei est.... Quid est deinde haec turris? Haec, inquit, ecclesia
est.... Demonstra mihi quare non in terra aedificatur haec turris, sed
supra petram."

[341:4] Tertullian, "De Praescrip." xxii. "Latuit aliquid Petrum
aedificandae ecclesiae petram dictum?" Tertullian here speaks of the
doctrine as already current. Even after he became a Montanist, he still
adhered to the same interpretation--"Petrum solum invenio maritum, per
socrum; monogamum praesumo per _ecclesiam, quae super illum, aedificata_
omnem gradum ordinis sui de monogamis erat collocatura."--_De
Monogamia_, c. viii. Again, in another Montanist tract, he says--"Qualis
es, evertens atque commutans manifestam domini intentionem personaliter
hoc Petro conferentem? _Super te_, inquit, _aedificabo ecclesiam
meam_."--_De Pudicitia_, c. xxi. See also "De Praescrip." c. xxii.
According to Origen every believer, as well as Peter, is the foundation
of the Church. "Contra Celsum," vi. 77. See also "Comment in Matthaeum
xii.," Opera, tom. iii. p. 524, 526.

[342:1] See this subject more fully explained in Period II. sec. iii.
ch. viii.

[343:1] Even the letters of Victor, which created such a sensation
throughout the Church, are not forthcoming. See Pearson's "Vindiciae
Ignatianae," pars 2, cap. 13, as to the spuriousness of those imputed to
him.

[343:2] They extend from Clement, who, according to some lists, was the
first Pope, to Syricius, who was made Bishop of Rome A.D. 384. All
candid writers, whether Romanists or Protestants, now acknowledge them
to be forgeries. They may be found in "Binii Concilia." They made their
appearance, for the first time, about the eighth century.

[344:1] This is the date assigned to its erection by Bunsen, but Dr
Wordsworth argues that it was erected earlier.

[344:2] 22d August.

[345:1] The first edition appeared at Oxford in 1851, exactly three
hundred years after the discovery of the statue.

[345:2] This point has been fully established by Bunsen and Wordsworth.

[345:3] This is expressly stated by Tertullian, "Adversus Praxeam," c.
i.

[345:4] See Bower's "History of the Popes." Victor, 13th Bishop.

[345:5] According to the commonly received chronology, Victor occupied
the papal chair from A.D. 192 to A.D. 201; Zephyrinus from A.D. 201 to
A.D. 219; and Callistus from A.D. 219 to A.D. 223.

[346:1] [Greek: andros idiotu kai aischrokerdous].

[346:2] [Greek: apeiron ton ekklesiakon horon].

[346:3] "Philosophumena," book ix.

[348:1] "Philosophumena," book ix.

[348:2] 14th October.

[348:3] "Philosophumena," book i., prooemium.

[348:4] [Greek: dedoikos eme].

[348:5] Bunsen describes Hippolytus as "a member of the Roman
presbytery" ("Hippolytus," i. 313), but he is here evidently mistaken.
Hippolytus was at the head of a presbytery of his own, the presbytery of
Portus. The presbytery of Rome was confined to the elders or presbyters
of that city. The _presbyter_ Hippolytus mentioned by some ancient
writers seems to have been a quite different person from the bishop of
Portus.

[348:6] "Philosophumena," book ix.

[349:1] It is probable that the bishop was at first chosen by lot out of
a leet of three selected by the presbytery from among its members. (See
preceding chapter, p. 333, note.) An appointment was now made out of
this leet of three, not by lot, but by popular suffrage.

[349:2] Euseb. vi. 29.

[350:1] Evidently from [Greek: kata], _down_, and [Greek: kumbos], _a
cavity_. Mr Northcote, in his work on the "Roman Catacombs," published
in 1857, calculates that the streets in all, taken together, are 900
miles long!

[350:2] See "Three Introductory Lectures on Ecclesiastical History," by
William Lee, D.D., of Trinity College, Dublin, p. 27.

[350:3] It is probable that many were condemned to labour in these mines
as a punishment for having embraced Christianity. See Lee's "Three
Lectures," p. 28.

[350:4] Maitland's "Church in the Catacombs," p. 24. Dr Maitland visited
Rome in 1841, but his inspection of the Lapidarian Gallery seems to have
been regarded with extreme jealousy by the authorities there. After
having obtained a licence "to make some memoranda in drawing in that
part of the Museum," he was officially informed that "his permission
_did not extend to the inscriptions_", and the communication was
accompanied by a demand that "the copies already made should be given
up." To his refusal to yield to this mandate we are indebted for many
important memorials to be found in his interesting volume.

[351:1] See Maitland, pp. 27-29.

[352:1] Maitland, p. 14.

[352:2] Maitland, pp. 33, 41, 43, 170.

[352:3] "Philosophumena," book ix.

[352:4] As Carthage now furnished Rome with marble and granite, it is
probable that the quarrymen and sand-diggers of the catacombs came
frequently into contact with the Carthaginian sailors; and we may thus
see how, in the time of Cyprian, there were such facilities for
epistolary intercourse between the Churches of Rome and Carthage. Under
favourable circumstances, the mariner could accomplish the voyage
between the two ports in two or three days.

[353:1] "Philosophumena," book ix. Tertullian corroborates the charges
of Hippolytus. See "De Pudicitia," cap. i.

[353:2] We know, however, that, long after this period, married bishops
were to be found almost everywhere. One of the most eminent martyrs in
the Diocletian persecution was a bishop who had a wife and children. See
Eusebius, viii. c.9. Clemens Romanus, reputed one of the early bishops
of the Western capital, speaks as a married man. See his "Epistle to the
Corinthians," Sec. 21.

[353:3] Maitland, pp. 191-193. These inscriptions may be found also in
Aringhi, i. 421, 419.

[353:4] Aringhi, ii. pp. 228; Rome, 1651.

[354:1] Cyprian to Antonianus, Epist. lii, p. 151.

[355:1] Cyprian speaks of "the blessed martyrs, Cornelius and Lucius."
Epist. lxvii. p. 250.

[355:2] See Cyprian's "Epistle to Successus," where it is stated that
"Xystus was martyred in the cemetery [the catacombs] on the eighth of
the Ides of August, and with him four deacons."

[355:3] This fragment may be found in Euseb. vi. 43.

[355:4] For an account of their duties see Period II. sec. iii. chap. x.

