to be worshipped in Gujarat. The census of Bengal (1901) records the
worship of the earth, sun and rivers as females, of the snake
goddesses Manasa and Jagat Gauri and of numerous female demons who
send disease, such as the seven sisters, Ola Bibi, Jogini and the
Churels, or spirits of women who have died in childbirth.

The rites celebrated in honour of these deities are often of a
questionable character and include dances by naked women and offerings
of spirituous liquors and blood. Similar features are found in other
countries. Prostitution formed part of the worship of Astarte and
Anahit: the Tauric Artemis was adored with human sacrifices and Cybele
with self-inflicted mutilations. Similarly offerings of blood drawn
from the sacrificer's own body are enjoined in the Kalika Purana. Two
stages can be distinguished in the relations between these cults and
Hinduism. In the later stage which can be witnessed even at the
present day an aboriginal goddess or demon is identified with one of
the aspects (generally a "black" or fierce aspect) of Siva's
spouse.[686] But such identification is facilitated by the fact that
goddesses like Kali, Bhairavi, Chinnamastaka are not products of
purely Hindu imagination but represent earlier stages of amalgamation
in which Hindu and aboriginal ideas are already compounded. When the
smallpox goddess is identified with Kali, the procedure is correct,
for some popular forms of Kali are little more than an aboriginal
deity of pestilence draped with Hindu imagery and philosophy.

Some Hindu scholars demur to this derivation of Saktism from lower
cults. They point to its refined and philosophic aspects; they see in
it the worship of a goddess, who can be as merciful as the Madonna,
but yet, since she is the goddess of nature, combines in one shape
life and death. May not the grosser forms of Saktism be perversions
and corruptions of an ancient and higher faith? In support of this it
may be urged that the Buddhist goddess Tara is as a rule a beautiful
and benevolent figure, though she can be terrible as the enemy of evil
and has clear affinities to Durga. Yet the history of Indian thought
does not support this view, but rather the view that Hinduism
incorporated certain ancient ideas, true and striking as ancient ideas
often are, but without purging them sufficiently to make them
acceptable to the majority of educated Indians.

The Yajur Veda[687] associates Rudra with a female deity called Ambika
or mother, who is however his sister, not his spouse. The earliest
forms of the latter seem to connect her with mountains. She is Uma
Haimavati, the daughter of the Himalayas, and Parvati, she of the
mountains, and was perhaps originally a sacred peak. In an interesting
but brief passage of the Kena Upanishad (III. 12 and IV. 1) Uma
Haimavati explains to the gods that a being whom they do not know is
Brahman. In later times we hear of a similar goddess in the Vindhyas,
Maharani Vindhyesvari, who was connected with human sacrifices and
Thugs.[688] Siva's consort, like her Lord, has many forms classified
as white or benignant and black or terrible. Uma belongs to the former
class but the latter (such as Kali, Durga, Camunda, Canda and Karala)
are more important.[689] Female deities bearing names like these are
worshipped in most parts of India, literally from the Himalaya to Cape
Comorin, for the latter name is derived from Kumari, the Virgin
goddess.[690] But the names Sakta and Saktism are usually restricted to
those sects in Bengal and Assam who worship the Consort of Siva with
the rites prescribed in the Tantras.

Saktism regards the goddess as the active manifestation of the
godhead. As such she is styled Sakti, or energy (whence the name
Sakta), and is also identified with Maya, the power which is
associated with Brahman and brings the phenomenal world into being.
Similar ideas appear in a philosophic form in the Sankhya teaching.
Here the soul is masculine and passive: its task is to extricate and
isolate itself. But Prakriti or Nature is feminine and active: to her
is due the evolution of the universe: she involves the soul in actions
which cause pain but she also helps the work of liberation.[691] In
its fully developed form the doctrine of the Tantras teaches that
Sakti is not an emanation or aspect of the deity. There is no
distinction between Brahman and Sakti. She is Parabrahman and
_paratpara_, Supreme of the Supreme.

The birthplace of Saktism as a definite sect seems to have been
north-eastern India[692] and though it is said to be extending in the
United Provinces, its present sphere of influence is still chiefly
Bengal and Assam.[693] The population of these countries is not Aryan
(though the Bengali language bears witness to the strong Aryan
influence which has prevailed there) and is largely composed of
immigrants from the north belonging to the Tibeto-Burman, Mon-Khmer
and Shan families. These tribes remain distinct in Assam but the
Bengali represents the fusion of such invaders with a Munda or
Dravidian race, leavened by a little Aryan blood in the higher castes.
In all this region we hear of no ancient Brahmanic settlements, no
ancient centres of Vedic or even Puranic learning[694] and when
Buddhism decayed no body of Brahmanic tradition such as existed in
other parts of India imposed its authority on the writers of the
Tantras. Even at the present day the worship of female spirits, only
half acknowledged by the Brahmans, prevails among these people, and in
the past the national deities of many tribes were goddesses who were
propitiated with human sacrifices. Thus the Chutiyas of Sadiya used to
adore a goddess, called Kesai Khati--the eater of raw flesh. The rites
of these deities were originally performed by tribal priests, but as
Hindu influence spread, the Brahmans gradually took charge of them
without modifying their character in essentials. Popular Bengali
poetry represents these goddesses as desiring worship and feeling
that they are slighted: they persecute those who ignore them, but
shower blessings on their worshippers, even on the obdurate who are at
last compelled to do them homage. The language of mythology could not
describe more clearly the endeavours of a plebeian cult to obtain
recognition.[695]

The Mahabharata contains hymns to Durga in which she is said to love
offerings of flesh and wine,[696] but it is not likely that Saktism or
Tantrism--that is a system with special scriptures and doctrines--was
prevalent before the seventh century A.D. for the Tantras are not
mentioned by the Chinese pilgrims and the lexicon _Amara Kosha_
(perhaps _c_. 500 A.D.) does not recognize the word as a designation
of religious books. Bana (_c_. 630) gives more than once in his
romances lists of sectaries but though he mentions Bhagavatas and
Pasupatas, he does not speak of Saktas.[697] On the other hand
Tantrism infected Buddhism soon after this period. The earlier Tibetan
translations of the Tantras are attributed to the ninth century. MSS.
of the Kubjikamata and other Tantras are said to date from the ninth
and even from the seventh century and tradition represents
Sankaracarya as having contests with Saktas.[698] But many Tantras
were written in the fifteenth century and even later, for the Yogini
Tantra alludes to the Koch king Bishwa Singh (1515-1540) and the Meru
Tantra mentions London and the English.

From the twelfth to the sixteenth century, when Buddhism, itself
deeply infected with Tantrism, was disappearing, Saktism was probably
the most powerful religion in Bengal, but Vishnuism was gaining
strength and after the time of Caitanya proved a formidable rival to
it. At the beginning of the fifteenth century we hear that the king of
the Ahoms summoned Brahmans to his Court and adopted many Hindu rites
and beliefs, and from this time onward Saktism was patronized by most
of the Assamese Rajas although after 1550 Vishnuism became the
religion of the mass of the people. Saktism never inspired any popular
or missionary movement, but it was powerful among the aristocracy and
instigated persecutions against the Vishnuites.

The more respectable Tantras[699] show considerable resemblance to the
later Upanishads such as the Nrisinhatapaniya and Ramata-paniya,
which mention Sakti in the sense of creative energy.[700] Both classes
of works treat of magical formulae (mantras) and the construction of
mystic diagrams or yantras. This resemblance does not give us much
assistance in chronology, for the dates of the later Upanishads are
very uncertain, but it shows how the Tantras are connected with other
branches of Hindu thought.

The distinction between Tantras and Puranas is not always
well-marked. The Bhagavata Purana countenances tantric rites[701] and
the Agni Purana (from chapter XXI onwards) bears a strong resemblance
to a Tantra. As a rule the Tantras contain less historical and
legendary matter than the Puranas and more directions as to ritual.
But whereas the Puranas approve of both Vedic rites and others, the
Tantras insist that ceremonies other than those which they prescribe
are now useless. They maintain that each age of the world has its own
special revelation and that in this age the Tantra-sastra is the only
scripture. Thus in the Mahanirvana Tantra Siva says:[702] "The fool
who would follow other doctrines heedless of mine is as great a sinner
as a parricide or the murderer of a Brahman or of a woman.... The
Vedic rites and mantras which were efficacious in the first age have
ceased to have power in this. They are now as powerless as snakes
whose fangs have been drawn and are like dead things." The Kularnava
Tantra (I. 79 ff.) inveighs against those who think they will obtain
salvation by Vedic sacrifices or asceticism or reading sacred books,
whereas it can be won only by tantric rites.

Various lists of Tantras are given and it is generally admitted that
many have been lost. The most complete, but somewhat theoretical
enumeration[703] divides India and the adjoining lands into three
regions to each of which sixty-four Tantras are assigned. The best
known names are perhaps Mahanirvana,[704] Saradatilaka,[705] Yogini,
Kularnava[706] and Rudra-Yamala. A Tantra is generally cast in the
form of a dialogue in which Siva instructs his consort but sometimes
_vice versa_. It is said that the former class are correctly described
as Agamas and the works where the Sakti addresses Siva as
Nigamas.[707] Some are also called Yamalas and Damaras but I have
found no definition of the meaning of these words. The Prapancasara
Tantra[708] professes to be a revelation from Narayana.

Saktism and the Tantras which teach it are generally condemned by
Hindus of other sects.[709] It is arguable that this condemnation is
unjust, for like other forms of Hinduism the Tantras make the
liberation of the soul their object and prescribe a life of religious
observances including asceticism and meditation, after which the adept
becomes released even in this life. But however much new tantric
literature may be made accessible in future, I doubt if impartial
criticism will come to any opinion except that Saktism and Tantrism
collect and emphasize what is superficial, trivial and even bad in
Indian religion, omitting or neglecting its higher sides. If for
instance the Mahanirvana Tantra which is a good specimen of these
works be compared with Sankara's commentary on the Vedanta Sutras, or
the poems of Tulsi Das, it will be seen that it is woefully deficient
in the excellences of either. But many tantric treatises are chiefly
concerned with charms, spells, amulets and other magical methods of
obtaining wealth, causing or averting disease and destroying enemies,
processes which even if efficacious have nothing to do with the better
side of religion.[710]

The religious life prescribed in the Tantras[711] commences with
initiation and requires the supervision of the Guru. The object of it
is _Siddhi_ or success, the highest form of which is spiritual
perfection. _Siddhi_ is produced by _Sadhana_, or that method of
training the physical and psychic faculties which realizes their
potentialities. Tantric training assumes a certain constitution of the
universe and the repetition in miniature of this constitution in the
human body which contains various nervous centres and subtle channels
for the passage of energy unknown to vulgar anatomy. Thus the Sakti
who pervades the universe is also present in the body as Kundalini,
a serpentine coil of energy, and it is part of Sadhana to arouse this
energy and make it mount from the lower to the higher centres.
Kundalini is also present in sounds and in letters. Hence if
different parts of the body are touched to the accompaniment of
appropriate mantras (which rite is called nyasa) the various Saktis
are made to dwell in the human frame in suitable positions.

The Tantras recognize that human beings are not equal and that codes
and rituals must vary according to temperament and capacity. Three
conditions of men, called the animal, heroic and divine,[712] are
often mentioned and are said to characterize three periods of
life--youth, manhood and age, or three classes of mankind,
non-tantrists, ordinary tantrists, and adepts. These three conditions
clearly correspond to the three Gunas. Also men, or rather Hindus,
belong to one of seven groups, or stages, according to the religious
practices which it is best for them to follow. Saktists apparently
demur[713] to the statement commonly made by Indians as well as by
Europeans that they are divided into two sects the Dakshinacarins, or
right-hand worshippers, whose ritual is public and decent, and the
Vamacarins who meet to engage in secret but admittedly immoral orgies.
But for practical purposes the division is just, although it must not
be supposed that Dakshinacarins necessarily condemn the secret
worship. They may consider it as good for others but not for
themselves. Saktists apparently would prefer to state the matter thus.
There are seven stages of religion. First come Vedic, Vishnuite and
Sivaite worship, all three inferior, and then Dakshinacara,
interpreted as meaning favourable worship, that is favourable to the
accomplishment of higher purposes, because the worshipper now begins
to understand the nature of Devi, the great goddess. These four kinds
of worship are all said to belong to _pravritti_ or active life. The
other three, considered to be higher, require a special initiation and
belong to _nivritti_, the path of return in which passion and activity
are suppressed.[714] And here is propounded the doctrine that passion
can be destroyed and exhausted by passion,[715] that is to say that
the impulses of eating, drinking and sexual intercourse are best
subjugated by indulging them. The fifth stage, in which this method is
first adopted, is called Vamacara.[716] In the sixth, or
Siddhantacara,[717] the adept becomes more and more free from passion
and prejudice and is finally able to enter Kaulacara, the highest
stage of all. A Kaula is one who has passed beyond all sects and
belongs to none, since he has the knowledge of Brahman. "Possessing
merely the form of man, he moves about this earth for the salvation of
the world and the instruction of men."[718]

These are aspirations common to all Indian religion. The peculiarity
of the Tantras is to suppose that a ritual which is shocking to most
Hindus is an indispensable preliminary to their attainment.[719] Its
essential feature is known as _pancatattva_, the five elements, or
_pancamakara_ the five m's, because they all begin with that letter,
namely, _madya_, _mamsa_, _matsya_, _mudra_, and _maithuna_, wine, meat,
fish, parched grain and copulation. The celebration of this ritual
takes place at midnight, and is called _cakra_ or circle. The
proceedings begin by the devotees seating themselves in a circle and
are said to terminate in an indiscriminate orgy. It is only fair to
say that some Tantras inveigh against drunkenness and authorize only
moderate drinking.[720] In all cases it is essential that the wine,
flesh, etc., should be formally dedicated to the goddess: without this
preliminary indulgence in these pleasures is sinful. Indeed it may be
said that apart from the ceremonial which they inculcate, the general
principles of the Tantras breathe a liberal and intelligent spirit.
Caste restrictions are minimized: travelling is permitted. Women are
honoured: they can act as teachers: the burning of widows is
forbidden:[721] girl widows may remarry[722] and the murder of a woman
is peculiarly heinous. Prostitution is denounced. Whereas Christianity
is sometimes accused of restricting its higher code to Church and
Sundays, the opposite may be said of Tantrism. Outside the temple its
morality is excellent.

A work like the Mahanirvana Tantra presents a refined form of Saktism
modified, so far as may be, in conformity with ordinary Hindu
usage.[723] But other features indubitably connect it with aboriginal
cults. For instance there is a legend which relates how the body of
the Sakti was cut into pieces and scattered over Assam and Bengal.
This story has an uncouth and barbarous air and seems out of place
even in Puranic mythology. It recalls the tales told of Osiris,
Orpheus and Halfdan the Black[724] and may be ultimately traceable to
the idea that the dismemberment of a deity or a human representative
ensures fertility. Until recently the Khonds of Bengal used to hack
human victims in pieces as a sacrifice to the Earth Goddess and throw
the shreds of flesh on the fields to secure a good harvest.[725] In
Sanskrit literature I have not found any authority for the
dismemberment of Sati earlier than the Tantras or Upapuranas (_e.g._
Kalika), but this late appearance does not mean that the legend is
late in itself but merely that it was not countenanced by Sanskrit
writers until medieval times. Various reasons for the dismemberment
are given and the incident is rather awkwardly tacked on to other
stories. One common version relates that when Sati (one of the many
forms of Sakti) died of vexation because her husband Siva was insulted
by her father Daksha, Siva took up her corpse and wandered
distractedly carrying it on his shoulder.[726] In order to stop this
penance Vishnu followed him and cut off pieces from the corpse with
his quoit until the whole had fallen to earth in fifty-one pieces. The
spots where these pieces touched the ground are held sacred and called
piths. At most of them are shown a rock supposed to represent some
portion of the goddess's body and some object called a bhairabi, left
by Siva as a guardian to protect her and often taking the form of a
lingam. The most important of these piths are Kamakhya near Gauhati,
Faljur in the Jaintia Parganas, and Kalighat in Calcutta.[727]

Though the Sakti of Siva is theoretically one, yet since she assumes
many forms she becomes in practice many deities or rather she is many
deities combined in one or sometimes a sovereign attended by a retinue
of similar female spirits. Among such forms we find the ten
Mahavidyas, or personifications of her supernatural knowledge; the
Mahamatris, Matrikas or the Great Mothers, allied to the aboriginal
goddesses already mentioned; the Nayakas or mistresses; the Yoginis or
sorceresses, and fiends called Dakinis. But the most popular of her
manifestations are Durga and Kali. The sects which revere these
goddesses are the most important religious bodies in Bengal, where
they number thirty-five million adherents. The Durgapuja is the
greatest festival of the year in north-eastern India[728] and in the
temple of Kalighat at Calcutta may be seen the singular spectacle of
educated Hindus decapitating goats before the image of Kali. It is a
black female figure with gaping mouth and protruded tongue dancing on
a prostrate body,[729] and adorned with skulls and horrid emblems of
destruction. Of her four hands two carry a sword and a severed head
but the other two are extended to give blessing and protection to her
worshippers. So great is the crowd of enthusiastic suppliants that it
is often hard to approach the shrine and the nationalist party in
Bengal who clamour for parliamentary institutions are among the
goddess's devotees.

It is easy to criticize and condemn this worship. Its outward signs
are repulsive to Europeans and its inner meaning strange, for even
those who pray to the Madonna are startled by the idea that the divine
nature is essentially feminine.[730] Yet this idea has deep roots in
the heart of Bengal and with it another idea: the terrors of death,
plague and storm are half but only half revelations of the
goddess-mother who can be smiling and tender as well. Whatever may be
the origin of Kali and of the strange images which represent her, she
is now no she-devil who needs to be propitiated, but a reminder that
birth and death are twins, that the horrors of the world come from the
same source as its grace and beauty and that cheerful acceptance of
the deity's terrible manifestations is an essential part of the higher
spiritual life.[731] These ideas are best expressed in the songs of
Rama Prasada Sen (1718-1775) which "still reign supreme in the
villages" of Bengal and show that this strange worship has really a
hold on millions of Indian rustics.[732] The directness and childlike
simplicity of his poems have caused an Indian critic to compare him to
Blake. "Though the mother beat the child," he sings, "the child cries
mother, mother, and clings still tighter to her garment. True, I
cannot see thee, yet I am not a lost child. I still cry mother,
mother."

"All the miseries that I have suffered and am suffering, I know, O
mother, to be your mercy alone."

I must confess that I cannot fully sympathize with this worship, even
when it is sung in the hymns of Rama Prasada, but it is clear that he
makes it tolerable just because he throws aside all the magic and
ritual of the Tantras and deals straight with what are for him
elemental and emotional facts. He makes even sceptics feel that he has
really seen God in this strange guise.

The chief sanctuary of Saktism is at Kamakhya (or Kamaksha) on a hill
which stands on the banks of the Brahmaputra, about two miles below
Gauhati. It is mentioned in the Padma Purana. The temples have been
rebuilt several times, and in the eighteenth century were munificently
endowed by an Ahom king, and placed under the management of a Brahman
from Nadia in Bengal, with reversion to his descendants who bear the
title of Parbatiya Gosains. Considerable estates are still assigned to
their upkeep. There are ten[733] shrines on the hill dedicated to
various forms of the Sakti. The situation is magnificent, commanding
an extensive prospect over the Brahmaputra and the plains on either
bank, but none of the buildings are of much architectural merit. The
largest and best is the temple dedicated to Kamakhya herself, the
goddess of sexual desire. It is of the style usual in northern India,
an unlighted shrine surmounted by a dome, and approached by a rather
ample vestibule, which is also imperfectly lighted. An inscription has
been preserved recording the restoration of the temple about 1550 but
only the present basement dates from that time, most of the
super-structure being recent. Europeans may not enter but an image of
the goddess can be seen from a side door. In the depths of the shrine
is said to be a cleft in the rock, adored as the Yoni of Sakti. In
front of the temple are two posts to which a goat is tied, and
decapitated daily at noon. Below the principal shrine is the temple of
Bhairavi. Human sacrifices were offered here in comparatively recent
times, and it is not denied that they would be offered now if the law
allowed. Also it is not denied that the rites of the "five m's"
already mentioned are frequently performed in these temples, and that
Aghoris may be found in them. The spot attracts a considerable number
of pilgrims from Bengal, and a wealthy devotee has built a villa on
the hill and pays visits to it for the purpose of taking part in the
rites. I was informed that the most esteemed scriptures of the sect
are the Yogini Tantra, the Mahanirvana Tantra, and the Kalika
Purana. This last work contains a section or chapter on blood,[734]
which gives rules for the performance of human sacrifices. It states
however that they should not be performed by the first three castes,
which is perhaps a way of saying that though they may be performed by
non-Aryans under Brahmanic auspices they form no part of the Aryan
religion. But they are recommended to princes and ministers and should
not be performed without the consent of princes. The ritual bears
little resemblance to the Vedic sacrifices and the essence of the
ceremony is the presentation to the goddess of the victim's severed
head in a vessel of gold, silver, copper, brass or wood but not of
iron. The axe with which the decapitation is to be performed is
solemnly consecrated to Kali and the victim is worshipped before
immolation. The sacrificer first thinks of Brahma and the other gods
as being present in the victim's body, and then prays to him directly
as being all the gods in one. "When this has been done" says Siva, who
is represented as himself revealing these rules, "the victim is even
as myself." This identification of the human victim with the god has
many analogies elsewhere, particularly among the Khonds.[735]

It is remarkable that this barbarous and immoral worship, though
looked at askance except in its own holy places, is by no means
confined to the lower castes. A series of apologies composed in
excellent English (but sometimes anonymous) attest the sympathy of the
educated. So far as theology and metaphysics are concerned, these
defences are plausible. The Sakti is identified with Prakriti or with
the Maya of the Advaita philosophy and defined as the energy,
coexistent with Brahman, which creates the world. But attempts to
palliate the ceremonial, such as the argument that it is a
consecration and limitation of the appetites because they may be
gratified only in the service of the goddess, are not convincing. Nor
do the Saktas, when able to profess their faith openly, deny the
nature of their rites or the importance attached to them. An
oft-quoted tantric verse represents Siva as saying _Maithunena
mahayogi mama tulyo na samsayah_. And for practical purposes that is
the gist of Saktist teaching.

The temples of Kamakhya leave a disagreeable impression--an impression
of dark evil haunts of lust and bloodshed, akin to madness and
unrelieved by any grace or vigour of art. For there is no attempt in
them to represent the terrible or voluptuous aspects of Hinduism, such
as find expression in sculpture elsewhere. All the buildings, and
especially the modern temple of Kali, which was in process of
construction when I saw the place, testify to the atrophy and
paralysis produced by erotic forms of religion in the artistic and
intellectual spheres, a phenomenon which finds another sad
illustration in quite different theological surroundings among the
Vallabhacarya sect at Gokul near Muttra.

It would be a poor service to India to palliate the evils and
extravagances of Saktism, but still it must be made clear that it is
not a mere survival of barbaric practices. The writers of the Tantras
are good Hindus and declare that their object is to teach liberation
and union with the Supreme Spirit. The ecstasies induced by tantric
rites produce this here in a preliminary form to be made perfect in
the liberated soul. This is not the craze of a few hysterical
devotees, but the faith of millions among whom many are well educated.
In some aspects Saktism is similar to the erotic Vishnuite sects, but
there is little real analogy in their ways of thinking. For the
essence of Vishnuism is passionate devotion and self-surrender to a
deity and this idea is not prominent in the Tantras. The strange
inconsistencies of Saktism are of the kind which are characteristic of
Hinduism as a whole, but the contrasts are more violent and the
monstrosities more conspicuous than elsewhere; wild legends and
metaphysics are mixed together, and the peace that passes all
understanding is to be obtained by orgies and offerings of blood.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 680: See also chap. XXIV. as to Saktism and Tantrism in
Buddhism. Copious materials for the study of Saktism and Tantrism are
being made available in the series of tantric texts edited in Sanskrit
and Tibetan, and in some cases translated by the author who uses the
pseudonym A. Avalon.]

[Footnote 681: See _Annales du Musee Guimet_, Tome VIII.
Si-Do-In-Dzon. Gestes de l'officiant dans les ceremonies mystiques des
sectes Tendai et Singon, 1899.]

[Footnote 682: See Underhill, _Mysticism_, chaps. VI. and VII.]

[Footnote 683: See Dhalla, _Zoroastrian Theology_, p. 116.]

[Footnote 684: Specially Ath. Veda, XII. 1.]

[Footnote 685: Village deities in south India at the present day are
usually female. See Whitehead, _Village Gods_, p. 21.]

[Footnote 686: Thus Candi is considered as identical with the wood
goddess Basuli, worshipped in the jungles of Bengal and Orissa. See
_J.A._ 1873, p. 187.]

[Footnote 687: Vaj. Sanh. 3. 57 and Taittir. Br. I. 6. 10. 4.]

[Footnote 688: Crooke, _Popular Religion of Northern India_, I. 63.
