
_WEDDING._


Time was when hymns were sung at weddings, though in America the
practice was never universal. Marriage, among Protestants, is not one of
the sacraments, and no masses are chanted for it by ecclesiastical
ordinance. The question of music at private marriages depends on
convenience, vocal or instrumental equipment, and the general drift of
the occasion. At public weddings the organ's duty is the "Wedding
March."

To revive a fashion of singing at home marriages would be considered an
oddity--and, where civil marriages are legal, a superfluity--but in the
religious ceremony, just after the prayer that follows the completion of
the nuptial formula, it will occur to some that a hymn would "tide over"
a proverbially awkward moment. Even good, quaint old John Berridge's
lines would happily relieve the embarrassment--besides reminding the
more thoughtless that a wedding is not a mere piece of social fun--

    Since Jesus truly did appear
      To grace a marriage feast
    O Lord, we ask Thy presence here
      To make a wedding guest.

    Upon the bridal pair look down
      Who now have plighted hands;
    Their union with Thy favor crown
      And bless the nuptial bands

       *       *       *       *       *

    In purest love these souls unite
      That they with Christian care
    May make domestic burdens light
      By taking each a share.

Tune, "Lanesboro," Mason.

A wedding hymn of more poetic beauty is the one written by Miss Dorothy
Bloomfield (now Mrs. Gurney), born 1858, for her sister's marriage in
1883.

    O perfect Love, all human thought transcending,
      Lowly we kneel in prayer before Thy throne
    That their's may be a love which knows no ending
      Whom Thou forevermore dost join in one.

    O perfect Life, be Thou their first assurance
      Of tender charity and steadfast faith,
    Of patient hope and quiet, brave endurance,
      With childlike trust that fears nor pain nor death.

    Grant them the joy which brightens earthly sorrow,
      Grant them the peace which calms all earthly strife,
    And to their day the glorious unknown morrow
      That dawns upon eternal love and life.

Tune by Joseph Barnby, "O Perfect Love."


_FRUITION DAY._


"LO! HE COMES WITH CLOUDS DESCENDING."

Thomas Olivers begins one of his hymns with this line. The hymn is a
Judgment-day lyric of rude strength and once in current use, but now
rarely printed. The "Lo He Comes," here specially noted, is the
production of John Cennick, the Moravian.

    Lo! He comes with clouds descending
      Once for favored sinners slain,
    Thousand thousand saints attending
      Swell the triumph of His train.
          Hallelujah!
    God appears on earth to reign.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Yea, amen; let all adore Thee
      High on Thy eternal throne.
    Saviour, take the power and glory,
      Claim the kingdom for thine own;
          O come quickly;
    Hallelujah! Come, Lord, come.


_THE TUNES._

Various composers have written music to this universal hymn, but none
has given it a choral that it can claim as peculiarly its own. "Brest,"
Lowell Mason's plain-song, has a limited range, and runs low on the
staff, but its solemn chords are musical and commanding. As much can be
said of the tunes of Dr. Dykes and Samuel Webbe, which have more
variety. Those who feel that the hymn calls for a more ornate melody
will prefer Madan's "Helmsley."


"LO! WHAT A GLORIOUS SIGHT APPEARS."

The great Southampton bard who wrote "Sweet fields beyond the swelling
flood" was quick to kindle at every reminder of Fruition Day.

    Lo! what a glorious sight appears
      To our believing eyes!
    The earth and seas are passed away,
      And the old rolling skies.
    From the third heaven, where God resides,
      That holy, happy place,
    The New Jerusalem comes down,
      Adorned with shining grace.

This hymn of Watts' sings one of his most exalted visions. It has been
dear for two hundred years to every Christian soul throbbing with
millennial thoughts and wishful of the day when--

    The God of glory down to men
      Removes His best abode,

--and when--

    His own kind hand shall wipe the tears
      From every weeping eye,
    And pains and groans, and griefs and fears,
      And death itself shall die,

--and the yearning cry of the last stanza, when the vision fades, has
been the household ? [A] of myriads of burdened and sorrowing saints--

    How long, dear Saviour, O how long
      Shall this bright hour delay?
    Fly swifter round ye wheels of Time,
      And bring the welcome day!

[Footnote A: Transcriber's note--This question mark is in the original.
It is possibly a compositor's query which the author missed when
correcting the proofs. The missing text could be "word".]


_THE TUNES._

By right of long appropriation both "Northfield" and "New Jerusalem" own
a near relationship to these glorious verses. Ingalls, one of the
constellation of early Puritan psalmodists, to which Billings and Swan
belonged, evidently loved the hymn, and composed his "New Jerusalem" to
the verse, "From the third heaven," and his "Northfield" to "How long,
dear Saviour." The former is now sung only as a reminiscence of the
music of the past, at church festivals, charity fairs and
entertainments of similar design, but the action and hearty joy in it
always evoke sympathetic applause. "Northfield" is still in occasional
use, and it is a jewel of melody, however irretrievably out of fashion.
Its union to that immortal stanza, if no other reason, seems likely to
insure its permanent place in the lists of sacred song.

John Cole's "Annapolis," still found in a few hymnals with these words,
is a little too late to be called a contemporary piece, but there are
some reminders of Ingalls' "New Jerusalem" in its style and vigor, and
it really partakes the flavor of the old New England church music.

Jeremiah Ingalls was born in Andover, Mass., March 1, 1764. A natural
fondness for music increased with his years, but opportunities to
educate it were few and far between, and he seemed like to become no
more than a fairly good bass-viol player in the village choir. But his
determination carried him higher, and in time his self-taught talent
qualified him for a singing-school master, and for many years he
travelled through Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Vermont, training the
raw vocal material in the country towns, and organizing choirs.

Between his thirtieth and fortieth years, he composed a number of tunes,
and, in 1804 published a two hundred page collection of his own and
others' music, which he called the _Christian Harmony_.

His home was for some time in Newberry, Vt., but he subsequently lived
at Rochester and at Hancock in the same state.

Among the traditions of him is this anecdote of the origin of his famous
tune "Northfield," which may indicate something of his temper and
religious habit. During his travels as a singing-school teacher he
stopped at a tavern in the town of Northfield and ordered his dinner. It
was very slow in coming, but the inevitable "how long?" that formulated
itself in his hungry thoughts, instead of sharpening into profane
complaint, fell into the rhythm of Watts' sacred line--and the tune came
with it. To call it "Northfield" was natural enough; the place where its
melody first beguiled him from his bodily wants to a dream of the final
Fruition Day.

Ingalls died in Hancock, Vt., April 6, 1828.




CHAPTER XIV.

HYMNS OF HOPE AND CONSOLATION.


"JERUSALEM THE GOLDEN."

_Urbs Sion Aurea._

"The Seven Great Hymns" of the Latin Church are:

    Laus Patriae Coelestis,--(Praise of the Heavenly Country).
    Veni, Sancte Spiritus,--(Come, Holy Spirit)
    Veni, Creator Spiritus,--(Come, Creator Spirit)
    Dies Irae,--(The Day of Wrath)
    Stabat Mater,--(The Mother Stood By)
    Mater Speciosa,--(The Fair Mother.)
    Vexilla Regis.--(The Banner of the King.)

Chief of these is the first named, though that is but part of a
religious poem of three thousand lines, which the author, Bernard of
Cluny, named "De Contemptu Mundi" (Concerning Disdain of the World.)

Bernard was of English parentage, though born at Morlaix, a seaport town
in the north of France. The exact date of his birth is unknown, though
it was probably about A.D. 1100. He is called Bernard of Cluny because
he lived and wrote at that place, a French town on the Grone where he
was abbot of a famous monastery, and also to distinguish him from
Bernard of Clairvaux.

His great poem is rarely spoken of as a whole, but in three portions, as
if each were a complete work. The first is the long exordium, exhausting
the pessimistic title (contempt of the world), and passing on to the
second, where begins the real "Laus Patriae Coelestis." This being cut
in two, making a third portion, has enriched the Christian world with
two of its best hymns, "For Thee, O Dear, Dear Country," and "Jerusalem
the Golden."

Bernard wrote the medieval or church Latin in its prime of literary
refinement, and its accent is so obvious and its rhythm so musical that
even one ignorant of the language could pronounce it, and catch its
rhymes. The "Contemptu Mundi" begins with these two lines, in a
hexameter impossible to copy in translation:

    Hora novissima; tempora pessima sunt; Vigilemus!
      Ecce minaciter imminet Arbiter, Ille Supremus!

    'Tis the last hour; the times are at their worst;
      Watch; lo the Judge Supreme stands threat'ning nigh!

Or, as Dr. Neale paraphrases and softens it,--

    The World is very evil,
      The times are waxing late,
    Be sober and keep vigil,
      The Judge is at the gate,

--and, after the poet's long, dark diorama of the world's wicked
condition, follows the "Praise of the Heavenly Fatherland," when a
tender glory dawns upon the scene till it breaks into sunrise with the
vision of the Golden City. All that an opulent and devout imagination
can picture of the beauty and bounty of heaven, and all that faith can
construct from the glimpses in the Revelation of its glory and happiness
is poured forth in the lavish poetry of the inspired monk of Cluny--

    Urbs Sion aurea, patria lactea, cive decora,
    Omne cor obruis, omnibus obstruis, et cor et ora.
    Nescio, nescio quae jubilatio lux tibi qualis,
    Quam socialia gaudia, gloria quam specialis.

      Jerusalem, the golden;
        With milk and honey blest;
      Beneath thy contemplation
        Sink heart and voice opprest.
      I know not, O I know not
        What joys await us there,
      With radiancy of glory,
        With bliss beyond compare.

      They stand, those halls of Zion,
        All jubilant with song,[47]
      And bright with many an angel;
        And all the martyr throng.
      The Prince is ever in them,
        The daylight is serene;
      The pastures of the blessed
        Are decked in glorious sheen.

       *       *       *       *       *

      O sweet and blessed country,
        The home of God's elect!
      O sweet and blessed country,
        That eager hearts expect!
      Jesu, in mercy bring us
        To that dear land of rest,
      Who art, with God the Father,
        And Spirit, ever blest.

[Footnote 47: In first editions, "_conjubilant_ with song."]

Dr. John Mason Neale, the translator, was obliged to condense Bernard's
exuberant verse, and he has done so with unsurpassable grace and melody.
He made his translation while "inhibited" from his priestly functions in
the Church of England for his high ritualistic views and practice, and
so poor that he wrote stories for children to earn his living. His
poverty added to the wealth of Christendom.


_THE TUNE._

The music of "Jerusalem the Golden" used in most churches is the
composition of Alexander Ewing, a paymaster in the English army. He was
born in Aberdeen, Scotland, Jan. 3d, 1830, and educated there at
Marischal College. The tune bears his name, and this honor, and its
general favor with the public, are so much testimony to its merit. It is
a stately harmony in D major with sonorous and impressive chords. Ewing
died in 1895.


"WHY SHOULD WE START AND FEAR TO DIE?"

Probably it is an embarrassment of riches and despair of space that have
crowded this hymn--perhaps the sweetest that Watts ever wrote--out of
some of our church singing-books. It is pleasant to find it in the new
_Methodist Hymnal_, though with an indifferent tune.

Christians of today should surely sing the last two stanzas with the
same exalted joy and hope that made them sacred to pious generations
past and gone--

    O if my Lord would come and meet,
      My soul would stretch her wings in haste.
    Fly fearless through death's iron gate,
      Nor feel the terrors as she passed.
    Jesus can make a dying bed
      Feel soft as downy pillows are,
    While on His breast I lean my head
      And breathe my life out sweetly there.


_THE TUNE._

The plain-music of William Boyd's "Pentecost," (with modulations in the
tenor), creates a new accent for the familiar lines. Preferable in every
sense are Bradbury's tender "Zephyr" or "Rest."

No coming generation will ever feel the pious gladness of Amariah Hall's
"All Saints New" in E flat major as it stirred the Christian choirs of
seventy five years ago. Fitted to this heart-felt lyric of Watts, it
opened with the words--

    O if my Lord would come and meet,

in full harmony and four-four time, continuing to the end of the stanza.
The melody, with its slurred syllables and beautiful modulations was
almost blithe in its brightness, while the strong musical bass and the
striking chords of the "counter," chastened it and held the anthem to
its due solemnity of tone and expression. Then the fugue took up--

    Jesus can make a dying bed,

--bass, treble and tenor adding voice after voice in the manner of the
old "canon" song, and the full harmony again carried the words, with
loving repetitions, to the final bar. The music closed with a minor
concord that was strangely effective and sweet.

Amariah Hall was born in Raynham, Mass., April 28, 1785, and died there
Feb. 8, 1827. He "farmed it," manufactured straw-bonnets, kept tavern
and taught singing-school. Music was only an avocation with him, but he
was an artist in his way, and among his compositions are found in some
ancient Tune books his "Morning Glory," "Canaan," "Falmouth,"
"Restoration," "Massachusetts," "Raynham," "Crucifixion," "Harmony,"
"Devotion," "Zion," and "Hosanna."

"All Saints New" was his masterpiece.


"WHEN I CAN READ MY TITLE CLEAR."

No sacred song has been more profanely parodied by the thoughtless, or
more travestied, (if we may use so strong a word), in popular religious
airs, than this golden hymn which has made Isaac Watts a benefactor to
every prisoner of hope. Not to mention the fancy figures and refrains
of camp-meeting music, which have cheapened it, neither John Cole's
"Annapolis" nor Arne's "Arlington" nor a dozen others that have borrowed
these speaking lines, can wear out their association with "Auld lang
Syne." The hymn has permeated the tune, and, without forgetting its own
words, the Scotch melody preforms both a social and religious mission.
Some arrangements of it make it needlessly repetitious, but its pathos
will always best vocalize the hymn, especially the first and last
stanzas--

    When I can read my title clear
      To mansions in the skies
    I'll bid farewell to every fear
      And wipe my weeping eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

    There shall I bathe my weary soul
      In seas of heavenly rest,
    And not a wave of trouble roll
      Across my peaceful breast.


"VITAL SPARK OF HEAVENLY FLAME."

This paraphrase, by Alexander Pope, of the Emperor Adrian's death-bed
address to his soul--

    Animula, vagula, blandula,
      Hospes, comesque corporis,

--transfers the poetry and constructs a hymnic theme.

An old hymn writer by the name of Flatman wrote a Pindaric, somewhat
similar to "Adrian's Address," as follows:

    When on my sick-bed I languish,
    Full of sorrow, full of anguish,
    Fainting, gasping, trembling, crying,
    Panting, groaning, speechless, dying;
    Methinks I hear some gentle spirit say,
   "Be not fearful, come away."

Pope combined these two poems with the words of Divine inspiration, "O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" and made a
pagan philosopher's question the text for a triumphant Christian anthem
of hope.

    Vital spark of heavenly flame,
    Quit, oh quit this mortal frame.
    Trembling, hoping, ling'ring, flying,
    Oh the pain, the bliss of dying!
    Cease, fond nature, cease thy strife,
    And let me languish into life.

    Hark! they whisper: angels say,
   "Sister spirit, come away!"
    What is this absorbs me quite,
    Steals my senses, shuts my sight,
    Drowns my spirit, draws my breath,
    Tell me, my soul, can this be death?

    The world recedes: it disappears:
    Heaven opens on my eyes; my ears
      With sounds seraphic ring.
    Lend, lend your wings! I mount! I fly!
    O grave where is thy victory?
      O death, where is thy sting?


_THE TUNE._

The old anthem, "The Dying Christian," or "The Dying Christian to his
Soul," which first made this lyric familiar in America as a musical
piece, will never be sung again except at antique entertainments, but it
had an importance in its day.

Beginning in quadruple time on four flats minor, it renders the first
stanza in flowing concords largo affettuoso, and a single bass fugue,
Then suddenly shifting to one flat, major, duple time, it executes the
second stanza, "Hark! they whisper" ... "What is this, etc.," in
alternate pianissimo and forte phrases; and finally, changing to triple
time, sings the third triumphant stanza, andante, through staccato and
fortissimo. The shout in the last adagio, on the four final bars, "O
Death! O Death!" softening with "where is thy sting?" is quite in the
style of old orchestral magnificence.

Since "The Dying Christian" ceased to appear in church music, the poem,
for some reason, seems not to have been recognized as a hymn. It is,
however, a Christian poem, and a true lyric of hope and consolation,
whatever the character of the author or however pagan the original that
suggested it.

The most that is now known of Edward Harwood, the composer of the
anthem, is that he was an English musician and psalmodist, born near
Blackburn, Lancaster Co., 1707, and died about 1787.


"YOUR HARPS, YE TREMBLING SAINTS."

This hymn of Toplady,--unlike "A Debtor to Mercy Alone," and "Inspirer
and Hearer of Prayer," both now little used,--stirs no controversial
feeling by a single line of his aggressive Calvinism. It is simply a
song of Christian gratitude and joy.

    Your harps, ye trembling saints
      Down from the willows take;
    Loud to the praise of Love Divine
      Bid every string awake.

    Though in a foreign land,
      We are not far from home,
    And nearer to our house above
      We every moment come.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Blest is the man, O God,
      That stays himself on Thee,
    Who waits for Thy salvation, Lord,
      Shall Thy salvation see.


_THE TUNE._

"Olmutz" was arranged by Lowell Mason from a Gregorian chant. He set it
himself to Toplady's hymn, and it seems the natural music for it. The
words are also sometimes written and sung to Jonathan Woodman's "State
St."

Jonathan Call Woodman was born in Newburyport, Mass., July 12, 1813. He
was the organist of St. George's Chapel, Flushing L.I. and a teacher,
composer and compiler. His _Musical Casket_ was not issued until Dec.
1858, but he wrote the tune of "State St." in August, 1844. It was a
contribution to Bradbury's _Psalmodist_, which was published the same
year.


"YE GOLDEN LAMPS OF HEAVEN, FAREWELL."

Dr. Doddridge's "farewell" is not a note of regret. Unlike Bernard, he
appreciates this world while he anticipates the better one, but his
contemplation climbs from God's footstool to His throne. His thought is
in the last two lines of the second stanza, where he takes leave of the
sun--

    My soul that springs beyond thy sphere
      No more demands thine aid.

But his fancy will find a function for the "golden lamps" even in the
glory that swallows up their light--

    Ye stars are but the shining dust
      Of my divine abode,
    The pavement of those heavenly courts
      Where I shall dwell with God.

    The Father of eternal light
      Shall there His beams display,
    Nor shall one moment's darkness mix
      With that unvaried day.


_THE TUNE._

The hymn has been assigned to "Mt. Auburn," a composition of George
Kingsley, but a far better interpretation--if not best of all--is H.K.
Oliver's tune of "Merton," (1847,) older, but written purposely for the
words.


"TRIUMPHANT ZION, LIFT THY HEAD."

This fine and stimulating lyric is Doddridge in another tone. Instead of
singing hope to the individual, he sounds a note of encouragement to
the church.

    Put all thy beauteous garments on,
    And let thy excellence be known;
    Decked in the robes of righteousness,
    The world thy glories shall confess.

       *       *       *       *       *

    God from on high has heard thy prayer;
    His hand thy ruins shall repair,
    Nor will thy watchful Monarch cease
    To guard thee in eternal peace.

The tune, "Anvern," is one of Mason's charming melodies, full of vigor
and cheerful life, and everything can be said of it that is said of the
hymn. Duffield compares the hymn and tune to a ring and its jewel.

It is one of the inevitable freaks of taste that puts so choice a strain
of psalmody out of fashion. Many younger pieces in the church manuals
could be better spared.


"SHRINKING FROM THE COLD HAND OF DEATH."

This is a hymn of contrast, the dark of recoiling nature making the
background of the rainbow. Written by Charles Wesley, it has passed
among his forgotten or mostly forgotten productions but is notable for
the frequent use of its 3rd stanza by his brother John. John Wesley, in
his old age, did not so much shrink from death as from the thought of
its too slow approach. His almost constant prayer was, "Lord, let me not
live to be useless." "At every place," says Belcher, "after giving to
his societies what he desired them to consider his last advice, he
invariably concluded with the stanza beginning--

  "'Oh that, without a lingering groan,
      I may the welcome word receive.
    My body with my charge lay down,
      And cease at once to work and live.'"

The anticipation of death itself by both the great evangelists ended
like the ending of the hymn--

    No anxious doubt, no guilty gloom
      Shall daunt whom Jesus' presence cheers;
    My Light, my Life, my God is come,
      And glory in His face appears.


"FOREVER WITH THE LORD."

Montgomery had the Ambrosian gift of spiritual song-writing. Whatever
may be thought of his more ambitious descriptive or heroic pages of
verse, and his long narrative poems, his lyrics and cabinet pieces are
gems. The poetry in some exquisite stanzas of his "Grave" is a dream of
peace:

    There is a calm for those who weep,
      A rest for weary mortals found;
    They softly lie and sweetly sleep
        Low in the ground.

    The storms that wreck the winter's sky
      No more disturb their deep repose
    Than summer evening's latest sigh
        That shuts the rose.

But in the poem, "At Home in Heaven," which we are considering--with its
divine text in I Thess. 4:17--the Sheffield bard rises to the heights of
vision. He wrote it when he was an old man. The contemplation so
absorbed him that he could not quit his theme till he had composed
twenty-two quatrains. Only four or five--or at most only seven of
them--are now in general use. Like his "Prayer is the Soul's Sincere
Desire," they have the pith of devotional thought in them, but are less
subjective and analytical.

    Forever with the Lord!
      Amen, so let it be,
    Life from the dead is in that word;
     'Tis immortality.

