disciples, was to be poured out for them. This supper is therefore to be a
memorial of redeeming grace; it is to show forth the Lord's death, as he
himself said, "This do in remembrance of me."

4. It is to be a time of hope. Even under the shadow of the cross our Lord
pointed his disciples to the glory of his throne; while their hearts were
torn by the thought of separation, he reminded them of a reunion when they
would eat and drink together "in the kingdom of God." He declared that
they were to have a time of temptation, but if they suffered with him,
they would also reign with him. "I appoint unto you a kingdom, even as my
Father appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my
kingdom." Thus the communion season is a time when we especially look
forward to glad reunions with those who have passed on before. We cheer
our hearts with visions of coming glory. Under the darkest shadows we look
for the opening skies and for the return of Christ; we "proclaim the
Lord's death till he come."

5. It is a time of consecration. While the disciples were seated at the
table they were disputing as to which of them was greatest. Our Saviour
gave them a memorable example when he stooped down and washed their feet,
and then most impressively he explained to them the character of true
greatness and showed that its essence lay in service; to quote his own
words, "He that is the greater among you, let him become as the younger;
and he that is chief, as he that doth serve." As we turn from the table of
our Lord it should ever be with a desire to go forth in his name and to do
anything in our power to serve our fellow men, and to follow in his
footsteps who came "not to be ministered unto but to minister, and to give
his life a ransom for many."

6. It should be a time of humility, when we realize anew our weakness and
our dependence upon Christ and his sustaining grace. Jesus found it
necessary to warn his disciples concerning their coming temptations and
trials, and particularly to foretell the fall of Peter. Turning to the
impulsive, affectionate, fickle disciple, who seems to have been the
leader of the apostolic band, he told him that Satan had desired to have
the disciples, to sift them as wheat, but that Jesus himself had made
special prayer for Peter that his faith should not fail, even though Jesus
foresaw that for a time his courage would give way and that he would deny
his Master. He urged Peter, however, to repent after his fall and to
encourage his fellow disciples. Such a statement of the weakness and
unfaithfulness which Peter was to manifest seemed incredible to him and he
protested, "Lord, with thee I am ready to go both to prison and to death."
But Jesus sadly replied, "I tell thee, Peter, the cock shall not crow this
day, until thou shalt thrice deny that thou knowest me."

It is impossible to observe the Lord's Supper without memories of past
failure, and it is only too true that similar experiences of weakness will
be shown in days to come. Every such disloyalty gives pain to our Lord,
but if our hearts are really yielded to him, our faults will be followed
by true repentance. If we really trust in him, he is ready to pardon; as
he prayed for Peter, so he is praying for us; though we at times stumble,
he will not allow us utterly to fall. He is able to save "to the uttermost
... seeing he ever liveth to make intercession" for us.

7. This should be a time of new resolution. We should be humble and
trustful in view of past and of possible future failures, but we should
determine to stand firmly in the strength which the Master supplies. He
told his followers in the upper room of the changed conditions which they
were to meet when he had been taken from them. The enemies who would take
his life would surely not treat his disciples with kindness. He assured
them that they were now to be left more to their own resources and that
they were to meet with the most bitter hostility. He even suggested that
it would be necessary for each one to buy a sword. They took his words
with absurd literalness and they said, "Lord, behold, here are two
swords." It was with sad irony that Jesus replied, "It is enough." Of
course, he did not mean that his followers are to use violence or are to
extend the gospel by means of force. He only wished us to be warned and to
resolve anew that in the spiritual conflict which awaits us we shall be
true to him as loyal soldiers of the cross. We go forth to battle, but on
some brighter morrow we shall be seated with him at a heavenly feast with
banquet and song.




C. The Agony In Gethsemane. Ch. 22:39-46


    39 And he came out, and went, as his custom was, unto the mount of
    Olives; and the disciples also followed him. 40 And when he was at
    the place, he said unto them, Pray that ye enter not into
    temptation. 41 And he was parted from them about a stone's cast;
    and he kneeled down and prayed, 42 saying, Father, if thou be
    willing, remove this cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but
    thine, be done. 43 And there appeared unto him an angel from
    heaven, strengthening him. 44 And being in an agony he prayed more
    earnestly; and his sweat became as it were great drops of blood
    falling down upon the ground. 45 And when he rose up from his
    prayer, he came unto the disciples, and found them sleeping for
    sorrow, 46 and said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and pray, that
    ye enter not into temptation.


From the quiet fellowship in the upper room Jesus with his disciples,
under the shadow of the night, went forth to the Garden of Gethsemane, a
favorite resort on the slope of the Mount of Olives, and he there
experienced that unequaled anguish of soul which is commonly known as his
"agony." To enter the sacred privacy of that scene even in imagination
seems to be an intrusion, and yet some glimpses have been revealed for our
instruction and encouragement as his disciples.

There can be no doubt that this distress which seized him was due to his
clear vision of the death he was to endure on the following day; and this
very agony adds beyond measure to the meaning and the mystery of that
death. For any sensitive soul to shrink from pain and anguish is but
natural and pardonable; yet if Jesus suffered such incomparable agony
simply in view of physical torture, he was less heroic than many of his
followers have been. If, however, in the hour of death, he was to be so
identified with sin as to become the Redeemer of the world; if he was "to
give his life a ransom for many;" if his experience as the Lamb of God was
to be absolutely unique; if he was to endure the hiding of his Father's
face, then we can understand why it was that in the dark hour of
anticipation his soul was sorrowful "even unto death." The agony of our
Lord must never be supposed to reflect upon his human heroism; it is
rather a proof of his divine atonement. The "cup" which Jesus was asked to
drink consisted of death as "the Bearer of sin."

In this hour of most bitter trial Jesus found relief in prayer. He had
come to Gethsemane that he might be alone with God. He had exhorted his
disciples to follow his example. When the agony most fiercely gripped his
lonely heart he still prayed and he was heard. The cup was not removed,
but "There appeared unto him an angel from heaven, strengthening him." He
was given grace to drain the cup to its very dregs and death lost its
sting and the grave its terror. He was fitted for perfect sympathy with
those who are called upon to face the mystery of "unanswered prayer." "He
became unto all them that obey him the author of eternal salvation."

Jesus prayed in faith; and the very essence of such believing prayer is
the willingness to obey. This was the petition which comes to us as an
example, "Nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." He won his
victory by complete submission to the will of his Father. Henceforth there
was no more struggle. He turned with unfaltering step to meet betrayal and
agony and death. The hour struck and he was ready. "He was well content."




D. The Arrest Of Jesus. Ch. 22:47-53


    47 While he yet spake, behold, a multitude, and he that was called
    Judas, one of the twelve, went before them; and he drew near unto
    Jesus to kiss him. 48 But Jesus said unto him, Judas, betrayest
    thou the Son of man with a kiss? 49 And when they that were about
    him saw what would follow, they said, Lord, shall we smite with
    the sword? 50 And a certain one of them smote the servant of the
    high priest, and struck off his right ear. 51 But Jesus answered
    and said, Suffer ye _them_ thus far. And he touched his ear, and
    healed him. 52 And Jesus said unto the chief priests, and captains
    of the temple, and elders, that were come against him, Are ye come
    out, as against a robber, with swords and staves? 53 When I was
    daily with you in the temple, ye stretched not forth your hands
    against me: but this is your hour, and the power of darkness.


The manner in which Judas concluded his foul crime was in perfect keeping
with its essential baseness. He led a multitude armed with swords and
clubs into the Garden where his Master was wont to retire for prayer, and
there betrayed him with a kiss, a sign which had been agreed upon in order
that, in the deep shadows, one of the disciples might not be mistaken for
the Master and arrested in his place. A kiss was a usual sign of
friendship, but the manner of Judas and the rebuke of Jesus indicate that
it was given with a false semblance of deep affection and was thus the
more repulsive to the Lord. Acts of disloyalty to Christ are even more
distressing to him in surroundings which are sacred and when committed by
those who have made loud protestations of love.

The fearless composure of the Master is now contrasted with the conduct of
his followers. They asked whether they should defend him with the sword,
and before he could reply, Peter rashly smote the servant of the high
priest and cut off his right ear. To this act Jesus made reply, "Suffer ye
them thus far;" the exact meaning is not certain, but probably he was
addressing his disciples to prevent further violence. He then touched the
ear of the servant and healed him. Only Luke, "the beloved physician,"
mentions this "unique miracle of surgery." The incident has its message
for disciples in all ages. Violence and cruelty in the defense of the
cause of Christ misrepresent him to the world. The act of Peter gave
countenance to charges which would be preferred against Jesus, and further
resistance would have compromised the position of his Lord. However well
intended, such rash defenses weaken the cause they are designed to
promote.

Jesus turned to rebuke his enemies and resented the fact that they had
come against him as against a robber with swords and clubs. He reminded
them that daily he had taught in public. Their coming with violence, in
secrecy; and under the cover of night, was a proof that the arrest was
false and that it could not be justified. There had been abundant
opportunities during many days to seize him in public when he was
unprotected. Their present course bore its own condemnation; but he added
mournfully, "This is your hour, and the power of darkness." In the mystery
of his providence God was allowing this iniquity. He was giving this
temporary authority to the forces of evil. It was to be a brief hour, but
those who willingly put it to such a use would incur eternal condemnation.
Nothing is more solemn than the possibility of using for evil ends the
liberty allotted us of God.




E. Peter's Denial. Ch. 22:54-62


    54 And they seized him, and led him _away_, and brought him into
    the high priest's house. But Peter followed afar off. 55 And when
    they had kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and had sat
    down together, Peter sat in the midst of them. 56 And a certain
    maid seeing him as he sat in the light _of the fire_, and looking
    stedfastly upon him, said, This man also was with him. 57 But he
    denied, saying, Woman, I know him not. 58 And after a little while
    another saw him, and said, Thou also art _one_ of them. But Peter
    said, Man, I am not. 59 And after the space of about one hour
    another confidently affirmed, saying, Of a truth this man also was
    with him; for he is a Galilaean. 60 But Peter said, Man, I know not
    what thou sayest. And immediately, while he yet spake, the cock
    crew. 61 And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter. And Peter
    remembered the word of the Lord, how that he said unto him, Before
    the cock crow this day thou shalt deny me thrice. 62 And he went
    out, and wept bitterly.


Peter really loved Jesus and his faith in him never failed; but in the
hour of trial, which Jesus had predicted, Peter lost courage and denied
his Lord. His sin, however, was unlike that of Judas. The latter was the
final step in a downward course. The former was an act of cowardice in a
career of moral development which resulted in blessing and service to all
the followers of Christ.

The fall of Peter may be traced to his self-confidence. When he protested
that he would be true to Christ, even though all should forsake him, he
was sincere and expressed the true feeling of his heart, but he betrayed
his pride. The immediate result was his failure to obey the Master and to
watch and pray as he had been bidden; and consequently he was surprised
and stunned by the arrest of Jesus, and like the other disciples, after a
rash stroke in his defense, he forsook Jesus and fled. He followed Jesus
to the palace of the high priest but hoped to conceal his discipleship and
to be regarded as one of the excited crowd.

Every follower of Christ is in mortal danger when confident of his moral
strength and especially when at the same time he is ashamed to be publicly
known as a disciple, and most of all when he feels, as Peter probably
felt, that confessed loyalty to Christ can under the circumstances be of
no special help to his Lord. At such a time when the cause of Jesus seemed
hopeless, when the courage of Peter was gone, when he was wearied by the
long night of sleeplessness, when cold and lonely, the unexpected attack
was made and Peter suffered his tragic defeat.

It may be easy to point the finger of scorn at the great apostle, but
there are few followers of Christ who at times of less severe testing have
not as truly denied their Lord, by word or deed, with cowardice and deceit
and passion. Three times Peter repeated his denial and then he heard the
crowing of a cock. The incident was insignificant in itself, but it
recalled the word of his Master; it made Peter conscious of his disgrace
but it called him to himself, and then as he turned toward the palace, for
a moment he caught sight of his Lord. We may be unable to conjecture what
was expressed in the face of Jesus as at that moment he "looked upon
Peter." There may have been something of rebuke, but probably there was
more of unutterable sorrow and of tender sympathy. We read that as "Peter
remembered the word of the Lord, ... he went out, and wept bitterly."
Surely these were tears of repentance and they prepared the way for pardon
and for peace. To many a fallen follower of Christ there has come some
minute providence recalling hours of glad fellowship and messages of
solemn warning, and the heart has been turned toward the Master, and true
repentance has been felt in realizing the pain which the disloyalty has
brought to the loving Lord.

The consciousness has brought bitter tears and hours of regret and of
anguish, but they have been followed by a brighter morning, by a meeting
with the risen Christ, by a new confession of love, by words of peace, and
by a truer life of deeper devotion to his cause.




F. Jesus Before The Jewish Rulers. Ch. 22:63-71


    63 And the men that held _Jesus_ mocked him, and beat him. 64 And
    they blindfolded him, and asked him, saying, Prophesy: who is he
    that struck thee? 65 And many other things spake they against him,
    reviling him.


    66 And as soon as it was day, the assembly of the elders of the
    people was gathered together, both chief priests and scribes; and
    they led him away into their council, saying, 67 If thou art the
    Christ, tell us. But he said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not
    believe: 68 and if I ask _you_, ye will not answer. 69 But from
    henceforth shall the Son of man be seated at the right hand of the
    power of God. 70 And they all said, Art thou then the Son of God?
    And he said unto them, Ye say that I am. 71 And they said, What
    further need have we of witness? for we ourselves have heard from
    his own mouth.


After Jesus had been denied by Peter, he was grossly insulted and abused
by his captors. He was mocked and beaten and reviled. Those responsible
for these indignities were the Jewish rulers, the most cultured and
refined and professedly religious men of their day; but the beast within
man is more powerful than we commonly suppose. When Christ is rejected,
when his teachings are despised, when his Spirit is opposed, then it is
only a question of time and of occasion when hatred or malice or lust or
anger awaken in man the passions and ferocity of the brute.

When the morning dawned, Jesus was led away to be arraigned formally
before the sanhedrin, the supreme ecclesiastical court of the Jews. He was
supposed to be on trial for his life; in reality the council was being
judged, and in its guilt the entire nation was involved. The rulers
convicted themselves of prejudice, dishonesty, and malice. They did not
