

[Page 389.]


    To form the bud for bursting bloom, [1]
    The hoary head with joy to crown;
    In short, the right to work and pray,
    "To point to heaven and lead the way."




The Mother's Evening Prayer


    O gentle presence, peace and joy and power;
      O Life divine, that owns each waiting hour,
    Thou Love that guards the nestling's faltering flight!
      Keep Thou my child on upward wing to-night.

    Love is our refuge; only with mine eye [10]
      Can I behold the snare, the pit, the fall:
    His habitation high is here, and nigh,
      His arm encircles me, and mine, and all.

    O make me glad for every scalding tear,
      For hope deferred, ingratitude, disdain! [15]
    Wait, and love more for every hate, and fear
      No ill,--since God is good, and loss is gain.

    Beneath the shadow of His mighty wing;
      In that sweet secret of the narrow way,
    Seeking and finding, with the angels sing: [20]
      "Lo, I am with you alway,"--watch and pray.

    No snare, no fowler, pestilence or pain;
      No night drops down upon the troubled breast,
    When heaven's aftersmile earth's tear-drops gain,
      And mother finds her home and heavenly rest. [25]


[Page 390.]




June


    Whence are thy wooings, gentle June?
      Thou hast a Naiad's charm;
    Thy breezes scent the rose's breath;
      Old Time gives thee her palm. [5]
    The lark's shrill song doth wake the dawn;
      The eve-bird's forest flute
    Gives back some maiden melody,
      Too pure for aught so mute.

    The fairy-peopled world of flowers, [10]
      Enraptured by thy spell,
    Looks love unto the laughing hours,
      Through woodland, grove, and dell;
    And soft thy footstep falls upon
      The verdant grass it weaves; [15]
    To melting murmurs ye have stirred
      The timid, trembling leaves.

    When sunshine beautifies the shower,
      As smiles through teardrops seen,
    Ask of its June, the long-hushed heart, [20]
      What hath the record been?
    And thou wilt find that harmonies,
      In which the Soul hath part,
    Ne'er perish young, like things of earth,
      In records of the heart. [25]


[Page 391.]




Wish And Item


Written to the Editor of the _Item_, Lynn, Mass.


    I hope the heart that's hungry
      For things above the floor,
    Will find within its portals [5]
      An item rich in store;

    That melancholy mortals
      Will count their mercies o'er,
    And learn that Truth and wisdom
      Have many items more; [10]

    That when a wrong is done us,
      It stirs no thought of strife;
    And Love becomes the substance,
      As item, of our life;

    That every ragged urchin, [15]
      With bare feet soiled or sore,
    Share God's most tender mercies,--
      Find items at our door.

    Then if we've done to others
      Some good ne'er told before, [20]
    When angels shall repeat it,
      'T will be an item more.


[Page 392.]




The Oak On The Mountain's Summit


    Oh, mountain monarch, at whose feet I stand,--
    Clouds to adorn thy brow, skies clasp thy hand,--
    Nature divine, in harmony profound,
    With peaceful presence hath begirt thee round. [5]

    And thou, majestic oak, from yon high place
    Guard'st thou the earth, asleep in night's embrace,--
    And from thy lofty summit, pouring down
    Thy sheltering shade, her noonday glories crown?

    Whate'er thy mission, mountain sentinel, [10]
    To my lone heart thou art a power and spell;
    A lesson grave, of life, that teacheth me
    To love the Hebrew figure of a tree.

    Faithful and patient be my life as thine;
    As strong to wrestle with the storms of time; [15]
    As deeply rooted in a soil of love;
    As grandly rising to the heavens above.




Isle Of Wight


Written on receiving a painting of the Isle


    Isle of beauty, thou art singing [20]
      To my sense a sweet refrain;
    To my busy mem'ry bringing
      Scenes that I would see again.


[Page 393.]


    Chief, the charm of thy reflecting, [1]
      Is the moral that it brings;
    Nature, with the mind connecting,
      Gives the artist's fancy wings.

    Soul, sublime 'mid human _debris_, [5]
      Paints the limner's work, I ween,
    Art and Science, all unweary,
      Lighting up this mortal dream.

    Work ill-done within the misty
      Mine of human thoughts, we see [10]
    Soon abandoned when the Master
      Crowns life's Cliff for such as we.

    Students wise, he maketh now thus
      Those who fish in waters deep,
    When the buried Master hails us [15]
      From the shores afar, complete.

    Art hath bathed this isthmus-lordling
      In a beauty strong and meek
    As the rock, whose upward tending
      Points the plane of power to seek. [20]

    Isle of beauty, thou art teaching
      Lessons long and grand, to-night,
    To my heart that would be bleaching
      To thy whiteness, Cliff of Wight.


[Page 394.]




Hope


    'T is borne on the zephyr at eventide's hour;
    It falls on the heart like the dew on the flower,--
    An infinite essence from tropic to pole,
    The promise, the home, and the heaven of Soul. [5]

    Hope happifies life, at the altar or bower,
    And loosens the fetters of pride and of power;
    It comes through our tears, as the soft summer rain,
    To beautify, bless, and make joyful again.

    The harp of the minstrel, the treasure of time; [10]
    A rainbow of rapture, o'erarching, divine;
    The God-given mandate that speaks from above,--
    No place for earth's idols, but hope thou, and love.




Rondelet


      "The flowers of June
    The gates of memory unbar:
      The flowers of June
    Such old-time harmonies _re_tune,
    I fain would keep the gates ajar,--
    So full of sweet enchantment are [20]
      The flowers of June."
        JAMES T. WHITE


[Page 395.]




To Mr. James T. White


    Who loves not June [2]
    Is out of tune
    With love and God;
    The rose his rival reigns, [5]
    The stars reject his pains,
    His home the clod!

    And yet I trow,
    When sweet _rondeau_
    Doth play a part, [10]
    The curtain drops on June;
    Veiled is the modest moon--
    Hushed is the heart.




Autumn


    Written in childhood, in a maple grove [15]

    Quickly earth's jewels disappear;
      The turf, whereon I tread,
    Ere autumn blanch another year,
      May rest above my head.

    Touched by the finger of decay [20]
      Is every earthly love;
    For joy, to shun my weary way,
      Is registered above.

    The languid brooklets yield their sighs,
      A requiem o'er the tomb [25]
    Of sunny days and cloudless skies,
      Enhancing autumn's gloom.


[Page 396.]


    The wild winds mutter, howl, and moan, [1]
      To scare my woodland walk,
    And frightened fancy flees, to roam
      Where ghosts and goblins stalk.

    The cricket's sharp, discordant scream [5]
      Fills mortal sense with dread;
    More sorrowful it scarce could seem;
      It voices beauty fled.

    Yet here, upon this faded sod,--
      O happy hours and fleet,-- [10]
    When songsters' matin hymns to God
      Are poured in strains so sweet,

    My heart unbidden joins rehearse;
      I hope it's better made,
    When mingling with the universe, [15]
      Beneath the maple's shade.




Christ My Refuge


    O'er waiting harpstrings of the mind
      There sweeps a strain,
    Low, sad, and sweet, whose measures bind [20]
      The power of pain,

    And wake a white-winged angel throng
      Of thoughts, illumed
    By faith, and breathed in raptured song,
      With love perfumed. [25]


[Page 397.]


    Then His unveiled, sweet mercies show [1]
      Life's burdens light.
    I kiss the cross, and wake to know
      A world more bright.

    And o'er earth's troubled, angry sea [5]
      I see Christ walk,
    And come to me, and tenderly,
      Divinely talk.

    Thus Truth engrounds me on the rock,
      Upon Life's shore, [10]
    'Gainst which the winds and waves can shock,
      Oh, nevermore!

    From tired joy and grief afar,
      And nearer Thee,--
    Father, where Thine own children are, [15]
      I love to be.

    My prayer, some daily good to do
      To Thine, for Thee;
    An offering pure of Love, whereto
      God leadeth me. [20]




"Feed My Sheep"


    Shepherd, show me how to go
      O'er the hillside steep,
    How to gather, how to sow,--
      How to feed Thy sheep;


[Page 398.]


    I will listen for Thy voice, [1]
      Lest my footsteps stray;
    I will follow and rejoice
      All the rugged way.

    Thou wilt bind the stubborn will, [5]
      Wound the callous breast,
    Make self-righteousness be still,
      Break earth's stupid rest.
    Strangers on a barren shore,
      Lab'ring long and lone, [10]
    We would enter by the door,
      And Thou know'st Thine own;

    So, when day grows dark and cold,
      Tear or triumph harms,
    Lead Thy lambkins to the fold, [15]
      Take them in Thine arms;
    Feed the hungry, heal the heart,
      Till the morning's beam;
    White as wool, ere they depart,
      Shepherd, wash them clean.




Communion Hymn


    Saw ye my Saviour? Heard ye the glad sound?
    Felt ye the power of the Word?
    'T was the Truth that made us free,
    And was found by you and me [25]
    In the life and the love of our Lord.


[Page 399.]


    Mourner, it calls you,--"Come to my bosom, [1]
    Love wipes your tears all away,
    And will lift the shade of gloom,
    And for you make radiant room
    Midst the glories of one endless day." [5]

    Sinner, it calls you,--"Come to this fountain,
    Cleanse the foul senses within;
    'Tis the Spirit that makes pure,
    That exalts thee, and will cure
    All thy sorrow and sickness and sin." [10]

    Strongest deliverer, friend of the friendless,
    Life of all being divine:
    Thou the Christ, and not the creed;
    Thou the Truth in thought and deed;
    Thou the water, the bread, and the wine. [15]




Laus Deo!


    Written on laying the corner-stone of The Mother Church

    _Laus Deo_, it is done!
    Rolled away from loving heart
      Is a stone. [20]
    Lifted higher, we depart,
      Having one.

    _Laus Deo_,--on this rock
    (Heaven chiselled squarely good)
      Stands His church,-- [25]
    God is Love, and understood
      By His flock.


[Page 400.]


    _Laus Deo_, night star-lit [1]
    Slumbers not in God's embrace;
      Be awake;
    Like this stone, be in thy place:
      Stand, not sit. [5]

    Grave, silent, steadfast stone,
    Dirge and song and shoutings low
      In thy heart
    Dwell serene,--and sorrow? No,
      It has none, [10]
      _Laus Deo!_




A Verse


    MOTHER'S NEW YEAR GIFT TO THE LITTLE CHILDREN

    Father-Mother God,
      Loving me,-- [15]
    Guard me when I sleep;
    Guide my little feet
      Up to Thee.

    TO THE BIG CHILDREN

    Father-Mother good, lovingly [20]
      Thee I seek,--
      Patient, meek,
    In the way Thou hast,--
    Be it slow or fast,
      Up to Thee. [25]





CHAPTER XII. TESTIMONIALS


Letters From Those Healed By Reading "Science And Health With Key To The
Scriptures"

The Editor of _The Christian Science Journal_ (Falmouth and St. Paul
Streets, Boston, Mass.) holds the original of most of the letters that
authenticate these.

It is something more than a year and a half since I was cured of a
complication of diseases through reading "Science and Health with Key to
the Scriptures."

Becoming at an early age disgusted with drugs, I learned hygiene, and
practised it faithfully for over twenty years; then I began to lose all
faith in its efficacy, became greatly discouraged, and, as I had never
been cured of a single ailment, I rapidly grew worse in health. Hearing of
this, a dear sister brought me Science and Health. Her admonition was,
"Now read it, E----; I have heard that just the reading of that book has
been known to heal the sick."

I had read to, and through, the chapter on Healing and Teaching,(8) and
was so deeply interested that I began reading that blessed chapter over
again,--when I found I was cured of my dyspepsia, that I could use my
strength in lifting without feeling the old distressing pain in my side,
and also that the pain in the kidneys only came on at night, waking me out
of sleep. Then I began my first conscious treatments: of course I followed
no formula, and I needed none. A cry for help, knowing it would be
answered; precious texts from the Bible, which had already become like a
new book to me; sweet assurance of faith by the witnessing Spirit; strong
logical conclusions, learned from Science and Health: what a wealth of
material! Before finishing the book, all tendency to my old aches and
pains had left me, and I have been a strong, healthy woman ever since.

My first demonstration with another than myself was also before I had
finished my first reading. My husband was cured of the belief of bilious
fever by not over ten minutes' treatment; the fever and pain in head and
limbs disappearing in that instantaneous way as soon as I could summon
sufficient courage to offer my services in this, to us, new but glorious
work. He slept soundly that night (the treatment was given about 10 A.
M.), and ate and worked as usual the next day, with no symptoms of a
relapse then or afterward. That was in March, 1888; in the following
August I met in one of our Rocky Mountain berry patches a lady who
complained so bitterly that I felt compelled to offer her treatment. Her
words, when I visited her at her home during Christmas week, will give
some idea of the result:--

"Yes, I am doing three women's work,--attending to my own and my son's
housework, and caring for his wife and new-born babe; but I am equal to
it, when I think of all the Lord has done for me! Why, Mrs. S., I was
cured with that first treatment you gave me, I know; because I went out to
gather berries that day and was caught in a drenching shower,--and for ten
years before I could not bear the least exposure without suffering from
those dreadful headaches I told you about, and from dysentery,--but that
day I had neither. I had once been laid out for dead,--lying there
perfectly conscious, hearing my friends grieving over me,--but I did not
want to come to, I suffered so. No, I never have any of those ailments. I
am a well, hearty woman,--and that is not all. I had been seeking religion
for more than twenty years, but I never knew how Christians felt till I
told you I was cured that day on the camp-ground."

On the first of this year I was so blessed as to receive a course of
lessons from one of our teacher's students. Now I am only trusting that
the time will come when I may be enabled to teach others the way of Truth,
as well as to add to the many demonstrations God has given me.--E. D. S.

                  -------------------------------------

A student of Christian Science was employed in the Massachusetts State
Prison at Charlestown, to teach the prisoners to make shoes. He carried
his copy of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" and the
_Journal_ with him, and as he had the opportunity would tell the men what
this wonderful truth could do for them, setting them free in a larger and
higher sense than they had dreamed of.

We make extracts from a number of letters that one of the prisoners has
written to those who are interesting themselves in this work.

"_Editor of The Christian Science Journal_:--At the prison, once a week,
there are Christian papers given to the inmates. But none of those papers
point out so clearly the fallibility of the mortal or carnal mind, and the
infallibility of the divine Mind, as does the teaching of Christian
Science.

"I was strangely blind and stupid. I loved sin, and it seemed as though I
never would be able to forsake it. I did everything that would be expected
of one entirely ignorant of God.

"I also had a complication of diseases. I could not begin to describe the
medicines I have taken.

"I no longer look for material treatment, but humbly seek for the divine
assistance of Jesus, through the way Christian Science has taught me. I
am, indeed, an altered man. I now have no more doubt of the way of
salvation than I have of the way to the prison workshop.

"I am very grateful to the students of Christian Science, for the interest
they have taken in me and my fellow-prisoners. Their letters and books
have been of great profit, and in accordance with their wish I have done
what I could for the others.

"I gave the _Journal_ to every man who would accept it, and related my
experience to those who would listen. I told them they need go no farther
than myself to see what the demonstration was; for not only have my eyes
been healed, but many other ailments have disappeared.

"Some of the fellows told me I was becoming religiously insane, but acting
upon your advice, I did not stop to argue with those opposed; and I am
glad to be able to tell you that those who expressed interest were more
than those who opposed.

"The chaplain told me I could keep Science and Health until I got through
with it. I never should get through with that book, but, as others were
waiting for it, I did not like to keep it too long. God bless the author!

"I need have no fear after leaving here; I feel that I can make an honest
living. I can honestly add, that my bad reputation is largely due to my
lack of education. What little I do know, I learned here and in the House
of Correction. I tell you this, for I feel that I must be honest with the
kind friends who have done so much for me.

"Providing I should not be paroled, I shall remain here until the 24th of
next December. God bless you all.--J. C."

                  -------------------------------------

I am glad to tell how I was healed. Beliefs of consumption, dyspepsia,
neuralgia, piles, tobacco, and bad language held me in bondage for many
years. Doctors that were consulted did nothing to relieve me, and I
constantly grew worse. Nearly two years ago a lady told me that if I would
read a book called "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" I would
be healed. I told her I would "go into it for all it is worth," and I have
found that it is worth all. I got the book, and read day and night. I saw
that it must be true, and believed that what I could not then understand
would be made clear later.
