we shall come at last into the sweet security and safety of the
perfect state is present likeness to the indwelling Spirit and
present reception of divine grace. The seal is the pledge of
security, just because it is the mark of ownership. When, by God's
Spirit dwelling in us, we are led to love the things that are fair,
and to long after more possession of whatever things are of good
report, that is like God's hoisting His flag upon a newly-annexed
territory. And is He going to be so careless in the preservation of
His property as that He will allow that which is thus acquired to
slip away from Him? Does He account us as of so small value as to
hold us with so slack a hand? But no man has a right to rest on the
assurance of God's saving him into the heavenly kingdom, unless He is
saving him at this moment from the devil and his own evil heart. And,
therefore, I say the Christian character, in its outward
manifestations and in its sweet inward secrets of communion, is the
guarantee that we shall not fall. Rest upon Him, and He will hold you
up. We are 'kept by the power of God unto salvation,' and that power
keeps us and that final salvation becomes ours, 'through faith.'

II. Now, secondly, turn to the other emblem, that 'earnest' which
consists in like manner 'of the Spirit.'

The 'earnest,' of course, is a small portion of purchase-money, or
wages, or contract-money, which is given at the making of a bargain,
as an assurance that the whole amount will be paid in due time. And,
says the Apostle, this seal is also an earnest. It not only makes
certain God's ownership and guarantees the security of those on whom
it is impressed, but it also points onwards to the future, and at
once guarantees that, and to a large extent reveals the nature of it.
So, then, we have here two thoughts on which I touch.

The Christian character and experience are the earnest of the
inheritance, in the sense of being its guarantee, inasmuch as the
experiences of the Christian life here are plainly immortal. The
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead is the objective and
external proof of a future life. The facts of the Christian life, its
aspirations, its communion, its clasp of God as its very own, are the
subjective and inward proofs of a future life. As a matter of fact,
if you will take the Old Testament, you will see that the highest
summits in it, to which the hope of immortality soared, spring
directly from the experience of deep and blessed communion with the
living God. When the Psalmist said 'Thou wilt not leave my soul in
_Sheol_; neither wilt Thou suffer Thy Holy One to see corruption,' he
was speaking a conviction that had been floated into his mind on the
crest of a great wave of religious enjoyment and communion. And, in
like manner, when the other Psalmist said, 'Thou art the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever,' he was speaking of the glimpse
that he had got of the land that was very far off, from the height
which he had climbed on the Mount of fellowship with God. And for us,
I suppose that the same experience holds good. Howsoever much we may
say that we believe in a future life and in a heaven, we really grasp
them as facts that will be true about ourselves, in the proportion in
which we are living here in direct contact and communion with God.
The conviction of immortality is the distinct and direct result of
the present enjoyment of communion with Him, and it is a reasonable
result. No man who has known what it is to turn himself to God with a
glow of humble love, and to feel that he is not turning his face to
vacuity, but to a Face that looks on him with love, can believe that
anything can ever come to destroy that communion. What have faith,
love, aspiration, resignation, fellowship with God, to do with death?
They cannot be cut through with the stroke that destroys physical
life, any more than you can divide a sunbeam with a sword. It unites
again, and the impotent edge passes through and has effected nothing.
Death can shear asunder many bonds, but that invisible bond that
unites the soul to God is of adamant, against which his scythe is in
vain. Death is the grim porter that opens the door of a dark hole and
herds us into it as sheep are driven into a slaughter-house. But to
those who have learned what it is to lay a trusting hand in God's
hand, the grim porter is turned into the gentle damsel, who keeps the
door, and opens it for light and warmth and safety to the hunted
prisoner that has escaped from the dungeon of life. Death cannot
touch communion, and the consciousness of communion with God is the
earnest of the inheritance.

It is so for another reason also. All the results of the Divine
Spirit's sealing of the soul are manifestly incomplete, and as
manifestly tend towards completeness. The engine is clearly working
now at half-speed. It is obviously capable of much higher pressure
than it is going at now. Those powers in the Christian man can
plainly do a great deal more than they ever have done here, and are
meant to do a great deal more. Is this imperfect Christianity of
ours, our little faith so soon shattered, our little love so quickly
disproved, our faltering resolutions, our lame performances, our
earthward cleavings--are these things all that Jesus Christ's bitter
agony was for, and all that a Divine Spirit is able to make of us?
Manifestly, here is but a segment of the circle, in heaven is the
perfect round; and the imperfections, so far as life is concerned, in
the work of so obviously divine an Agent, cry aloud for a region
where tendency shall become result, and all that it was possible for
Him to make us we shall become. The road evidently leads upwards, and
round that sharp corner where the black rocks come so near each other
and our eyesight cannot travel, we may be sure it goes steadily up
still to the top of the pass, until it reaches 'the shining
table-lands whereof our God Himself is Sun and Moon,' and brings us
all to the city set on a hill.

And, further, that divine seal is the earnest, inasmuch as itself is
part of the whole. The truest and the loftiest conception that we can
form of heaven is as being the perfecting of the religious experience
of earth. The shilling or two, given to the servant in old-fashioned
days, when he was hired, is of the same currency as the balance that
he is to get when the year's work is done. The small payment to-day
comes out of the same purse, and is coined out of the same specie,
and is part of the same currency of the same kingdom, as what we get
when we go yonder and count the endless riches to which we have
fallen heirs at last. You have but to take the faith, the love, the
obedience, the communion of the highest moments of the Christian life
on earth, and free them from all their limitations, subtract from
them all their imperfections, multiply them to their superlative
possibility, and endow them with a continual power of growth, and
stretch them out to absolute eternity, and you get heaven. The
earnest is of a piece with the inheritance.

So, dear brethren, here is a gift offered for us all, a gift which
our feebleness sorely needs, a gift for every timid nature, for every
weak will, for every man, woman, and child beset with snares and
fighting with heavy tasks, the offer of a reinforcement as real and
as sure to bring victory as when, on that day when the fate of Europe
was determined, after long hours of conflict, the Prussian bugles
blew, and the English commander knew that (with the fresh troops that
came on the field) victory was made certain. So you and I may have in
our hearts the Spirit of God, the spirit of strength, the spirit of
love and of a sound mind, the spirit of adoption, the spirit of
wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of Him, to enlighten our
darkness, to bind our hearts to Him, to quicken and energise our
souls, to make the weakest among us strong, and the strong as an
angel of God. And the condition on which we may get it is this simple
one which the Apostle lays down; '_After that ye believed_, ye were
sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance.' The Christ, who is the Lord and Giver of the Spirit,
has shown us how its blessed influences may be ours when, on the
great day of the feast, He stood and cried with a voice that echoes
across the centuries, and is meant for each of us, 'If any man
thirsts, let him come unto Me and drink. He that believeth in Me, out
of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. This spake He of the
Spirit which they that believe or Him should receive.'




THE TRIUMPHAL PROCESSION

   'Thanks be unto God, which always leadeth us in triumph
   in Christ and maketh manifest through us the savour of
   His knowledge in every place.'--2 COR. ii. 14 (R.V.)


I suppose most of us have some knowledge of what a Roman Triumph was,
and can picture to ourselves the long procession, the victorious
general in his chariot with its white horses, the laurelled soldiers,
the sullen captives, with suppressed hate flashing in their sunken
eyes, the wreathing clouds of incense that went up into the blue sky,
and the shouting multitude of spectators. That is the picture in the
Apostle's mind here. The Revised Version correctly alters the
translation into 'Thanks unto God which always _leadeth us in_
triumph in Christ.'

Paul thinks of himself and of his coadjutors in Christian work as
being conquered captives, made to follow their Conqueror and to swell
His triumph. He is thankful to be so overcome. What was deepest
degradation is to him supreme honour. Curses in many a strange tongue
would break from the lips of the prisoners who had to follow the
general's victorious chariot. But from Paul's lips comes
irrepressible praise; he joins in the shout of acclamation to the
Conqueror.

And then he passes on to another of the parts of the ceremonial. As
the wreathing incense appealed at once to two senses, and was visible
in its curling clouds of smoke, and likewise fragrant to the
nostrils, so says Paul, with a singular combination of expression,
'He maketh _manifest_,' that is visible, the _savour_ of
His knowledge. From a heart kindled by the flame of the divine love
there will go up the odour of a holy life visible and fragrant, sweet
and fair.

And thus all Christians, and not Christian workers only in the
narrower sense of the word, who may be doing evangelistic work, have
set before them in these great words the very ideal and secret of
their lives.

There are three things here, on each of which I touch as belonging to
the true notion of a Christian life--the conquered captive; that
captive partaking in the triumph of his Conqueror; and the conquered
captive led as a trophy and a witness to the Conqueror's power. These
three things, I think, explain the Apostle's thoughts here. Let me
deal with them now.

I. First then, let us look at that thought of all Christians being in
the truest sense conquered captives, bound to the chariot wheels of
One who has overcome them.

The image implies a prior state of hostility and alienation. Now, do
not let us exaggerate, let us take Paul's own experience. He is
speaking about himself here; he is not talking doctrine, he is giving
us autobiography, and he says, 'I was an enemy, and I have been
conquered.'

What sort of an enemy was he? Well! He says that before he became a
Christian he lived a pure, virtuous, respectable life. He was a man
'as touching the righteousness which is in the law, blameless.'
Observant of all relative duties, sober, temperate, chaste; no man
could say a word against him; he knew nothing against himself. His
conscience acquitted him of wrong: 'I thought I ought to do many
things,' as I did them. And yet, looking back from his present point
of view upon a life thus adorned with many virtues, pure from all
manifest corruption, to a large extent regulated by conscientious and
religious motives of a kind, he says, 'Notwithstanding all that, I
was an enemy.' Why? Because the retrospect let him see that his life
was barren of the deepest faith and the purest love. And so I come to
some of my friends here now, and I say to you, 'Change the name, and
the story is true about you,' respectable people, who are trying to
live pure and righteous lives, doing all duties that present
themselves to you with a very tolerable measure of completeness and
abominating and trying to keep yourselves from the things that your
consciences tell you are wrong, yet needing to be conquered, in the
deepest recesses of your wills and your hearts, before you become
the true subjects of the true King. I do not want to exaggerate, nor
to say of the ordinary run of people who listen to us preachers, that
they commit manifest sins, 'gross as a mountain, open, palpable.'
Some of you do, no doubt, for, in every hundred people, there are
always some whose lives are foul and whose memories are stained and
horrible; but the run of you are not like that. And yet I ask you,
has your will been bowed and broken, and your heart overcome and
conquered by this mighty Prince, the Prince of Peace, the Prince of
Life? Unless it has, for all your righteousness and respectability,
for all your outward religion and real religiousness of a sort, you
are still hostile and rebellious, in your inmost hearts. That is the
basis of the representation of my text.

What else does it suggest? It suggests the wonderful struggle and
victory of weaponless love. As was said about the first Christian
emperor, so it may be said about the great Emperor in the heavens,
'_In hoc signo vinces!_' By this sign thou shalt conquer. For
His only weapon is the Cross of His Son, and He fights only by the
manifestation of infinite love, sacrifice, suffering, and pity. He
conquers as the sun conquers the thick-ribbed ice by raying down its
heat upon it, and melting it into sweet water. So God in Christ
fights against the mountains of man's cold, hard sinfulness and
alienation, and by the warmth of His own radiation turns them all
into rivers that flow in love and praise. He conquers simply by
forbearance and pity and love.

And what more does this first part of my text say to us? It tells us,
too, of the true submission of the conquered captive; how we are
conquered when we perceive and receive His love; how there is nothing
else needed to win us all for Him except only that we shall recognise
His great love to us.

This picture of the triumph comes with a solemn appeal and
commandment to every one of us professing Christians. Think of these
men, dragged at the conqueror's chariot-wheels, abject, with their
weapons broken, with their resistance quelled, chained, yoked,
haled away from their own land, dependant for life or death on the
caprice of the general who rode before them there. It is a picture of
what you Christian men and women are bound to be if you believe that
God in Christ has loved you as we have been saying that He does. For
abject submission, unconditional surrender, the yielding up of our
whole will to Him, the yielding of all our possessions as His
vassals--these are the duties that are correspondent to the facts of
the case.

If we are thus won by infinite love, and not our own, but bought with
a price, no conquered king, dragged at an emperor's chariot-wheels,
was ever half as absolutely and abjectly bound to be his slave, and
to live or die by his breath, as you are bound to your Master. You
are Christians in the measure in which you are the captives of His
spear and of His bow; in the measure in which you hold your
territories as vassal kings, in the measure in which you say,
stretching out your willing hands for the fetters, 'Lord! here am I,
do with me as Thou wilt.' 'I am not mine own; be Thou my will, my
Emperor, my Commander, my all.' Loyola used to say, as the law of his
order, that every man that became a member of the Society of Jesus
was to be like as a staff in a man's hand, or like as a corpse. It
was a blasphemous and wicked claim, but it is but a poor fragmentary
statement of the truth about those of us who enter the real Society
of Jesus, and put ourselves in His hands to be wielded as His staff
and His rod, and submit ourselves to Him, not as a corpse, but yield
yourselves to our Christ 'as those that are alive from the dead.'

II. Now we have here, as part of the ideal of the Christian life, the
conquered captives partaking in the triumph of their general.

Two groups made up the triumphal procession--the one that of the
soldiers who had fought for, the other that of the prisoners who had
fought against, the leader. And some commentators are inclined to
believe that the Apostle is here thinking of himself and his fellows
as belonging to the conquering army, and not to the conquered enemy.
That seems to me to be less probable and in accordance with the whole
image than the explanation which I have adopted. But be that as it
may, it suggests to us this thought, that in the deepest reality in
that Christian life of which all this metaphor is but the expression,
they who are conquered foes become conquering allies. Or, to put it
into other words--to be triumphed over by Christ is to triumph with
Christ. And the praise which breaks from the Apostle's lips suggests
the same idea. He pours out his thanks for that which he recognises
as being no degradation but an honour, and a participation in his
Conqueror's triumph.

We may illustrate that thought, that to be triumphed over by Christ
is to triumph with Christ, by such considerations as these. This
submission of which I have been speaking, abject and unconditional,
extending to life and death, this submission and captivity is but
another name for liberty. The man who is absolutely dependent upon
Jesus Christ is absolutely independent of everything and everybody
besides, himself included. That is to say, to be His slave is to be
everybody else's master, and when we bow ourselves to Him, and take
upon us the chains of glad obedience, and life-deep as well as
life-long consecration, then He breaks off all other chains from our
hands, and will not suffer that any others should have a share with
Him in the possession of His servant. If you are His servants you are
free from all besides; if you give yourselves up to Jesus Christ, in
the measure in which you give yourselves up to Him, you will be set
at liberty from the worst of all slaveries, that is the slavery of
your own will and your own weakness, and your own tastes and fancies.
You will be set at liberty from dependence upon men, from thinking
about their opinion. You will be set at liberty from your dependence
upon externals, from feeling as if you could not live unless you had
this, that, or the other person or thing. You will be emancipated
from fears and hopes which torture the men who strike their roots no
deeper than this visible film of time which floats upon the surface
of the great, invisible abyss of Eternity. If you have Christ for
your Master you will be the masters of the world, and of time and
sense and men and all besides; and so, being triumphed over by Him,
you will share in His triumph.

And again, we may illustrate the same principle in yet another way.
Such absolute and entire submission of will and love as I have been
speaking about is the highest honour of a man. It was a degradation
to be dragged at the chariot-wheels of conquering general, emperor,
or consul--it broke the heart of many a barbarian king, and led some
of them to suicide rather than face the degradation. It is a
degradation to submit ourselves, even as much as many of us do, to
the domination of human authorities, or to depend upon men as much as
many of us do for our completeness and our satisfaction. But it is
the highest ennobling of humanity that it shall lay itself down at
Christ's feet, and let Him put His foot upon its neck. It is the
exaltation of human nature to submit to Christ. The true nobility are
those that 'come over with the Conqueror.' When we yield ourselves to
Him, and let Him be our King, then the patent of nobility is given to
us, and we are lifted in the scale of being. All our powers and
faculties are heightened in their exercise, and made more blessed in
their employment, because we have bowed ourselves to His control. And
so to be triumphed over by Christ is to triumph with Christ.

And the same thought may be yet further illustrated. That submission
which I have been speaking about so unites us to our Lord that we
share in all that belongs to Him and thus partake in His triumph. If
in will and heart we have yielded ourselves to Him, he that is thus
joined to the Lord is one spirit, and all 'mine is Thine, and all
Thine is mine.' He is the Heir of all things, and all things of which
He is the Heir are our possession. 'All things are yours, and ye are
Christ's.' Thus His dominion is the dominion of all that love Him,
and His heritage is the heritage of all those that have joined
themselves to Him; and no sparkle of the glory that falls upon His
head but is reflected on the heads of His servants. The 'many crowns'
that He wears are the crowns with which He crowns His followers.

Thus, my brother, to be overcome by God is to overcome the world, to
be triumphed over by Christ is to share in His triumph; and he over
whom Incarnate Love wins the victory, like the patriarch of old in
his mystical struggle, conquers in the hour of surrender; and to him
it is said: 'As a prince thou hast power with God and hast
prevailed.'

III. Lastly, a further picture of the ideal of the Christian life is
set before us here in the thought of these conquered captives being
led as the trophies and the witnesses of His overcoming power.

That idea is suggested by both halves of our verse. Both the emblem
of the Apostle as marching in the triumphal procession, and the
emblem of the Apostle as yielding from his burning heart the fragrant
visible odour of the ascending incense, convey the same idea, viz.
that one great purpose which Jesus Christ has in conquering men for
Himself, and binding them to His chariot wheels, is that from them
may go forth the witness of His power and the knowledge of His name.

That opens very wide subjects for our consideration which I can only
very briefly touch upon. Let me just for an instant dwell upon some
of them. First, the fact that Jesus Christ, by His Cross and Passion,
is able to conquer men's wills, and to bind men's hearts to Him, is
the highest proof of His power. It is an entirely unique thing in the
history of the world. There is nothing the least like it anywhere
else. The passionate attachment which this dead Galilean peasant is
able to evoke in the hearts of people all these centuries after His
death, is an unheard of and an unparalleled thing. All other teachers
'serve their generations by the will of God,' and then their names
become speedily less and less powerful, and thicker and thicker mists
of oblivion wrap them round until they disappear. But time has no
power over Christ's influence. The bond which binds you and me to Him
nineteen centuries after His death is the very same in quality as,
and in degree is often far deeper and stronger than, the bond which
united to Him the men that had seen Him. It stands as an unique fact
in the history of the world, that from Christ of Nazareth there rays
out through all the ages the spiritual power which absolutely takes
possession of men, dominates them and turns them into His organs and
instruments. This generation prides itself upon testing all things by
an utilitarian test, and about every system says:--'Well, let us see
it working.' And I do not think that Christianity need shrink from
the test. With all its imperfections, the long procession of holy men
and women who, for nineteen centuries, have been marching through
history, owning Christ as their Conqueror, and ascribing all their
goodness to Him, is a witness to His power to sway and to satisfy
men, the force of whose testimony it is hard to overthrow. And I
would like to ask the simple question: Will any system of belief or
of no belief, except the faith in Christ's atoning sacrifice, do the
like for men? He leads through the world the train of His captives,
the evidence of His conquests.

And then, further, let me remind you that out of this representation
there comes a very stimulating and solemn suggestion of duty for us
Christian people. We are bound to live, setting forth whose we are,
and what He has done for us. Just as the triumphal procession took
its path up the Appian Way and along the side of the Forum to the
altar of the Capitol, wreathed about by curling clouds of fragrant
incense, so we should march through the world encompassed by the
sweet and fragrant odour of His name, witnessing for Him by word,
witnessing for Him by character, speaking for Him and living like
Him, showing in our life that He rules us, and professing by our
words that He does; and so should manifest His power.

Still further, Paul's thanksgiving teaches us that we should be
thankful for all opportunities of doing such work. Christian men and
women often grudge their services and grudge their money, and feel as
if the necessities for doing Christian work in the world were
rather a burden than an honour. This man's generous heart was so full
of love to his Prince that it glowed with thankfulness at the thought
that Christ had let him do such things for Him. And He lets you do
them if you will.

So, dear friends, it comes to be a very solemn question for us. What
part are we playing in that great triumphal procession? We are all of
us marching at His chariot wheels, whether we know it or not. But
there were two sets of people in the old triumph. There were those
who were conquered by force and unconquered in heart, and out of
their eyes gleamed unquenchable malice and hatred, though their
weapons were broken and their arms fettered. And there were those
who, having shared in the commander's fight, shared in his triumph
and rejoiced in his rule. And when the procession reached the gate of
the temple, some, at any rate, of the former class were put to death
before the gates. I pray you to remember that if we are dragged after
Him reluctantly, the word will come: 'These, mine enemies, which
would not that I should reign over them, bring hither and slay them
before Me.' Whereas, on the other hand, for those who have yielded
heart and soul to Him in love and submission born of the reception of
His great love, the blessed word will come: 'He that overcometh shall
inherit all things.' Which of the two parts of the procession do you
belong to, my friend? Make your choice where you shall march, and
whether you will be His loyal allies and soldiers who share in His
triumph, or His enemies, who, overcome by His power, are not melted
by His love. The one live, the other perish.




TRANSFORMATION BY BEHOLDING

   'We all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory
   of the Lord, are changed into the same image.'--2 COR. iii. 18.


This whole section of the Epistle in which our text occurs is a
remarkable instance of the fervid richness of the Apostle's mind,
which acquires force by motion, and, like a chariot-wheel, catches
fire as it revolves. One of the most obvious peculiarities of his
style is his habit of 'going off at a word.' Each thought is, as it
were, barbed all round, and catches and draws into sight a multitude
of others, but slightly related to the main purpose in hand. And this
characteristic gives at first sight an appearance of confusion to his
writings. But it is not confusion, it is richness. The luxuriant
underwood which this fertile soil bears, as some tropical forest,
does not choke the great trees, though it drapes them.

Paul's immediate purpose seems to be to illustrate the frank openness
which ought to mark the ministry of Christianity. He does this by
reference to the veil which Moses wore when he came forth from
talking with God. There, he says in effect, we have a picture of the
Old Dispensation--a partial revelation, gleaming through a veil,
flashing through symbols, expressed here in a rite, there in a type,
there again in an obscure prophecy, but never or scarcely ever
fronting the world with an unveiled face and the light of God shining
clear from it. Christianity is, and Christian teachers ought to be,
the opposite of all this. It has, and they are to have, no esoteric
doctrines, no hints where plain speech is possible, no reserve, no
use of symbols and ceremonies to overlay truth, but an intelligible
revelation in words and deeds, to men's understandings. It and they
are plentifully to declare the thing as it is.

But he gets far beyond this point in his uses of his illustration. It
opens out into a series of contrasts between the two revelations. The
veiled Moses represents the clouded revelation of old. The vanishing
gleam on his face recalls the fading glories of that which was
abolished; and then, by a quick turn of association, Paul thinks of
the veiled readers in the synagogues, copies, as it were, of the
lawgiver with the shrouded countenance; only too significant images
of the souls obscured by prejudice and obstinate unbelief, with which
Israel trifles over the uncomprehended letter of the old law.

The contrast to all this lies in our text. Judaism had the one
lawgiver who beheld God, while the people tarried below. Christianity
leads us all, to the mount of vision, and lets the lowliest pass
through the fences, and go up where the blazing glory is seen. Moses
veiled the face that shone with the irradiation of Deity. We with
unveiled face are to shine among men. He had a momentary gleam, a
transient brightness; we have a perpetual light. Moses' face shone,
but the lustre was but skin deep. But the light that we have is
inward, and works transformation into its own likeness.

So there is here set forth the very loftiest conception of the
Christian life as direct vision, universal, manifest to men,
permanent, transforming.

I. Note then, first, that the Christian life is a life of
contemplating and reflecting Christ.

It is a question whether the single word rendered in our version
'beholding as in a glass,' means that, or 'reflecting as a glass
does.' The latter seems more in accordance with the requirements of
the context, and with the truth of the matter in hand. Unless we
bring in the notion of reflected lustre, we do not get any parallel
with the case of Moses. Looking into a glass does not in the least
correspond with the allusion, which gave occasion to the whole
section, to the glory of God smiting him on the face, till the
reflected lustre with which it glowed became dazzling, and needed to
be hid. And again, if Paul is here describing Christian vision of God
as only indirect, as in a mirror, then that would be a point of
inferiority in us as compared with Moses, who saw Him face to face.
But the whole tone of the context prepares us to expect a setting
forth of the particulars in which the Christian attitude towards the
manifested God is above the Jewish. So, on the whole, it seems better
to suppose that Paul meant 'mirroring,' than 'seeing in a mirror.'

But, whatever be the exact force of the word, the thing intended
includes both acts. There is no reflection of the light without a
previous reception of the light. In bodily sight, the eye is a
mirror, and there is no sight without an image of the thing perceived
being formed in the perceiving eye. In spiritual sight, the soul
which beholds is a mirror, and at once beholds and reflects. Thus,
then, we may say that we have in our text the Christian life
described as one of contemplation and manifestation of the light of
God.
The great truth of a direct, unimpeded vision, as belonging to
Christian men on earth, sounds strange to many of us. 'That cannot
be,' you say; 'does not Paul himself teach that we see through a
glass darkly? Do we not walk by faith and not by sight? "No man hath
seen God at any time, nor can see Him"; and besides that absolute
impossibility, have we not veils of flesh and sense, to say nothing
of the covering of sin "spread over the face of all nations," which
hide from us even so much of the eternal light as His servants above
behold, who see His face and bear His name on their foreheads?'

But these apparent difficulties drop away when we take into account
two things--first, the object of vision, and second, the real nature
of the vision itself.

As to the former, who is the Lord whose glory we receive on our
unveiled faces? He is Jesus Christ. Here, as in the overwhelming
majority of instances where _Lord_ occurs in the New Testament,
it is the name of the manifested God our brother. The glory which we
behold and give back is not the incomprehensible, incommunicable
lustre of the absolute divine perfectness, but that glory which, as
John says, we beheld in Him who tabernacled with us, full of grace
and truth; the glory which was manifested in loving, pitying words
and loveliness of perfect deeds; the glory of the will resigned to
God, and of God dwelling in and working through the will; the glory
of faultless and complete manhood, and therein of the express image
of God.

And as for the vision itself, that seeing which is denied to be
possible is the bodily perception and the full comprehension of the
Infinite God; that seeing which is affirmed to be possible, and
actually bestowed in Christ, is the beholding of Him with the soul by
faith; the immediate direct consciousness of His presence the
perception of Him in His truth by the mind, the feeling of Him in His
love by the heart, the contact with His gracious energy in our
recipient and opening spirits. Faith is made the antithesis of sight.
It is so, in certain respects. But faith is also paralleled with and
exalted above the mere bodily perception. He who believing grasps the
living Lord has a contact with Him as immediate and as real as that
of the eyeball with light, and knows Him with a certitude as reliable
as that which sight gives. 'Seeing is believing,' says sense;
'Believing is seeing' says the spirit which clings to the Lord, 'whom
having not seen' it loves. A bridge of perishable flesh, which is not
myself but my tool, connects me with the outward world. _It_ never
touches myself at all, and I know it only by trust in my senses. But
nothing intervenes between my Lord and me, when I love and trust.
Then Spirit is joined to spirit, and of His presence I have the
witness in myself. He is the light, which proves its own existence by
revealing itself, which strikes with quickening impulse on the eye of
the spirit that beholds by faith. Believing we see, and, seeing, we
have that light in our souls to be 'the master light of all our
seeing.' We need not think that to know by the consciousness of our
trusting souls is less than to know by the vision of our fallible
eyes; and though flesh hides from us the spiritual world in which we
float, yet the only veil which really dims God to us--the veil of
sin, the one separating principle--is done away in Christ, for all
who love Him; so as that he who has not seen and yet has believed,
has but the perfecting of his present vision to expect, when flesh
drops away and the apocalypse of the heaven comes. True, in one view,
'We see through a glass darkly'; but also true, 'We all, with
unveiled face, behold and reflect the glory of the Lord.'

Then note still further Paul's emphasis on the universality of this
prerogative--'We all.' This vision does not belong to any select
handful; does not depend upon special powers or gifts, which in the
nature of things can only belong to a few. The spiritual aristocracy
of God's Church is not the distinction of the law-giver, the priest
or the prophet. There is none of us so weak, so low, so ignorant, so
compassed about with sin, but that upon our happy faces that light
may rest, and into our darkened hearts that sunshine may steal.

In that Old Dispensation, the light that broke through clouds was but
that of the rising morning. It touched the mountain tops of the
loftiest spirits: a Moses, a David, an Elijah caught the early
gleams; while all the valleys slept in the pale shadow, and the mist
clung in white folds to the plains. But the noon has come, and, from
its steadfast throne in the very zenith, the sun, which never sets,
pours down its rays into the deep recesses of the narrowest gorge,
and every little daisy and hidden flower catches its brightness, and
there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. We have no privileged
class or caste now; no fences to keep out the mob from the place of
vision, while lawgiver and priest gaze upon God. Christ reveals
Himself to all His servants in the measure of their desire after Him.
Whatsoever special gifts may belong to a few in His Church, the
greatest gift belongs to all. The servants and the handmaidens have
the Spirit, the children prophesy, the youths see visions, the old
men dream dreams. 'The mobs,' 'the masses,' 'the plebs,' or whatever
other contemptuous name the heathen aristocratic spirit has for the
bulk of men, makes good its standing within the Church, as possessor
of Christ's chiefest gifts. Redeemed by Him, it can behold His face
and be glorified into His likeness. Not as Judaism with its ignorant
mass, and its enlightened and inspired few--we _all_ behold the glory
of the Lord.

Again, this contemplation involves reflection, or giving forth the
light which we behold.

They who behold Christ have Christ formed in them, as will appear in
my subsequent remarks. But apart from such considerations, which
belong rather to the next part of this sermon, I touch on this
thought here for one purpose--to bring out this idea--that what we
_see_ we shall certainly _show_. That will be the inevitable result
of all true possession of the glory of Christ. The necessary
accompaniment of vision is reflecting the thing beheld. Why, if you
look closely enough into a man's eye, you will see in it little
pictures of what he beholds at the moment; and if our hearts are
beholding Christ, Christ will be mirrored and manifested on our
hearts. Our characters will show what we are looking at, and ought,
in the case of Christian people, to bear His image so plainly, that
men cannot but take knowledge of us that we have been with Jesus.

This ought to lead all of us who say that we have seen the Lord, to
serious self-questioning. Do beholding and reflecting go together in
our cases? Are our characters like those transparent clocks, where
you can see not only the figures and hands, but the wheels and works?
Remember that, consciously and unconsciously, by direct efforts and
by insensible influences on our lives, the true secret of our being
ought to come, and will come, forth to light. The convictions which
we hold, the emotions that are dominant in our hearts, will mould and
shape our lives. If we have any deep, living perception of Christ,
bystanders looking into our faces will be able to tell what it is up
yonder that is making them like the faces of the angels--even vision
of the opened heavens and of the exalted Lord. These two things are
inseparable--the one describes the attitude and action of the
Christian man towards Christ; the other the very same attitude and
action in relation to men. And you may be quite sure that, if little
light comes from a Christian character, little light comes into it;
and if it be swathed in thick veils from men, there must be no less
thick veils between it and God.

Nor is it only that our fellowship with Christ will, as a matter of
course, show itself in our characters, and beauty born of that
communion 'shall pass into our face,' but we are also called on, as
Paul puts it here, to make direct conscious efforts for the
communication of the light which we behold. As the context has it,
God hath shined in our hearts, that we might give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. Away with
all veils! No reserve, no fear of the consequences of plain speaking,
no diplomatic prudence regulating our frank utterance, no secret
doctrines for the initiated! We are to 'renounce the hidden things of
dishonesty.' Our power and our duty lie in the full exhibition of the
truth. We are only clear from the blood of men when we, for our
parts, make sure that if any light be hid, it is hid not by reason of
obscurity or silence on our parts, but only by reason of the blind
eyes, before which the full-orbed radiance gleams in vain. All this
is as true for every one possessing that universal prerogative of
seeing the glory of Christ, as it is for an Apostle. The business of
all such is to make known the name of Jesus, and if from idleness, or
carelessness, or selfishness, they shirk that plain duty, they are
counteracting God's very purpose in shining on their hearts, and
going far to quench the light which they darken.

Take this, then, Christian men and women, as a plain practical lesson
from this text. You are bound to manifest what you believe, and to
make the secret of your lives, in so far as possible, an open secret.
Not that you are to drag into light before men the sacred depths of
your own soul's experience. Let these lie hid. The world will be none
the better for your confessions, but it needs your Lord. Show Him
forth, not your own emotions about Him. What does the Apostle say
close by my text? 'We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the
Lord.' Self-respect and reverence for the sanctities of our deepest
emotions forbid our proclaiming these from the house-tops. Let these
be curtained, if you will, from all eyes but God's, but let no folds
hang before the picture of your Saviour that is drawn on your heart.
See to it that you have the unveiled face turned towards Christ to be
irradiated by His brightness, and the unveiled face turned towards
men, from which shall shine every beam of the light which you have
caught from your Lord. 'Arise! shine, for thy light is come, and the
glory of the Lord is risen upon thee!'

II. Notice, secondly, that this life of contemplation is therefore a
life of gradual transformation.

The brightness on the face of Moses was only skin-deep. It faded
away, and left no trace. It effaced none of the marks of sorrow and
care, and changed none of the lines of that strong, stern face. But,
says Paul, the glory which we behold sinks inward, and changes us as
we look, into its own image. Thus the superficial lustre, that had
neither permanence nor transforming power, becomes an illustration of
the powerlessness of law to change the moral character into the
likeness of the fair ideal which it sets forth. And, in opposition to
its weakness, the Apostle proclaims the great principle of Christian
progress, that the beholding of Christ leads to the assimilation to
Him.

The metaphor of a mirror does not wholly serve us here. When the
sunbeams fall upon it, it flashes in the light, just because they do
not enter its cold surface. It is a mirror, because it does not drink
them up, but flings them back. The contrary is the case with these
sentient mirrors of our spirits. In them the light must first sink in
before it can ray out. They must first be filled with the glory,
before the glory can stream forth. They are not so much like a
reflecting surface as like a bar of iron, which needs to be heated
right down to its obstinate black core, before its outer skin glows
with the whiteness of a heat that is too hot to sparkle. The sunshine
must fall on us, not as it does on some lonely hill-side, lighting up
the grey stones with a passing gleam that changes nothing, and fades
away, leaving the solitude to its sadness; but as it does on some
cloud cradled near its setting, which it drenches and saturates with
fire till its cold heart burns, and all its wreaths of vapour are
brightness palpable, glorified by the light which lives amidst its
mists. So must we have the glory sink into us before it can be
reflected from us. In deep inward beholding we must have Christ in
our hearts, that He may shine forth from our lives.

And this contemplation will be gradual transformation. There is the
great principle of Christian morals. 'We all beholding ... are
changed.' The power to which is committed the perfecting of our
characters lies in looking upon Jesus. It is not the mere beholding,
but the gaze of love and trust that moulds us by silent sympathy into
the likeness of His wondrous beauty, who is fairer than the children
of men. It was a deep, true thought which the old painters had, when
they drew John as likest to his Lord. Love makes us like. We learn
_that_ even in our earthly relationships, where habitual familiarity
with parents and dear ones stamps some tone of voice or look, or
little peculiarity of gesture, on a whole house. And when the
infinite reverence and aspiration which the Christian soul cherishes
to its Lord are superadded, the transforming power of loving
contemplation of Him becomes mighty beyond all analogies in human
friendship, though one in principle with these. What a marvellous
thing that a block of rude sandstone, laid down before a perfect
marble, should become a copy of its serene loveliness just by lying
there! Lay your hearts down before Christ. Contemplate Him. Love Him.
Think about Him. Let that pure face shine upon heart and spirit, and
as the sun photographs itself on the sensitive plate exposed to its
light, and you get a likeness of the sun by simply laying the thing
in the sun, so He will 'be formed in, you.' Iron near a magnet
becomes magnetic. Spirits that dwell with Christ become Christ-like.
The Roman Catholic legends put this truth in a coarse way, when they
tell of saints who have gazed on some ghastly crucifix till they have
received, in their tortured flesh, the copy of the wounds of Jesus,
and have thus borne in their body the marks of the Lord. The story is
hideous and gross, the idea beneath is ever true. Set your faces
towards the Cross with loving, reverent gaze, and you will 'be
conformed unto His death,' that in due time you may 'be also in the
likeness of His Resurrection.'

Dear friends, surely this message--'Behold and be like'--ought to be
very joyful and enlightening to many of us, who are wearied with
painful struggles after isolated pieces of goodness, that elude our
grasp. You have been trying, and trying, and trying half your
lifetime to cure faults and make yourselves better and stronger. Try
this other plan. Let love draw you, instead of duty driving you. Let
fellowship with Christ elevate you, instead of seeking to struggle up
the steeps on hands and knees. Live in sight of your Lord, and catch
His Spirit. The man who travels with his face northwards has it grey
and cold. Let him turn to the warm south, where the midday sun
dwells, and his face will glow with the brightness that he sees.
'Looking unto Jesus' is the sovereign cure for all our ills and sins.
It is the one condition of running with patience 'the race that is
set before us.' Efforts after self-improvement which do not rest on
it will not go deep enough, nor end in victory. But from that gaze
will flow into our lives a power which will at once reveal the true
goal, and brace every sinew for the struggle to reach it. Therefore,
let us cease from self, and fix our eyes on our Saviour till His
image imprints itself on our whole nature.

Such transformation, it must be remembered, comes gradually. The
language of the text regards it as a lifelong process. 'We _are_
changed'; that is a continuous operation. 'From glory to glory'; that
is a course which has well-marked transitions and degrees. Be not
impatient if it be slow. It will take a lifetime. Do not fancy that
it is finished with you. Life is not long enough for it. Do not be
complacent over the partial transformation which you have felt. There
is but a fragment of the great image yet reproduced in your soul, a
faint outline dimly traced, with many a feature wrongly drawn, with
many a line still needed, before it can be called even approximately
complete. See to it that you neither turn away your gaze, nor relax
your efforts till all that you have beheld in Him is repeated in you.

Likeness to Christ is the aim of all religion. To it conversion is
