are accessory to these abominations, and from their large
establishments there are scores of souls being pitched off into death,
and their employers know it. Is there a God? Will there be a judgment?
I tell you, if God rises up to redress woman's wrongs, many of our
large establishments will be swallowed up quicker than a South
American earthquake ever took down a city. God will catch these
oppressors between the two millstones of his wrath and grind them to
powder.

Why is it that a female principal in a school gets only eight hundred
and twenty-five dollars for doing work for which a male principal gets
sixteen hundred and fifty dollars? I hear from all this land the wail
of womanhood. Man has nothing to answer to that wail but flatteries.
He says she is an angel. She is not. She knows she is not. She is a
human being who gets hungry when she has no food, and cold when she
has no fire. Give her no more flatteries; give her justice! There are
sixty-five thousand sewing-girls in New York and Brooklyn. Across the
sunlight comes their death groan. It is not such a cry as comes from
those who are suddenly hurled out of life, but a slow, grinding,
horrible wasting-away. Gather them before you and look into their
faces, pinched, ghastly, hunger-struck! Look at their fingers,
needle-pricked and blood-tipped! See that premature stoop in the
shoulders! Hear that dry, hacking, merciless cough! At a large meeting
of these women held in a hall in Philadelphia, grand speeches were
delivered, but a needle-woman took the stand, threw aside her faded
shawl, and with her shriveled arm hurled a very thunder-bolt of
eloquence, speaking out the horrors of her own experience.

Stand at the corner of a street in New York at six or seven o'clock in
the morning as the women go to work. Many of them had no breakfast
except the crumbs that were left over from the night before, or the
crumbs they chew on their way through the street. Here they come! The
working-girls of New York and Brooklyn. These engaged in head work,
these in flower-making, in millinery, in paper-box making; but, most
overworked of all and least compensated, the sewing-women. Why do they
not take the city cars on their way up? They can not afford the five
cents. If, concluding to deny herself something else, she gets into
the car, give her a seat. You want to see how Latimer and Ridley
appeared in the fire. Look at that woman and behold a more horrible
martyrdom, a hotter fire, a more agonizing death. Ask that woman how
much she gets for her work, and she will tell you six cents for making
coarse shirts and find her own thread.

Years ago, one Sabbath night in the vestibule of this church, after
service, a woman fell in convulsions. The doctor said she needed
medicine not so much as something to eat. As she began to revive, in
her delirium she said, gaspingly: "Eight cents! Eight cents! Eight
cents! I wish I could get it done, I am so tired. I wish I could get
some sleep, but I must get it done. Eight cents! Eight cents! Eight
cents!" We found afterward that she was making garments for eight
cents apiece, and that she could make but three of them in a day. Hear
it! Three times eight are twenty-four. Hear it, men and women who have
comfortable homes! Some of the worst villains of our cities are the
employers of these women. They beat them down to the last penny and
try to cheat them out of that. The woman must deposit a dollar or two
before she gets the garments to work on. When the work is done it is
sharply inspected, the most insignificant flaws picked out, and the
wages refused and sometimes the dollar deposited not given back. The
Women's Protective Union reports a case where one of the poor souls,
finding a place where she could get more wages, resolved to change
employers, and went to get her pay for work done. The employer says:
"I hear you are going to leave me?" "Yes," she said, "and I have come
to get what you owe me." He made no answer. She said: "Are you not
going to pay me?" "Yes," he said, "I will pay you," and he kicked her
down-stairs.

Oh, that Women's Protective Union, 19 Clinton Place, New York! The
blessings of Heaven be on it for the merciful and divine work it is
doing in the defense of toiling womanhood! What tragedies of suffering
are presented to them day by day! A paragraph from their report: "'Can
you make Mr. Jones pay me? He owes me for three weeks at $2.50 a week,
and I can't get anything, and my child is very sick!' The speaker, a
young woman lately widowed, burst into a flood of tears as she spoke.
She was bidden to come again the next afternoon and repeat her story
to the attorney at his usual weekly hearing of frauds and impositions.
Means were found by which Mr. Jones was induced to pay the $7.50."

Another paragraph from their report: "A fortnight had passed, when she
modestly hinted a desire to know how much her services were worth.
'Oh, my dear,' he replied, 'you are getting to be one of the most
valuable hands in the trade; you will always get the very best price.
Ten dollars a week you will be able to earn very easily.' And the
girl's fingers flew on with her work at a marvelous rate. The picture
of $10 a week had almost turned her head. A few nights later, while
crossing the ferry, she overheard the name of her employer in the
conversation of girls who stood near: 'What, John Snipes? Why, he
don't pay! Look out for him every time. He'll keep you on trial, as he
calls it, for weeks, and then he'll let you go, and get some other
fool!' And thus Jane Smith gained her warning against the swindler.
But the Union held him in the toils of the law until he paid the worth
of each of those days of 'trial.'"

Another paragraph: "Her mortification may be imagined when told that
one of the two five-dollar bills which she had just received for her
work was counterfeit. But her mortification was swallowed up in
indignation when her employer denied having paid her the money, and
insultingly asked her to prove it. When the Protective Union had
placed this matter in the courts, the judge said: 'You will pay
Eleanor the amount of her claim, $5.83, and also the costs of the
court.'"

How are these evils to be eradicated? Some say: "Give woman the
ballot." What effect such ballot might have on other questions I am
not here to discuss; but what would be the effect of female suffrage
on women's wages? I do not believe that woman will ever get justice by
woman's ballot. Indeed, women oppress women as much as men do. Do not
women, as much as men, beat down to the lowest figure the woman who
sews for them? Are not women as sharp as men on washer-women and
milliners and mantua-makers? If a woman asks a dollar for her work,
does not her female employer ask her if she will not take ninety
cents? You say, "Only ten cents difference." But that is sometimes the
difference between heaven and hell. Women often have less
commiseration for women than men. If a woman steps aside from the path
of rectitude, man may forgive--woman never! Woman will never get
justice done her from woman's ballot. Neither will she get it from
man's ballot. How then? God will rise up for her. God has more
resources than we know of. The flaming sword that hung at Eden's gate
when woman was driven out will cleave with its terrible edge her
oppressors.

But there is something for women to do. Let young people prepare to
excel in spheres of work, and they will be able after awhile to get
larger wages. Unskilled and incompetent labor must take what is given:
skilled and competent labor will eventually make its own standard.
Admitting that the law of supply and demand regulates these things, I
contend that the demand for skilled labor is very great and the supply
very small. Start with the idea that work is honorable, and that you
can do some one thing better than anybody else. Resolve that, God
helping, you will take care of yourself. If you are after awhile
called into another relation you will all the better be qualified for
it by your spirit of self-reliance, or if you are called to stay as
you are, you can be happy and self-supporting.

Poets are fond of talking about man as an oak and woman the vine that
climbs it; but I have seen many a tree fall that not only went down
itself, but took all the vines with it. I can tell you of something
stronger than an oak for an ivy to climb on, and that is the throne of
the great Jehovah. Single or affianced, that woman is strong who leans
on God and does her best. Many of you will go single-handed through
life, and you will have to choose between two characters. Young woman,
I am sure you will turn your back upon the useless, giggling,
irresponsible nonentity which society ignominiously acknowledges to be
a woman, and ask God to make you an humble, active, earnest Christian.
What will become of that womanly disciple of the world? She is more
thoughtful of the attitude she strikes upon the carpet than how she
will look in the judgment; more worried about her freckles than her
sins; more interested in her apparel than in her redemption. The
dying actress whose life had been vicious said: "The scene
closes--draw the curtain." Generally the tragedy comes first and the
farce afterward; but in her life it was first the farce of a useless
life and then the tragedy of a wretched eternity.

Compare the life and death of such a one with that of some Christian
aunt that was once a blessing to your household. I do not know that
she was ever asked to give her hand in marriage. She lived single,
that, untrammeled, she might be everybody's blessing. Whenever the
sick were to be visited or the poor to be provided with bread she went
with a blessing. She could pray or sing "Rock of Ages" for any sick
pauper who asked her. As she got older there were many days when she
was a little sharp, but for the most part auntie was a sunbeam--just
the one for Christmas Eve. She knew better than any one else how to
fix things. Her every prayer, as God heard it, was full of everybody
who had trouble. The brightest things in all the house dropped from
her fingers. She had peculiar notions, but the grandest notion she
ever had was to make you happy. She dressed well--auntie always
dressed well; but her highest adornment was that of a meek and quiet
spirit, which, in the sight of God, is of great price. When she died
you all gathered lovingly about her; and as you carried her out to
rest, the Sunday-school class almost covered the coffin with
japonicas; and the poor people stood at the end of the alley, with
their aprons to their eyes, sobbing bitterly, and the man of the world
said, with Solomon: "Her price was above rubies;" and Jesus, as unto
the maiden in Judea, commanded, "I say unto thee, Arise!"




TOBACCO AND OPIUM.

    "Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding
    seed."--GEN. i: 11.


The two first born of our earth were the grass-blade and the herb.
They preceded the brute creation and the human family--the grass for
the animal creation, the herb for human service. The cattle came and
took possession of their inheritance, the grass-blade; man came and
took possession of his inheritance, the herb. We have the herb for
food as in case of hunger, for narcotic as in case of insomnia, for
anodyne as in case of paroxysm, for stimulant as when the pulses flag
under the weight of disease. The caterer comes and takes the herb and
presents it in all styles of delicacy. The physician comes and takes
the herb and compounds it for physical recuperation. Millions of
people come and take the herb for ruinous physical and intellectual
delectation. The herb, which was divinely created, and for good
purposes, has often been degraded for bad results. There is a useful
and a baneful employment of the herbaceous kingdom.

There sprung up in Yucatan of this continent an herb that has
bewitched the world. In the fifteenth century it crossed the Atlantic
Ocean and captured Spain. Afterward it captured Portugal. Then the
French embassadors took it to Paris, and it captured the French
Empire. Then Walter Raleigh took it to London, and it captured Great
Britain. Nicotiana, ascribed to that genus by the botanists, but we
all know it is the exhilarating, elevating, emparadising,
nerve-shattering, dyspepsia-breeding, health-destroying tobacco. I
shall not in my remarks be offensively personal, because you all use
it, or nearly all! I know by experience how it soothes and roseates
the world, and kindles sociality, and I also know some of its baleful
results. I was its slave, and by the grace of God I have become its
conqueror. Tens of thousands of people have been asking the question
during the past two months, asking it with great pathos and great
earnestness: "Does the use of tobacco produce cancerous and other
troubles?" I shall not answer the question in regard to any particular
case, but shall deal with the subject in a more general way.

You say to me, "Did God not create tobacco?" Yes. You say to me, "Is
not God good?" Yes. Well, then, you say, "If God is good and he
created tobacco, He must have created it for some good purpose." Yes,
your logic is complete. But God created the common sense at the same
time, by which we are to know how to use a poison and how not to use
it. God created that just as He created henbane and nux vomica and
copperas and belladonna and all other poisons, whether directly
created by Himself or extracted by man.

That it is a poison no man of common sense will deny. A case was
reported where a little child lay upon its mother's lap and one drop
fell from a pipe to the child's lip, and it went into convulsions and
into death. But you say, "Haven't people lived on in complete use of
it to old age?" Oh, yes; just as I have seen inebriates seventy years
old. In Boston, years ago, there was a meeting in which there were
several centenarians, and they were giving their experience, and one
centenarian said that he had lived over a hundred years, and that he
ascribed it to the fact that he had refrained from the use of
intoxicating liquors. Right after him another centenarian said he had
lived over a hundred years, and he ascribed it to the fact that for
the last fifty years he had hardly seen a sober moment. It is an
amazing thing how many outrages men may commit upon their physical
system and yet live on. In the case of the man of the jug he lived on
because his body was pickled. In the case of the man of the pipe, he
lived on because his body turned into smoked liver!

But are there no truths to be uttered in regard to this great evil?
What is the advice to be given to the multitude of young people who
hear me this day? What is the advice you are going to give to your
children?

First of all, we must advise them to abstain from the use of tobacco
because all the medical fraternity of the United States and Great
Britain agree in ascribing to this habit terrific unhealth. The men
whose life-time work is the study of the science of health say so, and
shall I set up my opinion against theirs? Dr. Agnew, Dr. Olcott, Dr.
Barnes, Dr. Rush, Dr. Mott, Dr. Harvey, Dr. Hosack--all the doctors,
allopathic, homeopathic, hydropathic, eclectic, denounce the habit as
a matter of unhealth. A distinguished physician declared he considered
the use of tobacco caused seventy different styles of disease, and he
says: "Of all the cases of cancer in the mouth that have come under my
observation, almost in every case it has been ascribed to tobacco."

The united testimony of all physicians is that it depresses the
nervous system, that it takes away twenty-five per cent. of the
physical vigor of this generation, and that it goes on as the years
multiply and, damaging this generation with accumulated curse, it
strikes other centuries. And if it is so deleterious to the body, how
much more destructive to the mind. An eminent physician, who was the
superintendent of the insane asylum at Northampton, Massachusetts,
says: "Fully one half the patients we get in our asylum have lost
their intellect through the use of tobacco." If it is such a bad thing
to injure the body, what a bad thing, what a worse thing it is to
injure the mind, and any man of common sense knows that tobacco
attacks the nervous system, and everybody knows that the nervous
system attacks the mind.

Besides that, all reformers will tell you that the use of tobacco
creates an unnatural thirst, and it is the cause of drunkenness in
America to-day more than anything else. In all cases where you find
men taking strong drink you find they use tobacco. There are men who
use tobacco who do not take strong drink, but all who use strong drink
use tobacco, and that shows beyond controversy there is an affinity
between the two products. There are reformers here to-day who will
testify to you it is impossible for a man to reform from taking strong
drink until he quits tobacco. In many of the cases where men have been
reformed from strong drink and have gone back to their cups, they
have testified that they first touched tobacco and then they
surrendered to intoxicants.

I say in the presence of this assemblage to-day, in which there are
many physicians--and they know that what I say is true on the
subject--that the pathway to the drunkard's grave and the drunkard's
hell is strewn thick with tobacco-leaves. What has been the testimony
on this subject? Is this a mere statement of a preacher whose business
it is to talk morals, or is the testimony of the world just as
emphatic? What did Benjamin Franklin say? "I never saw a well man in
the exercise of common sense who would say that tobacco did him any
good." What did Thomas Jefferson say? Certainly he is good authority.
He says in regard to the culture of tobacco, "It is a culture
productive of infinite wretchdness." What did Horace Greeley say of
it? "It is a profane stench." What did Daniel Webster say of it? "If
those men must smoke, let them take the horse-shed!" One reason why
the habit goes on from destruction to destruction is that so many
ministers of the gospel take it. They smoke themselves into
bronchitis, and then the dear people have to send them to Europe to
get them restored from exhausting religious services! They smoke until
the nervous system is shattered. They smoke themselves to death. I
could mention the names of five distinguished clergymen who died of
cancer of the mouth, and the doctor said, in every case, it was the
result of tobacco. The tombstone of many a minister of religion has
been covered all over with handsome eulogy, when, if the true epitaph
had been written, it would have said: "Here lies a man killed by too
much cavendish!" They smoke until the world is blue, and their
theology is blue, and everything is blue. How can a man stand in the
pulpit and preach on the subject of temperance when he is indulging
such a habit as that? I have seen a cuspadore in a pulpit into which
the holy man dropped his cud before he got up to read about "blessed
are the pure in heart," and to read about the rolling of sin as a
sweet morsel under the tongue, and to read about the unclean animals
in Leviticus that chewed the cud.
