* Luke xv. 7-10

That the powers of light and darkness take part in the concerns of
mankind, and interest themselves in their affairs, and that they
conflict with each other on their account, we are taught in
revelation. *

Our departed friends who have known and loved us here, may be among
the invisible witnesses of our conduct, and among our invisible
helpers. They may rejoice, if we act well our parts, or weep if we are
numbered among sinners, or careless neglecters of the grace of life.

* Daniel x. 13. Jude 9

Perhaps the pious parent who hath died in the Lord, may regard the
little orphan which he hath left behind. Experienced in the troubles
and difficulties, snares and temptations of this life, he may watch
over it, and in ways to us unknown "do it good and not evil all the
days of its life." Little ones are not destitute of invisible keepers
--"_Their angels_ do always behold the face of my Father which is in
heaven." *

* Matthew xviii. 10.

Some are early called out of life; make but a transient visit to the
scene of sorrow, and just taste the bitter cup of affliction. But
though short their stay, they may yet begin to form some dear
connexions--connexions which might perhaps have been ensnaring; for
more set bad, than good examples before the little strangers committed
to their care. These, taken from the evils to come, may be friends to
those who had appear to befriend their helpless state in this strange
land--may watch for their good, and rejoice if they see them minding
the things which belong to their peace, and by a wise improvement of
more talents than had been committed to themselves, preparing for
greater joys and honors in the kingdom of God.

Those who had sustained a still nearer relation--who had been "one
flesh" may bear like regard to those "with whom they had taken sweet
counsel and walked to the house of God in company"--and may be the
first to welcome their arrival at the world of joy.

The Romish church have abused the doctrine which we conceive to be
contained in the text, by decreeing adoration to departed saints.
Others have gone into the opposite extreme, denying that they know
ought of terrestrial matters, or have any concern in them. Adoration
belongs exclusively to God. It belongs neither to glorified saints,
nor to angels of light, though the latter "are all sent forth to
minister to the heirs of salvation." * "Thou shalt worship the Lord
thy God, and him only shalt thou serve."

* Hebrews i. 14.

The righteous are not suffered to continue here by reason of death.
Their removal is one of our severest trials. Our subject ministers
support and comfort under it. When we reflect upon it, we seem to hear
them calling to us from behind the scene, with "Weep not for us--we
are not dead. Our bodies sleep, but our spirits wake"--Death is not
the period of our existence. It is only our removal--our birth day
into the world of glory.--We are joined "to the spirits of the just
made perfect"--enjoy the society and that of the angels of God--behold
the face of our heavenly Father, and of the divine Redeemer.
We rejoice to see you "followers of those who through faith and
patience inherit the promises"--are ready to help you in your work,
and to shout God's praises, and unite in songs of triumph, should you
come off conquerors, and rise from your humble state of sorrows,
sufferings and temptations, to be our companions in glory.

These are consoling and animating views. They tend to excite a divine
ambition in working out our salvation.

We are yet doomed "to bear the heat and burden day." But we are not
alone--not unobserved. God, angels, and the good, who were lately "our
companions in tribulation," witness the part we act. We would not
dishonor ourselves in their view, and sink ourselves in their
estimation. If they are ready to help our infirmity, we would not
render their heavenly aid of no avail, or cut ourselves off from
enjoying their society.

Consider some dear departed child of God thus interested in your
concerns, and you will find it a spur to duty, and an incentive to
labor and not faint in the work assigned you, preparatory to your
joining the church of the first born above. Think now that the godly
ones who loved you here, and labored to animate you in the service of
God--or those who lately looked to you for counsel and guidance,
having made their way to glory, are waiting your arrival and longing
to hail your entrance into the kingdom, and by all the strength of
your love to them, now freed from the imperfections of their earthly
residence, and made glorious and heavenly, you will find yourself
drawn on toward that state of blessedness, in which you hope again to
rejoice with those whose distresses you witnessed here--yea whose
dying agonies, may have chilled your frame and filled you with anguish
unutterable!

To meet them again, and find yourself and them, forever removed from
the fear of evil, either natural or moral--forever secure the divine
friendship--forever happy and glorious in the enjoyment of God, "the
former things being all passed away, and all tears forever wiped from
your eyes!" There to recount with those blessed spirits, the
travels and trials of this life, and look back, perhaps, on many
hairbreadth escapes from eternal death! There, to dwell on the wonders
of divine love and mercy exercised towards you, and often in things
which you once thought to be against you! Who would not willingly
suffer many deaths to enjoy these things?

Such considerations are animating in duty, and supporting in times of
trial. If realized, we shall adopt the language of the suffering
apostle--"None of these things move me, neither do I count my life
dear to myself, that I may finish my course with joy"--and share
such blessed society--such inconceivable felicity and glory in my
Father's house above, in which are many mansions!



 * * * * * *



SERMON XXVIII.

The Danger of Deviating from Divine Institutions.

Colossians ii, 8.

"Beware lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ."


St. Paul was the apostle of the Gentiles. The care of the churches
gathered among them devolved particularly on him. At the writing of
this epistle he had no personal acquaintance with the church to which
it is addressed.* Epaphras, a bishop of the Colossians, then his
fellow prisoner at Rome, had made him acquainted with their state, and
the danger they were in from false teachers, who, during the absence
of their minister, labored to turn them from the duplicity of the
gospel; and this letter was written, through divine influence, to
guard them against those deceivers, and persuade them to abide in
Christ.

* Verse 1.

To this end he counselled them to keep to the divine directions,
carefully avoiding every alteration, or addition, which might be urged
upon them by uninspired men, though they might come with a shew of
wisdom and humility, and profession of regard to the honor of God and
happiness.

Many of the most successful attacks on God's earthly kingdom have been
made in this way. Open rebellion against God, is found chiefly on
those who have no faith in him; who are therefore devoid of his fear.
Others are tempted mostly to other sins, and induced to make indirect
opposition to the divine government, from them, the tempter hides the
truth, and leads them into error, and thus causes them to pull down
the cause which they aim to build up, and fight against God with a
view to serve him.

So much of God appears in his works, that comparatively few can be
made to doubt his existence, or his providential government. Hence few
are prevailed with to renounce his fear and rise directly against him;
but many are deceived, and consequently engaged to act with his
enemies.

Here a common source of seduction hath been suggesting improvements on
divine institutions--that _this_ and _that_, which God hath not
ordered, would help his cause and promote his interest. Sometimes the
improvements are attempted under pretence of divine order, and urged
with his authority; but this veil is not always spread over endeavors
to change his institutes. They are often urged as means adapted to
help his cause, without pretence to divine order requiring the use of
them; Much, it is alleged, is left to human discretion. This taken
for granted, the rest is easy. It is only to say _these measures_ are
wise and good, calculated to help on the cause of God, and whoever
denies it, is considered as fighting against God.

Thus men are led away from the divine institutions to those of human
invention. Human wisdom is exalted above divine; and all with a view
to glorify God!

Thus was the tempter laboring, through the instrumentality of his
agents, to seduce the Colossians, when this epistle was written, and
it is chiefly intended to counteract their influence, and prevent that
church from being moved away from the hope of the gospel, which they
had received.

In discussing the subject, We shall first _glance at the measures used
by those deceivers_--then consider _the success which hath attended
this mode of fighting against God, and seducing mankind, adding a few
observations on the influence of tradition and the rudiments and
customs of the world_.

The Colossian seducers appear to have been of two kinds--Jewish and
Gentile. The former seem not to have differed from those at Rome,
Corinth, Galatia, and those in Judea. They were Jewish Christians, who
were so attached to the Mosaic ritual, that they wished to continue
it, and graft Christianity upon it, rendering the religion of Christ
only an appendage to that of Moses. They insisted that the ceremonial
law remained in force--insisted especially on the observance of
circumcision; and probably on the traditions so highly valued by the
Pharisees. But the apostle assured this Gentile Church, that they were
complete "in Christ", and needed nothing of this kind to recommend
them to God, or to secure his favor--that "Christ had blotted out the
hand writing of ordinances, and taken it away, nailing it to his
cross"--that the ceremonial law, being only "a shadow of good things
to come," was fulfilled in Christ, and no longer obligatory; and
warned them to stand fast in their Christian liberty, and suffer no
man to judge them respecting such things, or impose such burdens upon
them.

The Gentile seducers were converts from Paganism, and no less eager to
introduce the tenets and rites of their superstition. One of
the errors, which, from the particular mention made of it, they seem to
have urged, was the worshipping of angels, "Let no man beguile you of
your reward, in a voluntary humility and worshipping of angels,
intruding into those things which he hath not seen, vainly puffed up
by his fleshly mind." *

* Verse 18.

Mankind seem, at a pretty early period, generally to have given into
the idea of so vast a distance between God and man, that man is
unworthy to come into his presence, and can approach him acceptably
only through a mediator. But just views of a mediator were never
communicated to the scattered branches of our race, or soon lost
from among them. Most of the heathens offered religious homage to
departed heroes; or to those who had been revered while inhabitants of
earth. To them were their prayers addressed, that they might bear them
to the God of nature, and by their influence render him propitious.

Here was the appearance of humility--So sensible of their unworthiness
that they dared not approach God in their own names, or present their
own petitions--others who had ceased to sin, and been admitted to the
divine presence, must intercede for them. But this was "a voluntary
humility"--not ordered of God--a mere matter of human invention.

A mediator is indeed necessary for man since the fall; but man is not
left to choose his mediator. One every way suitable is provided,
through whom we may have access to God: "There is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus."

The apostle further observes, that those who directed them to worship
angels, arrogated a knowledge of matters not revealed. God hath given
no intimation of such use to be made of angels, but ordered man to
approach him in the name of Christ. Those who go to God in other ways,
or depending on other intercessors, are said "not to hold the head." *
"The head of every man is Christ." + Such people will lose their
reward. "Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary
humility and worshipping of angels"--The rewards of grace are promised
to obedience but not to "willful worship, or voluntary humility." The
utmost these can hope is forgiveness.

*Verse 9. + 1 Corinthians xi. 3.

When Paul assured the Colossians that they were "complete in Christ,"
he had reference to the errors of all the deceivers who were laboring
to seduce them. Gentile philosophy is as useless to the Christian, as
Jewish rites. Christ hath the fulness of the Godhead dwelling in him.
We' have only to rely on divine mercy, through faith, in him, and we
shall not be ashamed.

Such we conceive to be the sum of the instructions and warnings here
given to the Colossians. They were only to keep to the divine
directions, and seek salvation agreeably thereto, regardless of _the
traditions of men and rudiments of the world_.

All error is deviation from divine rule. To this men are tempted with
a view to honor God. This is a fruitful source of error. And when
error is once generated, it is often diffused and perpetuated by
tradition, custom, and _the rudiments of the world_.

We proceed to consider _the success which hath attended this mode of
fighting against God--that is, suggesting improvements on divine
institutions and appointments_.

The first attempt to seduce our race seems to have been of this kind.
"The woman being deceived was in the transgression," Made upright,
she could not have been persuaded to disobey God, unless she was led
to believe that she might, some how, honor God in consequence of that
disobedience. But how?--"In the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened; and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil"--Then
she could honor God better than while destitute of knowledge which
would liken her to superior intelligences. "And when the woman saw
that the tree was good for food, and that it was pleasant to the eyes,
and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of the fruit
thereof and did eat." Thus some suppose the tempter to have prevailed
against her. It may be thought strange that she should expect good to
rise out of evil. Her descendants have often entertained such
expectations; but they are depraved, and their minds are darkened.

Whether this was the sophism by which Satan's victory was obtained, we
presume not to determine. It is however certain that he prevailed by
deception; by persuading our common mother that advantage would accrue
from ceasing to follow the divine directions.

Cain, her eldest son, fell into a sin of the same kind; was induced to
change divine institutions. "Cain brought the fruit of the ground an
offering unto the Lord," instead of the firstlings of the flock. The
fruit of the ground did not typify the sacrifice of Christ, and had
not been ordered of God. It was a mode of honoring him of Cain's
devising. He thought to improve on divine appointments; or dared to
change them to suit his circumstances. "Cain was a tiller of the
ground." The fruits of the ground were the product of his own labors
--"Of such as he had, he would bring his offering. What advantage
would accrue from changing with his brother to procure what God had
required? God needed nothing and could receive nothing from his
creatures."

Abel believed himself under obligation to conform to the divine order,
and in that way to seek the divine favor. Cain had not this faith. He
was confident that another way would do as well; and followed the
dictates of his own fancied wisdom. * Therefore their different
reception. Had Cain been equally obedient with Abel no difference
would have been made. Cain is appealed to, to judge of this matter for
himself--"If thou dost well, shalt thou not be accepted?" TO do well,
is to regulate principle and practice by the divine order; in both
these Cain was deficient. They are commonly united. Error in principle
occasions error in practice.

* These are not mere conjectures--they are intimated by St. Jude, when
he declares the schismatics of his day "have gone in the way of Cain
and Core." Core, or Korah, certainly attempted to change a divine
order by which the functions of the priesthood were appropriated to
the family of Aaron. And the schismatics, who were contemporary with
the apostles, set themselves up for teachers in the church without a
regular, or supernal call to the ministry. These went in the way of
Cain. His sin must therefore have been a departure from divine
institutions.

Not many ages after the deluge idolatry was introduced into the world,
and corrupted and spoiled the worship of God. This seems to have been,
at first, a design to improve on the homage which was paid to the true
God.

Adoration offered to other than God, is idolatry. This is of two
kinds--that offered to angels, and departed spirits, and that offered
to the heavenly bodies and to images. The former is said to have been
originally designed to engage those to whom it was addressed to act
the part of mediators with God. The heavenly bodies were adored as the
supposed residences of Deity. Image worship was intended to help
devotion. It was thought that visible representations would serve to
impress a reverence for the objects of worship on the mind, and
solemnize the heart. With this view, images and paintings were
introduced into temples and places of worship. They appeared to have
effect. The worshippers seemed more devout. A happy discovery, which
had not occurred to Omniscience!

To increase the good effects, further improvements were suggested.
Images were made of the precious metals, and enriched with gems and
costly attire, and art was exhausted to embellish them. They were also
consecrated with magnificent and solemn rites. After consecration, the
celestials to whom they dedicated, were supposed to descend and dwell
in them, and thus to be present with their worshippers, to hear their
prayers, witness their gratitude, and smell a sweet savor in their
sacrifices. And as temples were built, and images consecrated chiefly
to inferior deities, who were worshipped as mediators, the homage
which was paid to them was suited to the conceptions which the
worshippers entertained of the objects of their worship; and being
mostly taken from among men, the offerings were adapted to the
characters which they had respectively sustained while resident in the
body. Hence the homage paid to Baal, Moloch, Mars, Bacchus, Venus and
others. Thus every abomination was sanctioned, and made an object of
religion!

The use of images was common among the Easterns at an early period,
and communicated to the Hebrews, who were conversant with them, before
their settlement in Canaan. In Egypt, or certainly in the wilderness
it was found among them. They were particularly guilty of this sin
while Moses was on the mount with God. And the use which they then
made of images was the same which hath been mentioned. As soon as the
