understand what I feel. Confidence alone must lead us to
Love. . . . Does not fear lead to the thought of the strict justice
that is threatened to sinners? But that is not the justice Jesus
will show to such as love Him.

God would not vouchsafe you the desire to be the Victim of His
Merciful Love, were this not a favour in store--or rather already
granted, since you are wholly surrendered unto Him and long to be
consumed by Him, and God never inspires a longing which He cannot
fulfill.

The road lies clear, and along it we must run together. I feel
that Jesus wishes to bestow on us the same graces; He wishes to
grant us both a free entrance into His Heavenly Kingdom. Dearest
Godmother, you would like to hear still more of the secrets which
Jesus confides to your child, but human speech cannot tell what
the human heart itself can scarcely conceive. Besides, Jesus
confides His secrets to you likewise. This I know, for you it was
who taught me to listen to His Divine teaching. On the day of my
Baptism you promised in my name that I would serve Him alone. You
were the Angel who led me and guided me in my days of exile and
offered me to Our Lord. As a child loves its mother, I love you;
in Heaven only will you realise the gratitude with which my heart
is full to overflowing.

Your little daughter,

Teresa of the Child Jesus.
_____________________________

[1] Eccles. 24:29.

[2] Apoc. 21:4.

[3] Isa. 53:3.

[4] She alludes to the Statue of the Holy Child in the cloister,
which was under her own special care. [Ed.]

[5] Luke 16:2.

[6] Luke 22:42.

[7] Cf. _Imit.,_ II, xi. 4.

_____________________________


LETTERS TO SISTER FRANCES TERESA[1]


I

August 13, 1893.

DEAR LITTLE SISTER,--At last your desires are satisfied. Like the
dove sent forth from the ark, you have been unable to find a spot
on earth whereon to rest, and have long been on the wing seeking
to re-enter the blessed abode where your heart had for ever fixed
its home. Jesus has kept you waiting, but at last, touched by the
plaintive cry of His dove, He has put forth His Divine Hand, and,
taking hold of it, has set it in His Heart--that sanctuary of His
Love.

It is quite a spiritual joy, this joy of mine. For I shall never
look upon you again, never hear your voice as I outpour my heart
into yours. Yet I know that earth is but a halting-place to us who
journey towards a Heavenly Home. What matter if the routes we
follow lie apart? Our goal is the same--that Heaven where we shall
meet, no more to be separated. There we shall taste for ever the
sweets of our earthly home. We shall have much to tell one another
when this exile is ended. Speech here below is so inadequate, but
a single glance will be enough for perfect understanding in our
home beyond; and I believe that our happiness will be greater than
if we had never been parted here.

Meanwhile we must live by sacrifice. Without it there would be no
merit in the religious life. As someone told us in a conference:
"The reason why the forest oak raises its head so high is because,
hemmed in on all sides, it wastes no sap in putting forth branches
underneath, but towers aloft. Thus in the religious life the soul,
hedged in all around by the rule and by the practice of community
life, of necessity finds there a means of lifting a high head
towards Heaven."

Dearest sister, pray for your little Therese that she may draw
profit from her exile on earth and from the plentiful means
granted her of meriting Heaven.


II

January, 1895.

DEAR LITTLE SISTER,--How fruitful for Heaven has been the year
that is gone! . . . Our dear Father has seen that which the eye of
man cannot see, he has heard the minstrelsy of the angels . . .
now his heart understands, and his soul enjoys "the things which
God hath prepared for those who love Him."[2] . . . Our turn will
come, and it is full sweet to think our sails are set towards the
Eternal Shore.

Do you not find, as I do, that our beloved Father's death has
drawn us nearer to Heaven? More than half of our loved ones
already enjoy the Vision of God, and the five who remain in exile
will follow soon. This thought of the shortness of life gives me
courage, and helps me to put up with the weariness of the journey.
What matters a little toil upon earth? We pass . . . "We have not
here a lasting city."[3]

Think of your Therese during this month consecrated to the Infant
Jesus, and beg of Him that she may always remain a very little
child. I will offer the same prayer for you, because I know your
desires, and that humility is your favourite virtue.

Which Therese will be the more fervent? . . . She who will be the
more humble, the more closely united to Jesus, and the more
faithful in making love the mainspring of every action. We must
not let slip one single occasion of sacrifice, everything has such
value in the religious life . . . Pick up a pin from a motive of
love, and you may thereby convert a soul. Jesus alone can make our
deeds of such worth, so let us love Him with every fibre of our
heart.


III

July 12, 1896.

MY DEAR LITTLE LEONIE,--I should have answered your letter last
Sunday if it had been given to me, but you know that, being the
youngest, I run the risk of not seeing letters for some
considerable time after my sisters, and occasionally not at all. I
only read yours on Friday, so forgive my delay.

You are right--Jesus is content with a tender look or a sigh of
love. For my part, I find it quite easy to practise perfection,
now that I realise it only means making Jesus captive through His
Heart. Look at a little child who has just vexed its mother,
either by giving way to temper or by disobedience. If it hides in
a corner and is sulky, or if it cries for fear of being punished,
its mother will certainly not forgive the fault. But should it run
to her with its little arms outstreteched, and say; "Kiss me,
Mother; I will not do it again!" what mother would not straightway
clasp her child lovingly to her heart, and forget all it had done?
. . . She knows quite well that her little one will repeat the
fault--no matter, her darling will escape all punishment so long
as it makes appeal to her heart.

Even when the law of fear was in force, before Our Lord's coming,
the prophet Isaias said--speaking in the name of the King of
Heaven: "Can a woman forget her babe? . . . And if she should
forget, yet will I not forget thee."[4] What a touching promise!
We who live under the law of Love, shall we not profit by the
loving advances made by our Spouse? How can anybody fear Him Who
allows Himself to be made captive "with one hair of our neck"?[5]

Let us learn to keep Him prisoner--this God, the Divine Beggar of
love. By telling us that a single hair can work this wonder, He
shows us that the smallest actions done for His Love are those
which charm His Heart. If it were necessary to do great things, we
should be deserving of pity, but we are happy beyond measure,
because Jesus lets Himself be led captive by the smallest action.
. . . With you, dear Leonie, little sacrifices are never lacking.
Is not your life made up of them? I rejoice to see you in presence
of such wealth, especially when I remember that you know how to
make profit thereby, not only for yourself but likewise for poor
sinners. It is so sweet to help Jesus to save the souls which He
has ransomed at the price of His Precious Blood, and which only
await our help to keep them from the abyss.

It seems to me that if our sacrifices take Jesus captive, our joys
make Him prisoner too. All that is needful to attain this end is,
that instead of giving ourselves over to selfish happiness, we
offer to our Spouse the little joys He scatters in our path, to
charm our hearts and draw them towards Him.

You ask for news of my health. Well, my cough has quite
disappeared. Does that please you? It will not prevent Our Lord
from taking me to Himself whensoever He wishes. And I need not
prepare for that journey, since my whole endeavour is to remain as
a little child. Jesus Himself must pay all its expenses, as well
as the price of my admission to Heaven.

Good-bye, dearest one, pray to Him without fail for the last and
least of your sisters.


IV

July 17, 1897.

MY DEAR LEONIE,--I am so pleased to be able to write to you again.
Some days ago I thought I should never again have this
consolation, but it seems God wishes to prolong somewhat the time
of my exile. This does not trouble me--I would not enter Heaven
one moment sooner through my own will. The only real happiness on
earth is to strive always to think "how goodly is the chalice"[6]
that Jesus give us. Yours is indeed a goodly one, dear Leonie. If
you wish to be a Saint--and it will not be hard--keep only one end
in view: give pleasure to Jesus, and bind yourself more closely to
Him.

Good-bye, my dear sister, I should wish the thought of my entering
Heaven to fill you with joy, because I shall then be better able
to give you proof of my tender love. In the Heart of our Heavenly
Spouse we shall live His very life, and through eternity I shall
remain,

Your very little sister,

TERESA OF THE CHILD JESUS.
_____________________________

[1] Nearly all the letters written by Soeur Therese to her sister
Leonie are lost. These few have been recovered. It will be
remembered that Leonie entered the Convent of the Visitation at
Caen. See note, page 113.

[2] Cf. I Cor. 2:9.

[3] Heb. 13:14.

[4] Isa. 49:15.

[5] Cant. 4:9.

[6] Ps. 22[23]:5.

_____________________________


LETTERS TO HER COUSIN MARIE GUERIN


I

1888.

Before you confided in me,[1] I felt you were suffering, and my
heart was one with yours. Since you have the humility to ask
advice of your little Therese, this is what she thinks: you have
grieved me greatly by abstaining from Holy Communion, because you
have grieved Our Lord. The devil must be very cunning to deceive a
soul in this way. Do you not know, dear Marie, that by acting thus
you help him to accomplish his end? The treacherous creature knows
quite well that when a soul is striving to belong wholly to God he
cannot cause her to sin, so he merely tries to persuade her that
she has sinned. This is a considerable gain, but not enough to
satisfy his hatred, so he aims at something more, and tries to
shut out Jesus from a tabernacle which Jesus covets. Unable to
enter this sanctuary himself, he wishes that at least it remain
empty and without its God. Alas, what will become of that poor
little heart? When the devil has succeeded in keeping a soul from
Holy Communion he has gained all his ends . . . while Jesus
weeps! . . .

Remember, little Marie, that this sweet Jesus is there in the
Tabernacle expressly for you and you alone. Remember that He burns
with the desire to enter your heart. Do not listen to satan. Laugh
him to scorn, and go without fear to receive Jesus, the God of
peace and of love.

"Therese thinks all this"--you say--"because she does not know my
difficulties." She does know, and knows them well; she understands
everything, and she tells you confidently that you can go without
fear to receive your only true Friend. She, too, has passed
through the martyrdom of scruples, but Jesus gave her the grace to
receive the Blessed Sacrament always, even when she imagined she
had committed great sins. I assure you I have found that this is
the only means of ridding oneself of the devil. When he sees that
he is losing his time he leaves us in peace.

In truth it is impossible that a heart which can only find rest in
contemplation of the Tabernacle--and yours is such, you tell
me--could so far offend Our Lord as not to be able to receive Him
. . . What does offend Jesus, what wounds Him to the Heart, is
want of confidence.

Pray much that the best portion of your life may not be
overshadowed by idle fears. We have only life's brief moments to
spend for the Glory of God, and well does satan know it. This is
why he employs every ruse to make us consume them in useless
labour. Dear sister, go often to Holy Communion, go very
often--that is your one remedy.


II

1894

You are like some little village maiden who, when sought in
marriage by a mighty king would not dare to accept him, on the
plea that she is not rich enough, and is strange to the ways of a
court. But does not her royal lover know better than she does, the
extent of her poverty and ignorance?

Marie, though you are nothing, do not forget that Jesus is All.
You have only to lose your own nothingness in that Infinite All,
and thenceforth to think only of that All who alone is worthy of
your love.

You tell me you wish to see the fruit of your efforts. That is
exactly what Jesus would hide from you. He likes to contemplate by
Himself these little fruits of our virtue. They console Him.

You are quite wrong, Marie, if you think that Therese walks
eagerly along the way of Sacrifice: her weakness is still very
great, and every day some new and wholesome experience brings this
home more clearly. Yet Jesus delights to teach her how to _glory
in her infirmities._[2] It is a great grace, and I pray Him to
give it to you, for with it come peace and tranquillity of heart.
When we see our misery we do not like to look at ourselves but
only upon our Beloved.

You ask me for a method of obtaining perfection. I know of
Love--and Love only! Our hearts are made for this alone. Sometimes
I endeavour to find some other word for love; but in a land of
exile "words which have a beginning and an end"[3] are quite
unable to render adequately the emotions of the soul, and so we
must keep to the one simple word--LOVE.

But on whom shall our poor hearts lavish this love, and who will
be worthy of this treasure? Is there anyone who will understand it
and--above all--is there anyone who will be able to repay? Marie,
Jesus alone understands love: He alone can give back all--yea,
infinitely more than the utmost we can give.
_____________________________

[1] The allusion is to the scruples from which Marie suffered.
Having read this letter--which is a strong plea for Frequent
Communion--Pope Pius X declared it "most opportune." Therese was
but fifteen when she wrote it. [Ed.]

[2] 2 Cor. 11:5.

[3] St. Augustine.

_____________________________


LETTER TO HER COUSIN, JEANNE GUERIN (MADAME LA NEELE)

August, 1895.

It is a very great sacrifice that God has asked of you, my dear
Jeanne, in calling your little Marie to the Carmel; but remember
that He has promised a hundredfold to anyone who for His Love hath
left father or mother or _sister._[1] Now, for love of Jesus, you
have not hesitated to part with a sister dearer to you than words
can say, and therefore He is bound to keep His promise. I know
that these words are generally applied to those who enter the
religious life, but my heart tells me they were spoken, too, for
those whose generosity is such that they will sacrifice to God
even the loved ones they hold dearer than life itself.
_____________________________

[1] Mark 10:30.

_____________________________


LETTERS TO HER BROTHER MISSIONARIES


I

1895.

Our Divine Lord asks no sacrifice beyond our strength. At times,
it is true, He makes us taste to the full the bitterness of the
chalice He puts to our lips. And when He demands the sacrifice of
all that is dearest on earth, it is impossible without a very
special grace not to cry out as He did during His Agony in the
Garden: "My Father, let this chalice pass from me!" But we must
hasten to add: "Yet not as I will, but as Thou wilt."[1] It is so
consoling to think that Jesus, "the Strong God,"[2] has felt all
our weaknesses and shuddered at the sight of the bitter
chalice--that very chalice He had so ardently desired.

Your lot is indeed a beautiful one, since Our Lord has chosen it
for you, and has first touched with His own Lips the cup which He
holds out to yours. A Saint has said: "The greatest honour God can
bestow upon a soul is not to give to it great things, but to ask
of it great things." Jesus treats you as a privileged child. It is
His wish you should begin your mission even now,[3] and save souls
through the Cross. Was it not by suffering and death that He
ransomed the world? I know that you aspire to the happiness of
laying down your life for Him; but the martyrdom of the heart is
not less fruitful than the shedding of blood, and this martyrdom
is already yours. Have I not, then, good reason to say that your
lot is a beautiful one--worthy an apostle of Christ?


II

1896.

Let us work together for the salvation of souls! We have but the
one day of this life to save them, and so give to Our Lord a proof
of our love. To-morrow will be Eternity, then Jesus will reward
you a hundredfold for the sweet joys you have given up for Him. He
knows the extent of your sacrifice. He knows that the sufferings
of those you hold dear increase your own; but He has suffered this
