    Here in the body pent,
      Absent from Him I roam,
    Yet nightly pitch my moving tent
      A day's march nearer home.

    My Father's house on high!
      Home of my soul, how near
    At times to faith's foreseeing eye
      Thy golden gates appear.

    I hear at morn and even,
      At noon and midnight hour,
    The choral harmonies of heaven
      Earth's Babel tongues o'erpower.

The last line has been changed to read--

    Seraphic music pour,

--and finally the hymnals have dropped the verse and substituted others.
The new line is an improvement in melody but not in rhyme, and,
besides, it robs the stanza of its leading thought--heaven and earth
offsetting each other, and heavenly music drowning earthly noise--a
thought that is missed even in the rich cantos of "Jerusalem the
Golden."


_THE TUNES._

Nearly the whole school of good short metre tunes, from "St. Thomas" to
"Boylston" have offered their notes to Montgomery's "At Home in Heaven,"
but the two most commonly recognized as its property are "Mornington,"
named from Lord Mornington, its author, and I.B. Woodbury's familiar
harmony, "Forever with the Lord."

Garret Colley Wellesley, Earl of Mornington, and ancestor of the Duke of
Wellington, was born in Dagan, Ireland, July 19, 1735. Remarkable for
musical talent when a child, he became a skilled violinist, organ-player
and composer in boyhood, with little aid beyond his solitary study and
practice. When scarcely twenty-one, the University of Dublin conferred
on him the degree of Doctor of Music, and a professorship. He excelled
as a composer of glees, but wrote also tunes and anthems for the church,
some of which are still extant in the choir books of the Dublin
Cathedral Died March 22, 1781.


"HARK! HARK, MY SOUL!"

The Methodist Reformation, while it had found no practical sympathy
within the established church, left a deep sense of its reason and
purpose in the minds of the more devout Episcopalians, and this feeling,
instead of taking form in popular revival methods, prompted them to
deeper sincerity and more spiritual fervor in their traditional rites of
worship. Many of the next generation inherited this pious
ecclesiasticism, and carried their loyalty to the old Christian culture
to the extreme of devotion till they saw in the sacraments the highest
good of the soul. It was Keble's "Christian Year" and his "Assize
Sermon" that began the Tractarian movement at Oxford which brought to
the front himself and such men as Henry Newman and Frederick William
Faber.

The hymns and sacred poems of these sacramentarian Christians would
certify to their earnest piety, even if their lives were unknown.

Faber's hymn "Hark, Hark My Soul," is welcomed and loved by every
Christian sect for its religious spirit and its lyric beauty.

    Hark! hark, my soul! angelic songs are swelling
      O'er earth's green fields and ocean's wave-beat shore;
    How sweet the truth those blessed strains are telling
      Of that new life where sin shall be no more.

  REFRAIN
    Angels of Jesus, angels of light
      Singing to welcome the pilgrims of the night.

    Onward we go, for still we hear them singing
     "Come, weary souls, for Jesus bids you come,"
    And through the dark, its echoes sweetly ringing,
      The music of the gospel leads us home.
                                        Angels of Jesus.

    Far, far away, like bells at evening pealing,
      The voice of Jesus sounds o'er land and sea,
    And laden souls, by thousands meekly stealing,
      Kind Shepherd, turn their weary steps to Thee.
                                        Angels of Jesus.


_THE TUNES._

John B. Dykes and Henry Smart--both masters of hymn-tune
construction--have set this hymn to music. "Vox Angelica" in B flat, the
work of the former, is a noble composition for choir or congregation,
but "Pilgrim," the other's interpretation, though not dissimilar in
movement and vocal range, has, perhaps, the more sympathetic melody. It
is, at least, the favorite in many localities. Some books print the two
on adjacent pages as optionals.

Another much-loved hymn of Faber's is--

    O Paradise, O Paradise!
      Who doth not crave for rest?
    Who would not see the happy land
      Where they that loved are blest?

  REFRAIN
    Where loyal hearts and true
      Stand ever in the light,
    All rapture through and through
      In God's most holy sight.

    O Paradise, O Paradise,
      The world is growing old;
    Who would not be at rest and free
      Where love is never cold.

                Where loyal hearts and true.

    O Paradise, O Paradise,
      I greatly long to see
    The special place my dearest Lord,
      In love prepares for me.

                Where loyal hearts and true.

This aspiration, from the ardent soul of the poet has been interpreted
in song by the same two musicians, and by Joseph Barnby--all with the
title "Paradise." Their similarity of style and near equality of merit
have compelled compilers to print at least two of them side by side for
the singers' choice. A certain pathos in the strains of Barnby's
composition gives it a peculiar charm to many, and in America it is
probably the oftenest sung to the words.

Dr. David Breed, speaking of Faber's "unusual" imagination, says, "He
got more out of language than any other poet of the English tongue, and
used words--even simple words--so that they rendered him a service which
no other poet ever secured from them." The above hymns are
characteristic to a degree, but the telling simplicity of his
style--almost quaint at times--is more marked in "There's a Wideness in
God's Mercy," given on p. 234.

[Illustration: Horatius Bonar, D.D.]


"BEYOND THE SMILING AND THE WEEPING."

This song of hope--one of the most strangely tuneful and rune-like of
Dr. Bonar's hymn-poems--is less frequently sung owing to the peculiarity
of its stanza form. But it scarcely needs a staff of notes--

    Beyond the smiling and the weeping
        I shall be soon;
    Beyond the waking and the sleeping,
    Beyond the sowing and the reaping
        I shall be soon.

  REFRAIN
    Love, rest and home!
      Sweet hope!
    Lord, tarry not, but come.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Beyond the parting and the meeting
        I shall be soon;
    Beyond the farewell and the greeting,
    Beyond the pulses' fever-beating
        I shall be soon.
                    Love, rest and home!

    Beyond the frost-chain and the fever
        I shall be soon;
    Beyond the rock-waste and the river
    Beyond the ever and the never
        I shall be soon.
                    Love, rest and home!

The wild contrasts and reverses of earthly vicissitude are spoken and
felt here in the sequence of words. Perpetual black-and-white through
time; then the settled life and untreacherous peace of eternity.
Everywhere in the song the note of heavenly hope interrupts the wail of
disappointment, and the chorus returns to transport the soul from the
land of emotional whirlwinds to unbroken rest.


_THE TUNES._

Mr. Bradbury wrote an admirable tune to this hymn, though the one since
composed by Mr. Stebbins has in some localities superseded it in popular
favor. Skill in following the accent and unequal rhythms produces a
melodious tone-poem, and completes the impression of Bonar's singular
but sweet lyric of hope which suggests a chant-choral rather than a
regular polyphonic harmony. W.A. Tarbutton and the young composer, Karl
Harrington, have set the hymn to music, but the success of their work
awaits the public test.


"WE SHALL MEET BEYOND THE RIVER."

The words were written by Rev. John Atkinson, D.D., in January, 1867,
soon after the death of his mother. He had been engaged in revival work
and one night in his study, "that song, in substance, seemed," he says,
"to sing itself into my heart." He said to himself, "I would better
write it down, or I shall lose it."

"There," he adds, "in the silence of my study, and not far from
midnight, I wrote the hymn."

    We shall meet beyond the river
      By and by, by and by;
    And the darkness will be over
      By and by, by and by.

    With the toilsome journey done,
      And the glorious battle won.
    We shall shine forth as the sun
      By and by, by and by.

The Rev. John Atkinson was born in Deerfield, N.J. Sept. 6, 1835. A
clergyman of the Methodist denomination, he is well-known as one of its
writers. The _Centennial History of American Methodism_ is his work, and
besides the above hymn, he has written and published _The Garden of
Sorrows_, and _The Living Way_. He died Dec. 8, 1897.

The tune to "We Shall Meet," by Hubert P. Main, composed in 1867,
exactly translates the emotional hymn into music. S.J. Vail also wrote
music to the words. The hymn, originally six eight-line stanzas, was
condensed at his request to its present length and form by Fanny Crosby.


"ONE SWEETLY SOLEMN THOUGHT."

Phebe Cary, the author of this happy poem, was the younger of the two
Cary sisters, Alice and Phebe, names pleasantly remembered in American
literature. The praise of one reflects the praise of the other when we
are told that Phebe possessed a loving and trustful soul, and her life
was an honor to true womanhood and a blessing to the poor. She had to
struggle with hardship and poverty in her early years: "I have cried in
the street because I was poor," she said in her prosperous years, "and
the poor always seem nearer to me than the rich."

When reputation came to her as a writer, she removed from her little
country home near Cincinnati, O., where she was born, in 1824, and
settled in New York City with her sister. She died at Newport, N.Y.,
July 31, 1871, and her hymn was sung at her funeral. Her remains rest in
Greenwood Cemetery.

"One Sweetly Solemn Thought," was written in 1852, during a visit to one
of her friends. She wrote (to her friend's inquiry) years afterwards
that it first saw the light "in your own house ... in the little back
third-story bedroom, one Sunday after coming from church." It was a
heart experience noted down without literary care or artistic effort,
and in its original form was in too irregular measure to be sung. She
set little value upon it as a poem, but when shown hesitatingly to
inquiring compilers, its intrinsic worth was seen, and various revisions
of it were made. The following is one of the best versions--stanzas one,
two and three:--

    One sweetly solemn thought
      Comes to me o'er and o'er,
    I am nearer home to-day,
      Than I ever have been before.

    Nearer my Father's house,
      Where the many mansions be,
    Nearer the great white throne,
      Nearer the crystal sea.

    Nearer the bound of life,
      Where we lay our burdens down,
    Nearer leaving the cross
      Nearer gaining the crown.


_THE TUNE._

The old revival tune of "Dunbar," with its chorus, "There'll be no more
sorrow there," has been sung to the hymn, but the tone-lyric of Philip
Phillips, "Nearer Home," has made the words its own, and the public are
more familiar with it than with any other. It was this air that a young
man in a drinking house in Macao, near Hong-Kong, began humming
thoughtlessly while his companion was shuffling the cards for a new
game. Both were Americans, the man with the cards more than twenty years
the elder. Noticing the tune, he threw down the pack. Every word of the
hymn had come back to him with the echo of the music.

"Harry, where did you learn that hymn?"

"What hymn?"

"Why the one you have been singing."

The young man said he did not know what he had been singing. But when
the older one repeated some of the lines, he said they were learned in
the Sunday-school.

"Come, Harry," said the older one, "here's what I've won from you. As
for me, as God sees me, I have played my last game, and drank my last
bottle. I have misled you, Harry, and I am sorry for it. Give me your
hand, my boy, and say that, for old America's sake, if for no other,
you will quit this infernal business."

Col. Russel H. Conwell, of Boston, (now Rev. Dr. Conwell of
Philadelphia) who was then visiting China, and was an eye-witness of the
scene, says that the reformation was a permanent one for both.


"I WILL SING YOU A SONG OF THAT BEAUTIFUL LAND."

One day, in the year 1865, Mrs. Ellen M.H. Gates received a letter from
Philip Phillips noting the passage in the _Pilgrim's Progress_ which
describes the joyful music of heaven when Christian and Hopeful enter on
its shining shore beyond the river of death, and asking her to write a
hymn in the spirit of the extract, as one of the numbers in his _Singing
Pilgrim_. Mrs. Gates complied--and the sequel of the hymn she wrote is
part of the modern song-history of the church. Mr. Phillips has related
how, when he received it, he sat down with his little boy on his knee,
read again the passage in Bunyan, then the poem again, and, turning to
his organ, pencil in hand, pricked the notes of the melody. "The 'Home
of the Soul,'" he says, "seems to have had God's blessing from the
beginning, and has been a comfort to many a bereaved soul. Like many
loved hymns, it has had a peculiar history, for its simple melody has
flowed from the lips of High Churchmen, and has sought to make itself
heard above the din of Salvation Army cymbals and drums. It has been
sung in prisons and in jailyards, while the poor convict was waiting to
be launched into eternity, and on hundreds of funeral occasions. One man
writes me that he has led the singing of it at one hundred and twenty
funerals. It was sung at my dear boy's funeral, who sat on my knee when
I wrote it. It is my prayer that God may continue its solace and
comfort. I have books containing the song now printed in seven different
languages."

A writer in the _Golden Rule_ (now the _Christian Endeavor World_) calls
attention to an incident on a night railroad train narrated in the late
Benjamin F. Taylor's _World on Wheels_, in which "this hymn appears as a
sort of Traveller's Psalm." Among the motley collection of passengers,
some talkative, some sleepy, some homesick and cross, all tired, sat two
plain women who, "would make capital country aunts.... If they were
mothers at all they were good ones." Suddenly in a dull silence, near
twelve o'clock, a voice, sweet and flexible, struck up a tune. The
singer was one of those women. "She sang on, one after another the good
Methodist and Baptist melodies of long ago," and the growing interest of
the passengers became chained attention when she began--

   "I will sing you a song of that beautiful land,
      The far-away home of the soul,
    Where no storms can beat on the glittering strand,
      While the years of eternity roll.

    O, that home of the soul, in my visions and dreams,
      Its bright jasper walls I can see;
    Till I fancy but thinly the veil intervenes
      Between the fair city and me."

"The car was a wakeful hush long before she had ended; it was as if a
beautiful spirit were floating through the air. None that heard will
ever forget. Philip Phillips can never bring that 'home of the soul' any
nearer to anybody. And never, I think, was quite so sweet a voice lifted
in a storm of a November night on the rolling plains of Iowa."

In an autograph copy of her hymn, sent to the editor, Mrs. Gates changes
"harps" to "palms." Is it an improvement? "Palms" is a word of two
meanings.

    O how sweet it will be in that beautiful land,
      So free from all sorrow and pain,
    With songs on our lips and with harps in our hands
      To meet one another again.


"THERE'S A LAND THAT IS FAIRER THAN DAY."

This belongs rather with "Christian Ballads" than with genuine hymns,
but the song has had and still has an uplifting mission among the lowly
whom literary perfection and musical nicety could not touch--and the
first two lines, at least, are good hymn-writing. Few of the best sacred
lyrics have been sung with purer sentiment and more affectionate fervor
than "The Sweet By-and-By." To any company keyed to sympathy by time,
place, and condition, the feeling of the song brings unshed tears.

As nearly as can be ascertained it was in the year 1867 that a man about
forty-eight years old, named Webster, entered the office of Dr. Bennett
in Elkhorn. Wis., wearing a melancholy look, and was rallied
good-naturedly by the doctor for being so blue--Webster and Bennett were
friends, and the doctor was familiar with the other's frequent fits of
gloom.

The two men had been working in a sort of partnership, Webster being a
musician and Bennett a ready verse-writer, and together they had created
and published a number of sheet-music songs. When Webster was in a fit
of melancholy, it was the doctor's habit to give him a "dose" of new
verses and cure him by putting him to work. Today the treatment turned
out to be historic.

"What's the matter now," was the doctor's greeting when his "patient"
came with the tell-tale face.

"O, nothing," said Webster. "It'll be all right by and by."

"Why not make a song of the sweet by and by?" rejoined the doctor,
cheerfully.

"I don't know," said Webster, after thinking a second or two. "If you'll
make the words, I'll write the music."

The doctor went to his desk, and in a short time produced three stanzas
and a chorus to which his friend soon set the notes of a lilting air,
brightening up with enthusiasm as he wrote. Seizing his violin, which
he had with him, he played the melody, and in a few minutes more he had
filled in the counterpoint and made a complete hymn-tune. By that time
two other friends, who could sing, had come in and the quartette tested
the music on the spot. Here different accounts divide widely as to the
immediate sequel of the new-born song.

A Western paper in telling its story a year or two ago, stated that
Webster took the "Sweet By and By" (in sheet-music form), with a batch
of other pieces, to Chicago, and that it was the only song of the lot
that Root and Cady would not buy; and finally, after he had tried in
vain to sell it, Lyon and Healy took it "out of pity," and paid him
twenty dollars. They sold eight or ten copies (the story continued) and
stowed it away with dead goods, and it was not till apparently a long
time after, when a Sunday-school hymn-book reprinted it, and began to
sell rapidly on its account, that the "Sweet By and By" started on its
career round the world.

This seems circumstantial enough, and the author of the hymn in his own
story of it might have chosen to omit some early particulars, but,
untrustworthy as the chronology of mere memory is, he would hardly
record immediate popularity of a song that lay in obscurity for years.
Dr. Bennett's words are, "I think it was used in public shortly after
[its production], for within two weeks children on the street were
singing it."

The explanation may be partly the different method and order of the
statements, partly lapses of memory (after thirty years) and partly in
collateral facts. The Sunday-school hymn-book was evidently _The Signet
Ring_, which Bennett and Webster were at work upon and into which first
went the "Sweet By and By"--whatever efforts may have been made to
dispose of it elsewhere or whatever copyright arrangement could have
warranted Mr. Healy in purchasing a song already printed. The _Signet
Ring_ did not begin to profit by the song until the next year, after a
copy of it appeared in the publishers' circulars, and started a demand;
so that the _immediate_ popularity implied in Doctor Bennett's account
was limited to the children of Elkhorn village.

The piece had its run, but with no exceptional result as to its hold on
the public, until in 1873 Ira D. Sankey took it up as one of his working
hymns. Modified from its first form in the "_Signet Ring_" with
pianoforte accompaniment and chorus, it appeared that year in _Winnowed
Hymns_ as arranged by Hubert P. Main, and it has so been sung ever
since.

Sanford Filmore Bennett, born in 1836, appears to have been a native of
the West, or, at least, removed there when a young man. In 1861 he
settled in Elkhorn to practice his profession. Died Oct., 1898.

Joseph Philbrick Webster was born in Manchester, N.H. March 22, 1819. He
was an active member of the Handel and Haydn Society, and various other
musical associations. Removed to Madison, Ind. 1851, Racine, Wis. 1856,
and Elkhorn, Wis., 1857, where he died Jan. 18, 1875. His _Signet Ring_
was published in 1868.

    There's a land that is fairer than day,
      And by faith I can see it afar
    For the Father waits over the way
      To prepare us a dwelling-place there.

  CHORUS
      In the sweet by and by
    We shall meet on that beautiful shore.

    We shall sing on that beautiful shore
      The melodious songs of the blest,
    And our spirits shall sorrow no more,
      Nor sigh for the blessing of rest.
                    In the sweet by and by, etc.


"SUNSET AND EVENING STAR."

Was it only a poet's imagination that made Alfred Tennyson approach
perhaps nearest of all great Protestants to a sense of the real
"Presence," every time he took the Holy Communion at the altar? Whatever
the feeling was, it characterized all his maturer life, so far as its
spiritual side was known. His remark to a niece expressed it, while
walking with her one day on the seashore, "God is with us now, on this
down, just as truly as Jesus was with his two disciples on the way to
Emmaus."

Such a man's faith would make no room for dying terrors.

    Sunset and evening star,
      And one clear call for me,
    And may there be no moaning of the bar
      When I put out to sea,

    But such a tide as, moving, seems asleep,
      Too full for sound and foam,
    When that which drew from out the boundless deep
      Turns again home.

    Twilight and evening bell,
      And after that the dark,
    And may there be no sadness of farewell
      When I embark.

    For though from out our bourne of time and place
      The flood may bear me far,
    I hope to see my Pilot face to face
      When I have crossed the bar.

Tennyson lived three years after penning this sublime prayer. But it was
his swan-song. Born at Somersby, Lincolnshire, Aug. 63 1809, dying at
Farringford, Oct. 6, 1892, he filled out the measure of a good old age.
And his prayer was answered, for his death was serene and dreadless. His
unseen Pilot guided him gently "across the bar"--and then _he saw Him_.


_THE TUNE._

Joseph Barnby's "Crossing the Bar" has supplied a noble choral to this
poem. It will go far to make it an accepted tone in church worship,
among the more lyrical strains of verse that sing hope and euthanasia.


"SAFE IN THE ARMS OF JESUS."

If Tennyson had the mistaken feeling (as Dr. Benson intimates) "that
hymns were expected to be commonplace," it was owing both to his mental
breeding and his mental stature. Genius in a colossal frame cannot
otherwise than walk in strides. What is technically a hymn he never
wrote, but it is significant that as he neared the Shoreless Sea, and
looked into the Infinite, his sense of the Divine presence instilled
something of the hymn spirit into his last verses.

Between Alfred Tennyson singing trustfully of his Pilot and Fanny Crosby
singing "Safe in the Arms of Jesus," is only the width of the choir. The
organ tone and the flute-note breathe the same song. The stately poem
and the sweet one, the masculine and the feminine, both have wings, but
while the one is lifted in anthem and solemn chant in the great
sanctuaries, the other is echoing Isaiah's tender text[48] in prayer
meeting and Sunday-school and murmuring it at the humble firesides like
a mother's lullaby.

[Footnote 48: Isa. 40:11.]

    Safe in the arms of Jesus,
      Safe on His gentle breast,
    There by His love o'ershaded
      Sweetly my soul shall rest.
    Hark! 'tis the voice of angels
      Borne in a song to me
    Over the fields of glory,
      Over the jasper sea.

  REFRAIN
    Safe in the arms of Jesus (1st four lines rep.).

    Safe in the arms of Jesus,
      Safe from corroding care,
    Safe from the world's temptations,
      Sin cannot harm me there.
    Free from the blight of sorrow,
      Free from my doubts and fears,
    Only a few more trials,
      Only a few more tears.

              Safe in the arms of Jesus.

    Jesus, my heart's dear refuge
      Jesus has died for me;
    Firm on the Rock of Ages
      Ever my trust shall be,
    Here let me with patience,
      Wait till the night is o'er,
    Wait till I see the morning
      Break on the Golden Shore.

              Safe in the arms of Jesus.

                            --Composed 1868.


_THE TUNE._

Those who have characterized the _Gospel Hymns_ as "sensational" have
always been obliged to except this modest lyric of Christian peace and
its sweet and natural musical supplement by Dr. W.H. Doane. No hurried
and high-pitched chorus disturbs the quiet beauty of the hymn, a simple
_da capo_ being its only refrain. "Safe in the Arms of Jesus" sang
itself into public favor with the pulses of hymn and tune beating
together.




                INDEX OF NAMES.

  ABBOT, Lyman,                      237, 326
  ABT, Franz,                        228, 364
  ADAMS, E.,                              369
  ADAMS, John,                            368
  ADAMS, John Quincy,                     293
  ADAMS, Sarah F.,                        152
  ADDISON, Joseph,              113, 114, 353
  ADRIAN, (Emperor),                      515
  AIBLINGER, Johan Caspar,               357
  ALDRICH, Jonathan,                      287
  ALEXANDER, Mrs. C.F.,                   414
  ALLEN, George N.,                       412
  ALLEN, J.O.,                            129
  ALMOND, ----,                      364, 365
  ALTENBURG, Johan M.,                     84
  AMBROSE,                      xiii, 1, 2, 3
  ANATOLIUS,                              354
  APES, William,                          265
  ARATUS,                                 237
  ARNE, Thomas A.,                   107, 108
  ARNOLD, Matthew,                        109
  ARNOLD, S.,                             287
  ATCHISON, John B.,                      451
  ATKINSON, John,                    528, 529
  AUBER, Harriet,                    168, 169
  AUGUSTINE,                         ix, 2, 3
  AVISON, Charles,                        327

  BACH, Emanuel,                            9
  BACH, Sebastian,                      9, 71
  BAILEY, Thomas H.,                      112
  BAKER, Sir Henry,                        57
