consciously be rectified and made blessed. And I, for my part, do not
believe that any man comes into the full sweetness of an assured
friendship with God, unless he comes to it by the road of faith in that
Saviour in whom God draws near to us with tenderness in His heart, and
blessings dropping from His open Hands. To be at peace with God is the
beginning of all true tranquillity, and that can be secured only by
faith in Jesus Christ.

So, because He brings the reconciliation between man and God, because He
brings the rectification of our relation to circumstances and men,
because He brings the control of desires and passions and inclinations,
and because He satisfies all the capacities of our natures, in Him, and
in Him only, is there peace for us.

III. So note, thirdly, that the peace of the Lord of Peace is perfect.

'Give you peace always,' that points to perpetual, unbroken duration in
time, and through all changing circumstances which might threaten a less
stable and deeply-rooted tranquillity. And then, 'by all means,' as our
Authorised Version has it, or, better, 'in all ways,' as the Revised
Version reads, the reference being, not so much to the various manners
in which the divine peace is to be bestowed, as to the various aspects
which that peace is capable of assuming. Christ's peace, then, is
perpetual and multiform, unbroken, and presenting itself in all the
aspects in which tranquillity is possible for a human spirit.

It is possible, then, thinks Paul, that there shall be in our hearts a
deep tranquillity, over which disasters, calamities, sorrows, losses,
need have no power. There is no necessity why, when my outward life is
troubled, my inward life should be perturbed. There may be light in the
dwellings of Goshen, while darkness lies over all the land of Egypt. The
peace which Christ gives is no exemption from warfare, but is realised
in the midst of warfare. It is no immunity from sorrows, but is then
most felt when the storm of sorrow beating upon us is patiently
accepted. The rainbow steadfastly stands spanning the tortured waters of
the cataract. The fire may burn, like that old Greek fire, beneath the
water. The surface may be agitated, but the centre may be calm. It is
not calamity that breaks our peace, but it is the resistance of our
wills to calamity which troubles us. When we can bow and submit and say,
'Thy will be done,' 'it seemeth good to Thee, do as Thou wilt,' then
nothing can break the peace of God in our hearts. We seek in the wrong
quarter for peace when we seek it in the disposition of outward things
according to our wills. We seek in the right way when we seek it in the
disposition of our wills according to the will of the Father manifest in
our circumstances. There may be peace always, even whilst the storms,
efforts, and calamities of life are in full operation around us and on
us. That peace may be uninterrupted and uniform, extended on one high
level, as it were through all our lives. It is not so with us, dear
brethren; there are ups and downs which are our own fault. The peace of
God may be permanent, but, in order that it should be, there must be
permanent communion and permanent obedience.

Further, says the Apostle, Christ's peace will not manifest itself in
one form only, but in all the shapes in which peace is possible. There
are many enemies that beset this calmness of spirit; for them all there
is the appropriate armour and defence in the peace of God, I have
already enumerated in part some of the requirements for true and
permanent tranquillity of soul. All these are met in the peace of
Christ. Whatever it is that disturbs men, He has His anodyne that will
soothe. If circumstances threaten, if men array themselves against us,
if our own evil hearts rise up in rebellion, if our passions disturb us,
if our consciences accuse: for all these Christ brings tranquillity and
calm. In every way in which men can be disturbed, and in every way,
therefore, in which peace can be manifest, Christ's gift avails. 'Come
unto Me all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.'

IV. Lastly, 'the Lord of Peace' gives it by giving His own presence.

The Thessalonians, as they listened to Paul's first prayer, might think
to themselves, 'Always, by all means.' That is a large petition! Can it
be fufilled? And so the Apostle adds, 'The Lord be with you all.' You
cannot separate Christ's gifts from Christ. The only way to get anything
that He gives is to get Him. It is His presence that does everything. If
He is with me, the world's annoyances will seem very small. If I hold
His hand I shall not be much troubled. If I can only nestle close to His
side, and come under His cloak, He will shield me from the cold blast,
from whatever side it blows. If my heart is twined around Him it will
partake of the stability and calm of the great heart on which it rests.

The secret of tranquillity is the presence of Christ. When He is in the
vessel the waves calm themselves. So, Christian men and women, if you
and I are conscious of breaches of our restfulness, interruptions of
our tranquillity by reason of surging, impatient passions, and hot
desires within ourselves, or by reason of the pressure of outward
circumstances, or by reason of our having fallen beneath our
consciences, and done wrong things, let us understand that the breaches
of our peace are not owing to Him, but only to our having let go His
hand. It is our own faults if we are ever troubled; if we kept close to
Him we should not be. It is our own faults if the world ever agitates us
beyond the measure that is compatible with central calm. Sorrow should
not have the power to touch the citadel of our lives. Effort should not
have the power to withdraw us from our trustful repose in Him. And
nothing here would have the power, if we did not let our hand slip out
of His, and break our communion with Him.

So, dear brethren, 'in the world ye shall have tribulation, in Me ye
shall have peace.' Keep inside the fortress and nothing will disturb.
'He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under
the shadow of the Almighty.' The only place where that hungry,
passion-ridden heart of yours, conscious of alienation from God, can
find rest, is close by Jesus Christ. 'The Lord be with us all,' and then
the peace of that Lord shall clothe and fill our hearts in Christ
Jesus.




I. TIMOTHY




THE END OF THE COMMANDMENT

          'Now, the end of the commandment is love, out of a
          pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
          unfeigned.'--1 TIM. 1. 6.


The Apostle has just said that he left Timothy in Ephesus, in order to
check some tendencies there which were giving anxiety. Certain teachers
had appeared, the effect of whose activity was to create parties, to
foster useless speculations, and to turn the minds of the Ephesian
Christians away from the practical and moral side of Christianity. In
opposition to these, the Apostle here lays down the broad principle that
God has spoken, not in order to make acute theologians, or to provide
materials for controversy, but in order to help us to love. The whole of
these latest letters of the Apostle breathe the mellow wisdom of old
age, which has learned to rate brilliant intellectualism, agility,
incontroversial fence and the like, far lower than homely goodness. And
so, says Paul, 'the end of the commandment is love.'

Now he here states, not only the purpose of the divine revelation, but
gives us a summary, but yet sufficient, outline of the method by which
God works towards that purpose. The commandment is the beginning, love
is the end or aim. And between these two there are inserted three
things, a 'pure heart,' a 'good conscience,' 'faith unfeigned.' Now of
these three the two former are closely connected, and the third is the
cause, or condition, of both of them. It is, therefore, properly named
last as being first in order, and therefore last reached in analysis.
When you track a stream from its mouth to its source, the fountain-head
is the last thing that you come to. And here we have, as in these great
lakes in Central Africa--out of which finally the Nile issues--the
stages of the flow. There are the twin lakes, a 'good conscience' and a
'pure heart.' These come from 'unfeigned faith,' which lies higher up in
the hills of God; and they run down into the love which is the 'end of
the commandment.' The faith lays hold on the commandment, and so the
process is complete. Or, if you begin at the top, instead of at the
bottom, God gives the word; faith grasps the word, and thereby nourishes
a 'pure heart' and a 'good conscience,' and thereby produces a universal
love. So, then, we have three steps to look at here.

I. First of all, what God speaks to us for.

'The end of the commandment is love.'

Now, I take it that the word 'commandment' here means, not this or that
specific precept, but the whole body of Christian revelation, considered
as containing laws for life. And to begin with, and only to mention, it
is something to get that point of view, that all which God says, be it
promise, be it self-manifestation, be it threatening, or be it anything
else, has a preceptive bearing, and is meant to influence life and
conduct. I shall have a word or two more to say about that presently,
but note, just as we go on, how remarkable it is, and how full of
lessons, if we will ponder it, that one name for the Gospel on the lips
of the man who had most to say about the contrast between Gospel and
Law is 'commandment.' Try to feel the stringency of that aspect of
evangelical truth and of Christian revelation.

Then I need not remind you how here the indefinite expression 'love'
must be taken, as I think is generally the case in the New Testament,
when the object on which the love rests is not defined, as including
both of the twin commandments, of which the second, our Master says, is
like unto the first, love to God and love to man. In the Christian idea
these two are one. They are shoots from the one root. The only
difference is that the one climbs and the other grows along the levels
of earth. There is no gulf set in the New Testament teaching, and there
ought to be none in the practice and life of a Christian man, between
the love of God and the love of man. They are two aspects of one thing.

Then, if so, mark how, according to the Apostle's teaching here, in this
one thought of a dual-sided love, one turned upwards, one turned
earthwards, there lies the whole perfection of a human soul. You want
nothing more if you are 'rooted and grounded in love.' That will secure
all goodness, all morality, all religion, everything that is beautiful,
and everything that is noble. And all this is meant to be the result of
God's speech to us.

So, then, two very plain practical principles may be deduced and
enforced from this first thought. First, the purpose of all revelation
and the test of all religion is--character and conduct.

It is all very well to know about God, to have our minds filled with
true thoughts about Him, His nature, and dealings with us. Orthodoxy is
good, but orthodoxy is a means to an end. There should be nothing in a
man's creed which does not act upon his life. Or, if I may put it into
technical words, all a man's _credenda_ should be his _agenda_; and
whatsoever he believes should come straight into his life to influence
it, and to shape character. Here, then, is the warning against a mere
notional orthodoxy, and against regarding Christian truth as being
intended mainly to illuminate the understanding, or to be a subject of
speculation and discussion. There are people in all generations, and
there are plenty of them to-day, who seem to think that the great
verities of the Gospel are mainly meant to provide material for
controversy--

          'As if religion were intended
           For nothing else but to be mended';

and that they have done all that can be expected when they have tried to
apprehend the true bearing of this revelation, and to contend against
misinterpretations. This is the curse of religious controversy, that it
blinds men to the practical importance of the truths for which they are
fighting. It is as if one were to take some fertile wheat-land, and sand
it all over, and roll it down, and make it smooth for a gymnasium, where
nothing would grow. So the temper which finds in Christian truth simply
a 'ministration of questions,' as my text says, mars its purpose, and
robs itself of all the power and nourishment that it might find there.

No less to be guarded against is the other misconception which the clear
grasp of our text would dismiss at once, that the great purpose for
which God speaks to us men, in the revelation of Jesus Christ, is that
we may, as we say, be 'forgiven,' and escape any of the temporal or
eternal consequences of our wrongdoing. That _is_ a purpose, no doubt,
and men will never rise to the apprehension of the loftiest purposes,
nor penetrate to a sympathetic perception of the inmost sweetness of the
Gospel, unless they begin with its redemptive aspect, even in the
narrowest sense of that word. But there are a miserable number of
so-called and of real Christians in this world, and in our churches
to-day, who have little conception that God has spoken to them for
anything else than to deliver them from the fear of death, and from the
incidence on them of future condemnation. He _has_ spoken for this
purpose, but the ultimate end of all is that we may be helped to love
Him, and so to be like Him. The aim of the commandment is love, and if
you ever are tempted to rest in intellectual apprehensions, or to
pervert the truth of God into a mere arena on which you can display your
skill of fence and your intellectual agility, or if ever you are tempted
to think that all is done when the sweet message of forgiveness is
sealed upon a man's heart, remember the solemn and plain words of my
text--the final purpose of all is that we may love God and man.

But then, on the other side, note that no less distinctly is the sole
foundation of this love laid in God's speech. My text, in its elevation
of sentiment and character and conduct above doctrine, falls in with the
prevailing tendencies of this day; but it provides the safeguards which
these tendencies neglect. Notice that this favourite saying of the most
advanced school of broad thinkers, who are always talking about the
decay of dogma, and the unimportance of doctrine as compared with love,
is here uttered by a man who was no sentimentalist, but to whom the
Christian system was a most distinct and definite thing, bristling all
over with the obnoxious doctrines which are by some of us so summarily
dismissed as of no importance. My very text protests against the modern
attempt to wrench away the sentiments and emotions produced in men, by
the reception of Christian truth, from the truth which it recognises as
the only basis on which they can be produced. It declares that the
'commandment' must come first, before love can follow; and the rest of
the letter, although, as I say, it decisively places the end of
revelation as being the moral and religious perfecting of men into
assimilation with the divine love, no less decisively demands that for
such a perfecting there shall be laid the foundation of the truth as it
is revealed in Jesus Christ.

And that is what we want to-day in order to make breadth wholesome, and
if only we will carry with us the two thoughts, the commandment and
love, we shall not go far wrong. But what would you think of a man that
said, 'I do not want any foundations. I want a house to live in'? And
pray how are you going to get your house without the foundations? Or
would he be a wise man who said, 'Oh, never mind about putting grapes
into the vine vat, and producing fermentation; give me the wine!' Yes!
But you must have the fermentation first. The process is not the result,
of course, but there is no result without the process. And according to
New Testament teaching, which, I am bold to say, is verified by
experience, there is no deep, all-swaying, sovereign, heart-uniting love
to God which is not drawn from the acceptance of the truth as it is in
Jesus Christ.

II. And so I come, secondly, to note the purifying which is needed prior
to such love.

Our text, as I said, divides the process into stages; or, if I may go
back to a former illustration, into levels. And on the level
immediately above the love, down into which the waters of the twin lakes
glide, are a pure heart and a good conscience. These are the requisites
for all real and operative love. Now they are closely connected, as it
seems to me, more closely so than with either the stage which precedes
or that which follows. They are, in fact, two twin thoughts, very
closely identified, though not quite identical.

A pure heart is one that has been defecated and cleansed from the
impurities which naturally attach to human affections. A 'good
conscience' is one which is void of offence towards God and man, and
registers the emotions of a pure heart. It is like a sheet of sensitive
paper that, with a broken line, indicates how many hours of sunshine in
the day there have been. We need not discuss the question as to which of
these two great gifts and blessings which sweeten a whole life come
first. In the initial stages of the Christian life I suppose the good
conscience precedes the pure heart. For forgiveness which calms the
conscience and purges it of the perilous stuff which has been injected
into it by our corruptions--forgiveness comes before cleansing, and the
conscience is calm before the heart is purified. But in the later stages
of the Christian life the order seems to be reversed, and there cannot
be in a man a conscience that is good unless there is a heart that is
pure.

But however that may be--and it does not affect the general question
before us--mark how distinctly Paul lays down here the principle that
you will get no real love of God or man out of men whose hearts are
foul, and whose consciences are either torpid or stinging them. I need
not dwell upon that, for it is plain to anybody that will think for a
moment that all sin separates between a man and God; and that from a
heart all seething and bubbling, like the crater of a volcano, with foul
liquids, and giving forth foul odours, there can come no love worth
calling so to God, nor any benevolence worth calling so to man. Wherever
there is sin, unrecognised, unconfessed, unpardoned, there there is a
black barrier built up between a man's heart and the yearning heart of
God on the other side. And until that barrier is swept away, until the
whole nature receives a new set, until it is delivered from the love of
evil, and from its self-centred absorption, and until conscience has
taken into grateful hands, if I might so say, the greatest of all gifts,
the assurance of the divine forgiveness, I, for one, do not believe that
deep, vital, and life-transforming love to God is possible. I know that
it is very unfashionable, I know it is exceedingly narrow teaching, but
it seems to me that it is Scriptural teaching; and it seems to me that
if we will strip it of the exaggerations with which it has often been
surrounded, and recognise that there may be a kind of instinctive and
occasional recognition of a divine love, there may be a yearning after a
clear light, and fuller knowledge of it, and yet all the while no real
love to God, rooted in and lording over and moulding the life, we shall
not find much in the history of the world, or in the experience of
ourselves or of others, to contradict the affirmation that you need the
cleansing of forgiveness, and the recognition of God's love in Jesus
Christ, before you can get love worth calling so in return to Him in
men's hearts.

Brethren, there is much to-day to shame Christian men in the singular
fact which is becoming more obvious daily, of a divorce between human
benevolence and godliness. It is a scandal that there should be so many
men in the world who make no pretensions to any sympathy with your
Christianity, and who set you an example of benevolence, self-sacrifice,
enthusiasm for humanity, as it is called. I believe that the one basis
upon which there can be solidly built benevolence to men is devotion to
God, because of God's great love to us in Jesus Christ. But I want to
stir, if I might not say sting, you and myself into a recognition of our
obligations to mankind, more stringent and compelling than we have ever
felt it, by this phenomenon of modern life, that a divorce has been
proclaimed between philanthropy and religion. The end of the commandment
is love, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience.

III. Lastly, notice the condition of such purifying.

To recur to my former illustration, we have to go up country to a still
higher level. What feeds the two reservoirs that feed the love? What
makes the heart pure and the conscience good? Paul answers, 'faith
unfeigned'; not mere intellectual apprehension, not mere superficial or
professed, but deep, genuine, and complete faith which has in it the
element of reliance as well as the element of credence. Belief is not
all that goes to make faith. Trust is not all that goes to make faith.
Belief and trust are indissolubly wedded in the conception of it. Such a
faith, which knows what it lays hold of--for it lays hold upon definite
truth, and lays hold on what it knows, for it trusts in Him whom the
truth reveals--such a faith makes the heart pure and the conscience
good.

And how does it do so? By nothing in itself. There is no power in my
faith to make me one bit better than I am. There is no power in it to
still one accusation of conscience. It is only the condition on which
the one power that purges and that calms enters into my heart and works
there. The power of faith is the power of that which faith admits to
operate in my life. If we open our hearts the fire will come in, and it
will thaw the ice, and melt out the foulness from my heart. It is
important for practice that we should clearly understand that the great
things which the Bible says of faith it says of it only because it is
the channel, the medium, the condition, by and on which the real power,
which is Jesus Christ Himself, acts upon us. It is not the window, but
the sunshine, that floods this building with light. It is not the opened
hand, but the gift laid in it, that enriches the pauper. It is not the
poor leaden pipe, but the water that flows through it, that fills the
cistern, and cleanses it, whilst it fills. It is not your faith, but the
Christ whom your faith brings into your heart and conscience, that
purges the one, and makes the other void of offence towards God and man.

So, brethren, let us learn the secret of all nobility, of all power, of
all righteousness of character and conduct. Put your foot on the lowest
round of the ladder, and then aspire and climb, and you will reach the
summit. Take the first step, and be true to it after you have taken it,
and the last will surely come. He that can say, 'We have known and
believed the love that God hath to us,' will also be able to say, 'We
love Him because He first loved us.' 'And this commandment have we of
God, that he who loves God loves his brother also.'




'THE GOSPEL OF THE GLORY OF THE HAPPY GOD'

          'The glorious gospel of the blessed God.'--1 TIM.
          i. 11.


Two remarks of an expository character will prepare the way for our
consideration of this text. The first is, that the proper rendering is
that which is given in the Revised Version--'the gospel of the glory,'
not the 'glorious gospel.' The Apostle is not telling us what kind of
thing the Gospel is, but what it is about. He is dealing not with its
quality, but with its contents. It is a Gospel which reveals, has to do
with, is the manifestation of, the glory of God.

Then the other remark is with reference to the meaning of the word
'blessed.' There are two Greek words which are both translated 'blessed'
in the New Testament. One of them, the more common, literally means
'well spoken of,' and points to the action of praise or benediction;
describes what a man is when men speak well of him, or what God is when
men praise and magnify His name. But the other word, which is used here,
and is only applied to God once more in Scripture, has no reference to
the human attribution of blessing and praise to Him, but describes Him
altogether apart from what men say of Him, as what He is in Himself, the
'blessed,' or, as we might almost say, the 'happy' God. If the word
happy seems too trivial, suggesting ideas of levity, of turbulence, of
possible change, then I do not know that we can find any better word
than that which is already employed in my text, if only we remember that
it means the solemn, calm, restful, perpetual gladness that fills the
heart of God.

So much, then, being premised, there are three points that seem to me to
come out of this remarkable expression of my text. First, the revelation
of God in Christ, of which the Gospel is the record, is the glory of
God. Second, that revelation is, in a very profound sense, an element in
the blessedness of God. And, lastly, that revelation is the good news
for men. Let us look at these three points, then, in succession.

I. Take, first, that striking thought that the revelation of God in
Jesus Christ is the glory of God.

The theme, or contents, or purpose of the whole Gospel, is to set forth
and make manifest to men the glory of God.

Now what do we mean by 'the glory'? I think, perhaps, that question may
be most simply answered by remembering the definite meaning of the word
in the Old Testament. There it designates, usually, that supernatural
and lustrous light which dwelt between the Cherubim, the symbol of the
presence and of the self-manifestation of God. So that we may say, in
brief, that the glory of God is the sum-total of the light that streams
from His self-revelation, considered as being the object of adoration
and praise by a world that gazes upon Him.

And if this be the notion of the glory of God, is it not a startling
contrast which is suggested between the apparent contents and the real
substance of that Gospel? Suppose a man, for instance, who had no
previous knowledge of Christianity, being told that in it he would find
the highest revelation of the glory of God. He comes to the book, and
finds that the very heart of it is not about God, but about a man; that
this revelation of the glory of God is the biography of a man; and more
than that, that the larger portion of that biography is the story of
the humiliations, and the sufferings, and the death of the man. Would it
not strike him as a strange paradox that the history of a _man's_ life
was the shining apex of all revelations of the glory of _God_? And yet
so it is, and the Apostle, just because to him the Gospel was the story
of the Christ who lived and died, declares that in this story of a human
life, patient, meek, limited, despised, rejected, and at last crucified,
lies, brighter than all other flashings of the divine light, the very
heart of the lustre and palpitating centre and fontal source of all the
radiance with which God has flooded the world. The history of Jesus
Christ is the glory of God. And that involves two or three
considerations on which I dwell briefly.

One of them is this: Christ, then, is the self-revelation of God. If,
when we deal with the story of His life and death, we are dealing simply
with the biography of a man, however pure, lofty, inspired he may be,
then I ask what sort of connection there is between that biography which
the four Gospels gives us, and what my text says is the substance of the
Gospel? What force of logic is there in the Apostle's words: 'God
commendeth _His_ love toward us in that whilst we were yet sinners
_Christ_ died for us,' unless there is some altogether different
connection between the God who commends His love and the Christ who dies
to commend it, than exists between a mere man and God? Brethren! to
deliver my text, and a hundred other passages of Scripture, from the
charge of being extravagant nonsense, and clear, illogical _non
sequiturs_, you must believe that in that man Christ Jesus 'we behold
His glory--the glory of the only begotten of the Father'; and that when
we look--haply not without some touch of tenderness and awed admiration
in our hearts--upon His gentleness, we have to say, 'the patient God';
when we look upon His tears we have to say, 'the pitying God'; when we
look upon His Cross we have to say, 'the redeeming God'; and gazing upon
the Man, to see in Him the manifest divinity. Oh! listen to that voice,
'He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father,' and bow before the story of
the human life as being the revelation of the indwelling God.

And then, still further, my text suggests that this self-revelation of
God in Jesus Christ is the very climax and highest point of all God's
revelations to men. I believe that the loftiest exhibition and
conception of the divine character which is possible to us must be made
to us in the form of a man. I believe that the law of humanity, for
ever, in heaven as on earth, is this, that the Son is the revealer of
God; and that no loftier--yea, at bottom, no other--communication of the
divine nature can be made to man than is made in Jesus Christ.

But be that as it may, let me urge upon you this thought, that in that
wondrous story of the life and death of our Lord Jesus Christ the very
high-water mark of divine self-communication has been touched and
reached. All the energies of the divine nature are embodied there. The
'riches, both of the _wisdom_ and of the _knowledge_ of God,' are in the
Cross and Passion of our Saviour. 'To declare at this time His
_righteousness_' Jesus Christ came to die. The Cross is 'the _power_ of
God unto salvation.' Or, to put it into other words, and avail oneself
of an illustration, we know the old story of the queen who, for the love
of an unworthy human heart, dissolved pearls in the cup and gave them to
him to drink. We may say that God comes to us, and for the love of us,
reprobate and unworthy, has melted all the jewels of His nature into
that cup of blessing which He offers to us, saying: 'Drink ye all of
it.' The whole Godhead, so to speak, is smelted down to make that
rushing river of molten love which flows from the Cross of Christ into
the hearts of men. Here is the highest point of God's revelation of
Himself.

And my text implies, still further, that the true living, flashing
centre of the glory of God is the love of God. Christendom is more than
half heathen yet, and it betrays its heathenism not least in its vulgar
conceptions of the divine nature and its glory. The majestic attributes
which separate God from man, and make Him unlike His creatures, are the
ones which people too often fancy belong to the glorious side of His
character. They draw distinctions between 'grace' and 'glory,' and think
that the latter applies mainly to what I might call the physical and the
metaphysical, and less to the moral, attributes of the divine nature. We
adore power, and when it is expanded to infinity we think that it is the
glory of God. But my text delivers us from all such misconceptions. If
we rightly understand it, then we learn this, that the true heart of the
glory is tenderness and love. Of power that weak man hanging on the
Cross is a strange embodiment; but if we learn that there is something
more godlike in God than power, then we can say, as we look upon Jesus
Christ: 'Lo! this is our God. We have waited for Him, and He will save
us.' Not in the wisdom that knows no growth, not in the knowledge which
has no border-land of ignorance ringing it round about, not in the
unwearied might of His arm, not in the exhaustless energy of His being,
not in the unslumbering watchfulness of His all-seeing eye, not in that
awful presence wheresoever creatures are; not in any or in all of these
lies the glory of God, but in His love. These are the fringes of the
brightness; this is the central blaze. The Gospel is the Gospel of the
glory of God, because it is all summed up in the one word--'God so loved
the world that He gave His only begotten Son.'

II. Now, in the next place, the revelation of God in Christ is an
element in the blessedness of God.

We are come here into places where we see but very dimly, and it becomes
us to speak very cautiously. Only as we are led by the divine teaching
may we affirm at all. But it cannot be unwise to accept in simple
literality utterances of Scripture, however they may seem to strike us
as strange. And so I would say--the philosopher's God may be
all-sufficient and unemotional, the Bible's God 'delighteth in mercy,'
rejoiceth in His gifts, and is glad when men accept them. It is
something, surely, amid all the griefs and sorrows of this
sorrow-haunted and devil-hunted world, to rise to this lofty region and
to feel that there is a living personal joy at the heart of the
universe. If we went no further, to me there is infinite beauty and
mighty consolation and strength in that one thought--the happy God. He
is not, as some ways of representing Him figure Him to be, what the
older astronomers thought the sun was, a great cold orb, black and
frigid at the heart, though the source and centre of light and warmth to
the system. But He Himself is joy, or if we dare not venture on that
word, which brings with it earthly associations, and suggests the
possibility of alteration--He is the blessed God. And the Psalmist saw
deeply into the divine nature, who, not contented with hymning His
praise as the possessor of the fountain of life, and the light whereby
we see light, exclaimed in an ecstasy of anticipation, 'Thou makest us
to drink of the rivers of Thy pleasures.'

But there is a great deal more than that here, if not in the word
itself, at least in its connection, which connection seems to suggest
that, howsoever the divine nature must be supposed to be blessed in its
own absolute and boundless perfectness, an element in the blessedness of
God Himself arises from His self-communication through the Gospel to the
world. All love delights in imparting. Why should not God's? On the
lower level of human affection we know that it is so, and on the highest
level we may with all reverence venture to say, The quality of that
mercy . . . 'is twice blest,' and that divine love 'blesseth Him that
gives and them that take.'

He created a universe because He delights in His works, and in having
creatures on whom He can lavish Himself. He 'rests in His love, and
rejoices over us with singing' when we open our hearts to the reception
of His light, and learn to know Him as He has declared Himself in His
Christ. The blessed God is blessed because He is God. But He is blessed
too because He is the loving and, therefore, the giving God.

What a rock-firmness such a thought as this gives to the mercy and the
love that He pours out upon us! If they were evoked by our worthiness we
might well tremble, but when we know, according to the grand words
familiar to many of us, that it is His nature and property to be
merciful, and that He is far gladder in giving than we can be in
receiving, then we may be sure that His mercy endureth for ever, and
that it is the very necessity of His being--and He cannot turn His back
upon Himself--to love, to pity, to succour, and to bless.

III. And so, lastly, the revelation of God in Christ is good news for us
all.

'The Gospel of the glory of the blessed God.' How that word 'Gospel' has
got tarnished and enfeebled by constant use and unreflective use, so
that it slips glibly off my tongue and falls without producing any
effect upon your hearts! It needs to be freshened up by considering what
really it means. It means this: here are we like men shut up in a
beleaguered city, hopeless, helpless, with no power to break out or to
raise the siege; provisions failing, death certain. Some of you older
men and women remember how that was the case in that awful siege of
Paris, in the Franco-German War, and what expedients were adopted in
order to get some communication from without. And here to us, prisoned,
comes, as it did to them, a despatch borne under a dove's wing, and the
message is this:--God is love; and that you may know that He is, He has
sent you His Son who died on the Cross, the sacrifice for a world's sin.
Believe it, and trust it, and all your transgressions will pass away.

My brother, is not that good news? Is it not _the_ good news that you
need--the news of a Father, of pardon, of hope, of love, of strength, of
purity, of heaven? Does it not meet our fears, our forebodings, our
wants at every point? It comes to you. What do you do with it? Do you
welcome it eagerly, do you clutch it to your hearts, do you say, 'This
is _my_ Gospel'? Oh! let me beseech you, welcome the message; do not
turn away from the word from heaven, which will bring life and
blessedness to all your hearts! Some of you have turned away long
enough, some of you, perhaps, are fighting with the temptation to do so
again even now. Let me press that ancient Gospel upon your acceptance,
that Christ the Son of God has died for you, and lives to bless and help
you. Take it and live! So shall you find that, 'as cold water to a
thirsty soul,' so is this best of all news from the far country.




THE GOSPEL IN SMALL

          'This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
          acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world
          to save sinners.'--1 TIM. i. 15.


Condensation is a difficult art. There are few things drier and more
unsatisfactory than small books on great subjects, abbreviated
statements of large systems. Error lurks in summaries, and yet here the
whole fulness of God's communication to men is gathered into a sentence;
tiny as a diamond, and flashing like it. My text is the one precious
drop of essence, distilled from gardens full of fragrant flowers. There
is an old legend of a magic tent, which could be expanded to shelter an
army, and contracted to cover a single man. That great Gospel which
fills the Bible and overflows on the shelves of crowded libraries is
here, without harm to its power, folded up into one saying, which the
simplest can understand sufficiently to partake of the salvation which
it offers.

There are five of these 'faithful sayings' in the letters of Paul,
usually called 'the pastoral epistles.' It seems to have been a manner
with him, at that time of his life, to underscore anything which he felt
to be especially important by attaching to it this label. They are all,
with one exception, references to the largest truths of the Gospel. I
turn to this one, the first of them now, for the sake of gathering some
lessons from it.

I. Note, then, first, here the Gospel in a nutshell.

'Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.' Now, every word
there is weighty, and might be, not beaten out, but opened out into
volumes. Mark who it is that comes--the solemn double name of that great
Lord, 'Christ Jesus.' The former tells of His divine appointment and
preparation, inasmuch as the Spirit of the Lord God is upon Him,
anointing Him to proclaim good tidings to the poor, and to open the
prison doors to all the captives, and asserts that it is He to whom
prophets and ritual witnessed, and for whose coming prophets and kings
looked wearily through the ages, and died rejoicing even to see afar off
the glimmer of His day. The name of Jesus tells of the child born in
Bethlehem, who knows the experience of our lives by His own, and not
only bends over our griefs with the pity and omniscience of a God, but
with the experience and sympathy of a man.

'Christ Jesus came.' Then He _was_ before He came. His own will impelled
His feet, and brought Him to earth.

'Christ Jesus came to save.' Then there is disease, for saving is
healing; and there is danger, for saving is making secure.

'Christ Jesus came to save sinners'--the universal condition,
co-extensive with the 'world' into which, and for which, He came. And so
the essence of the Gospel, as it lay in Paul's mind, and had been
verified in his experience, was this--that a divine person had left a
life of glory, and in wonderful fashion had taken upon Himself manhood
in order to deliver men from the universal danger and disease. That is
the Gospel which Paul believed, and which he commends to us as 'a
faithful saying.'

Well, then, if that be so, there are two or three things very important
for us to lay to heart. The first is the universality of sin. That is
the thing in which we are all alike, dear friends. That is the one thing
about which any man is safe in his estimate of another. We differ
profoundly. The members of this congregation, gathered accidentally
together, and perhaps never to be all together again, may be at the
antipodes of culture, of condition, of circumstances, of modes of life;
but, just as really below all the diversities there lies the common
possession of the one human heart, so really and universally below all
diversities there lies the black drop in the heart, and 'we all have
sinned and come short of the glory of God.' It is that truth which I
want to lay on your hearts as the first condition to understanding
anything about the power, the meaning, the blessedness of the Gospel
which we say we believe.

And what does Paul mean by this universal indictment? If you take the
vivid autobiographical sketch in the midst of which it is embedded, you
will understand. He goes on to say, 'of whom I am chief.' It was the
same man that said, without supposing that he was contradicting this
utterance at all, 'touching the righteousness which is in the law' I was
'blameless.' And yet, 'I am chief.' So all true men who have ever shown
us their heart, in telling their Christian faith, have repeated Paul's
statement; from Augustine in his wonderful _Confessions_, to John Bunyan
in his _Grace Abounding to the Chief of Sinners_. And then prosaic men
have said, 'What profligates they must have been, or what exaggerators
they are now!' No. Sewer gas of the worst sort has no smell; and the
most poisonous exhalations are only perceptible by their effects. What
made Paul think himself the chief of sinners was not that he had broken
the commandments, for he might have said, and in effect did say, 'All
these have I kept from my youth up,' but that, through all the
respectability and morality of his early life there ran this streak--an
alienation of heart, in the pride of self-confidence, from God, and an
ignorance of his own wretchedness and need. Ah! brethren, I do not need
to exaggerate, nor to talk about 'splendid vices,' in the untrue
language of one of the old saints, but this I seek to press on you: that
the deep, universal sin does not lie in the indulgence of passions, or
the breach of moralities, but it lies here--'thou hast left Me, the
fountain of living water.' That is what I charge on myself, and on every
one of you, and I beseech you to recognise the existence of this
sinfulness beneath all the surface of reputable and pure lives.
Beautiful they may be; God forbid that I should deny it: beautiful with
many a strenuous effort after goodness, and charming in many respects,
but yet vitiated by this, 'The God in whose hand thy breath is, and
whose are all thy ways, thou hast not glorified.' That is enough to make
a man brush away all the respectabilities and proprieties and graces,
and look at the black reality beneath, and wail out 'of whom I am
chief.'

But, further, Paul's condensed summary of the Gospel implies the fatal
character of this universal sin. 'He comes to save,' says he. Now what
answers to 'save' is either disease or danger. The word is employed in
the original in antithesis to both conditions. To save is to heal and to
make safe. And I need not remind you, I suppose, of how truly the
alienation from God, and the substitution for Him of self or of
creature, is the sickness of the whole man. But the end of sickness
uncured is death. We 'have no healing medicine,' and the 'wound is
incurable' by the skill of any earthly chirurgeon. The notion of
sickness passes, therefore, at once into that of danger: for unhealed
sickness can only end in death. Oh! that my words could have the waking
power that would startle some of my complacent hearers into the
recognition of the bare facts of their lives and character, and of the
position in which they stand on a slippery inclined plane that goes
straight down into darkness!

You do not hear much about the danger of sin from some modern pulpits.
God forbid that it should be the staple of any; but God forbid that it
should be excluded from any! Whilst fear is a low motive,
self-preservation is not a low one; and it is to that that I now appeal.
Brethren, the danger of every sin is, first, its rapid growth; second,
its power of separating from God; third, the certainty of a future--ay!
and _present_--retribution.

To me, the proof of the fatal effect of sin is what God had to do in
order to stop it. Do you think that it would be a small, superficial cut
which could be stanched by nothing else but the pierced hand of Jesus
Christ? Measure the intensity of danger by the cost of deliverance, and
judge how grave are the wounds for the healing of which stripes had to
be laid on Him. Ah! if you and I had not been in danger of death, Jesus
Christ would not have died. And if it be true that the Son of God laid
aside His glory, and came into the world and died on the Cross for men,
out of the very greatness of the gift, and the marvellousness of the
mercy, there comes solemn teaching as to the intensity of the misery and
the reality and awfulness of the retribution from which we were
delivered by such a death. Sin, the universal condition, brings with it
no slight disease and no small danger.

Further, we may gather from this condensed summary where the true heart
and essence of the Christian revelation is. You will never understand it
until you are contented to take the point of view which the New
Testament takes, and give all weight and gravity to the fact of man's
transgression and the consequences thereof. We shall never know what the
power and the glory of the revelation of God in Jesus Christ is until we
recognise that, first and foremost, it is the mighty means by which
man's ruin is repaired, man's downrush is stopped, sin is forgiven and
