the person's eyes and so rendered itself visible.'--HENRY JENNER.

[69] This is a natural outcropping of greenstone on a commanding hill
just above the vicarage in Newlyn, and concerning it many weird legends
survive. In pre-Christian times it was probably one of the Cornish
sacred spots for the celebration of ancient rites--probably in honour of
the Sun--and for divination.

[70] For more about the Tolcarne Troll see chapter on Celtic Re-birth p.
391.

[71] Mr. John B. Cornish, solicitor, of Penzance, told me that when he
once suggested to an old miner who fully believed in the 'knockers',
that the noises they were supposed to make were due to material causes,
the old miner became quite annoyed, and said, 'Well, I guess I have ears
to hear.'

[72] For the Cornish folk-lore already published by Miss M. A. Courtney,
the reader is referred to her work, _Cornish Feasts and Folk-Lore_
(Penzance, 1890).

[73] A curious holed stone standing between two low menhirs on the moors
beyond the Lanyon Dolmen, near Madron; but in Borlase's time (cf. his
_Antiquities of Cornwall_, ed. 1769, p. 177) the three stones were not
as now in a direct line. The Men-an-Tol has aroused much speculation
among archaeologists as to its probable use or meaning. No doubt it was
astronomical and religious in its significance; and it may have been a
calendar stone with which ancient priests took sun observations (cf. Sir
Norman Lockyer, _Stonehenge and Other Stone Monuments_); or it may have
been otherwise related to a sun cult, or to some pagan initiatory rites.

[74] I asked what a nath is, and Mr. Spragg explained:--'A nath is a
bird with a beak like that of a parrot, and with black and grey
feathers. The naths live on sea-islands in holes like rabbits, and
before they start to fly they first run.' The nath, as Mr. Henry Jenner
informs me, is the same as the puffin (_Fratercula arctica_), called
also in Cornwall a 'sea parrot'.

[75] Sometimes it is necessary to turn your coat inside out. A Zennor
man said that to do the same thing with your socks or stockings is as
good. In Ireland this strange psychological state of going astray comes
from walking over a fairy domain, over a confusing-sod, or getting into
a fairy pass.

[76] Cf. F. M. Luzel, _Contes populaires de Basse-Bretagne_ (Paris,
1887), i. 177-97; following the account of Ann Drann, a servant at
Coat-Fual, Plouguernevel (Cotes-du-Nord), November 1855.

[77] My Breton friend, M. Goulven Le Scour, was born November 20, 1851,
at Kerouledic in Plouneventer, Finistere. He is an antiquarian, a poet,
and, as we shall see, a folk-lorist of no mean ability. In 1902, at the
_Congres d'Auray_ of Breton poets and singers, he won two prizes for
poetry, and, in 1901, a prize at the _Congres de Quimperle_ or _Concours
de Recueils poetiques_.

[78] This story concerns persons still living, and, at M. Le Scour's
suggestion, I have omitted their names.

[79] By a Carnac family I was afterwards given a sprig of such blessed
box-wood, and was assured that its exorcizing power is still recognized
by all old Breton families, most of whom seem to possess branches of it.

[80] This idea seems related to the one in the popular Morbihan legend
of how St. Cornely, the patron saint of the country and the saint who
presides over the Alignements and domestic horned animals, changed into
upright stones the pagan forces opposing him when he arrived near
Carnac; and these stones are now the famous Alignements of Carnac.

[81] Luzel, op. cit., iii. 226-311; i. 128-218; ii. 349-54.

[82] Ib., ii. 269; cf. our study, p. 93.

[83] According to the annotations to a legend recorded by Villemarque,
in his _Barzaz Breiz_, pp. 39-44, and entitled the _Submersion de la
Ville d'Is_, St. Guenole was traditionally the founder of the first
monastery raised in Armorica; and Dahut the princess stole the key from
her sleeping father in order fittingly to crown a banquet and midnight
debaucheries which were being held in honour of her lover, the Black
Prince.

[84] Luzel, op. cit., ii. 257-68; i. 3-13.

[85] P. Sebillot, _Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne_
(Paris, 1882), i. 100.

[86] General references: Sebillot, ib.; and his _Folk-Lore de France_
(Paris, 1905).

[87] Sebillot, _Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne_, i.
73-4.

[88] Ib., i. 102, 103-4.

[89] Sebillot, _Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne_, i.
83.

[90] Ib., i. 90-1.

[91] Cf. ib., i. 109.

[92] Cf. ib., i. 74-5, &c.

[93] Cf. Sebillot, _Traditions et superstitions de la Haute-Bretagne_,
i. 74-5, &c.

[94] In Lower Brittany the _corrigan_ tribes collectively are commonly
called _Corriket_, masculine plural of _Corrik_, diminutive of _Corr_,
meaning 'Dwarf'; or _Corriganed_, feminine plural of _Corrigan_, meaning
'Little Dwarf'. Many other forms are in use. (Cf. R. F. Le Men, _Trad.
et supers. de la Basse-Bretagne_, in _Rev. Celt._, i. 226-7.)

[95] Cf. _Foyer breton_, i. 199.

[96] By 'E. R.', in _Melusine_ (Paris), i. 114.

[97] This account about _corrigans_, more rational than any preceding
it, may possibly refer to a dream or trance-like state of mind on the
part of the young girl; and if it does, we can then compare the presence
of a mortal at this _corrigan_ sabbath, or even at the ordinary witches'
sabbath, to the presence of a mortal in Fairyland. And according to
popular Breton belief, as reliable peasants assure me, during dreams,
trance, or ecstasy, the soul is supposed to depart from the body and
actually see spirits of all kinds in another world, and to be then under
their influence. While many details in the more conventional _corrigan_
stories appear to reflect a folk-memory of religious dances and songs,
and racial, social, and traditional usages of the ancient Bretons, the
animistic background of them could conceivably have originated from
psychical experiences such as this girl is supposed to have had.

[98] Villemarque, _Barzaz Breiz_ (Paris, 1867), pp. 33, 35.

[99] J. Loth, in _Annales de Bretagne_ (Rennes), x. 78-81.

[100] E. Renan, _Essais de morale et de critique_ (Paris, 1859), p. 451.

[101] In Ireland it is commonly held that a seer beholding a fairy can
make a non-seer see it also by coming into bodily _rapport_ with the
non-seer (cf. p. 152).

[102] It is sometimes believed that phantom washerwomen are undergoing
penance for having wilfully brought on an abortion by their work, or
else for having strangled their babe.

[103] Every parish in the uncorrupted parts of Brittany has its own
_Ankou_, who is the last man to die in the parish during the year. Each
King of the Dead, therefore, never holds office for more than twelve
months, since during that period he is certain to have a successor.
Sometimes the _Ankou_ is Death itself personified. In the Morbihan, the
_Ankou_ occasionally may be seen as an apparition entering a house where
a death is about to occur; though more commonly he is never seen, his
knocking only is heard, which is the rule in Finistere. In Welsh
mythology, Gwynn ab Nudd, king of the world of the dead, is represented
as playing a role parallel to that of the Breton _Ankou_, when he goes
forth with his fierce hades-hounds hunting the souls of the dying. (Cf.
Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 155.)

[104] Cf. A. Le Braz, _La Legende de la Mort_; Introduction by L.
Marillier (Paris, 1893), pp. 31, 40.

[105] Cf. Le Braz, _La Legende de la Mort_; Introduction by Marillier,
pp. 47, 46, 7-8, 40, 45, 46.

[106] Cf. Le Braz, _La Legende de la Mort_; Introduction by Marillier,
p. 43.

[107] Ib.; Notes by G. Dottin (Paris, 1902), p. 44.

[108] Ib.; Introduction by Marillier, pp. 19, 23, 68.

[109] Cf. ib.; Introduction by Marillier, pp. 53 ff., 68.

[110] A Breton night's entertainment held in a peasant's cottage,
stable, or other warm outhouse. In parts of the Morbihan and of
Finistere where the old Celtic life has escaped modern influences,
almost every winter night the Breton Celts, like their cousins in very
isolated parts of West Ireland and in the Western Hebrides, find their
chief enjoyment in story-telling festivals, some of which I have been
privileged to attend.

[111] The word in the MS. is _boiteux_, and in relation to a devil or
demon this seems to be the proper rendering.

[112] B. Spencer and F. T. Gillen, _Nat. Tribes of Cent. Aust._ (London,
1899), chapters xi, xv.

[113] R. H. Codrington, _Journ. Anthrop. Inst._ x. 261; _The Melanesians_
(Oxford, 1891), pp. 123, 151, &c.; also cf. F. W. Christian, _The
Caroline Islands_ (London, 1899), pp. 281 ff., &c.

[114] H. Callaway, _The Religious System of the Amazulu_ (London, 1868),
pp. 226-7.

[115] C. G. Leland, _Memoirs_ (London, 1893), i. 34.

[116] R. C. Temple, _Legends of the Panjab_, in _Folk-Lore_, x. 395.

[117] W. W. Skeat, _Malay Magic_ (London, 1900), _passim_.

[118] Hardouin, _Traditions et superstitions siamoises_, in _Rev. Trad.
Pop._, v. 257-67.

[119] Ella G. Sykes, _Persian Folklore_, in _Folk-Lore_, xii. 263.

[120] I am directly indebted for this information to a friend who is a
member of Lincoln College, Oxford, Mr. Mohammed Said Loutfy, of Barkein,
Lower Egypt. Mr. Loutfy has come into frequent and very intimate contact
with these animistic beliefs in his country, and he tells me that they
are common to all classes of almost all races in modern Egypt. The
common Egyptian spellings are _afreet_, in the singular, and _afaareet_
in the plural, for spiritual beings, who are usually described by
percipients as of pygmy stature, but as being able to assume various
sizes and shapes. The _djinns_, on the contrary, are described as tall
spiritual beings possessing great power.

[121] J. C. Lawson, _Modern Greek Folk-Lore_ (Cambridge, 1910), pp.
131-7, 139-46, 163.

[122] L. Sainean, _Les Fees mechantes d'apres les croyances du peuple
roumain_, in _Melusine_, x. 217-26, 243-54.

[123] Cf. C. G. Leland, _Etruscan Roman Remains in Pop. Trad._ (London,
1892), pp. 162, 165, 223, &c.

[124] H. C. Coote, _The Neo-Latin Fay_, in _Folk-Lore Record_, ii. 1-18.

[125] We cannot here attempt to present, even in outline, all the
complex ethnological arguments for and against the existence in
prehistoric times of European pygmy races. Attention ought, however, to
be called to the remarkable finds recently made in the _Grotte des
Enfants_, at Mentone, France. A certain number of well-preserved
skeletons of probably the earliest men who dwelt on the present land
surface of Europe, which were found there, suggest that different racial
stocks, possibly in succession, have preceded the Aryan stock. The first
race, as indicated by two small negroid-looking skeletons of a woman,
1,580 mm. (62.21 inches), and of a boy 1,540 mm. (60.63 inches) in
height, found in the lowest part of the _Grotte_, was probably
Ethiopian. The succeeding race was probably Mongolian, judging from
other remains found in another part of the same _Grotte_, and especially
from the Chancelade skeleton with its distinctly Eskimo appearance, only
1,500 mm. (59.06 inches) high, discovered near Perigneux, France. The
race succeeding this one was possibly the one out of which our own Aryan
race evolved. In relation to the Pygmy Theory these recent finds are of
the utmost significance. They confirm Dr. Windle's earlier conclusion,
that, contrary to the argument advanced to support the Pygmy Theory, the
neolithic races of Central Europe were not true pygmies--a people whose
average stature does not exceed four feet nine inches (cf. B. C. A.
Windle, _Tyson's Pygmies of the Ancients_, London, 1894, Introduction).
And, furthermore, these finds show, as far as any available ethnological
data can, that there are no good reasons for believing that European
and, therefore, Celtic lands were once dominated by pygmies even in
epochs so remote that we can only calculate them in tens of thousands of
years. Nevertheless, it is very highly probable that a folk-memory of
Lappish, Pictish, or other small but not true pygmy races, has
superficially coloured the modern fairy traditions of Northern Scotland,
of the Western Hebrides (where what may prove to have been Lapps' or
Picts' houses undoubtedly remain), of Northern Ireland, of the Isle of
Man, and slightly, if indeed at all, the fairy traditions of other parts
of the Celtic world (cf. David MacRitchie, _The Testimony of Tradition_,
London, 1890; and his criticism of our own Psychological Theory, in the
_Celtic Review_, October 1909 and January 1910, entitled respectively,
_A New Solution of the Fairy Problem_, and _Druids and Mound-Dwellers_).

Again, the very small flint implements frequently found in Celtic lands
and elsewhere have perhaps very reasonably been attributed to a
long-forgotten pygmy race; though we must bear in mind in this connexion
that it would be very unwise to conclude definitely that no race save a
small-statured race could have made and used such implements: American
Red Men were, when discovered by Europeans, and still are, making and
using the tiniest of arrow-heads, precisely the same in size and design
as those found in Celtic lands and attributed to pygmies. The use of
small flint implements for special purposes, e. g. arrows for shooting
small game like birds, for spearing fish, and for use in warfare as
poisoned arrows, seems to have been common to most primitive peoples of
normal stature. Contemporary pygmy races, far removed from Celtic lands,
are also using them, and no doubt their prehistoric ancestors used them
likewise.

[126] J. G. Campbell, _The Fians_ (London, 1891), p. 239. An Irish dwarf
is minutely described in _Silva Gadelica_ (ii. 116), O'Grady's
translation. Again, in Malory's _Morte D'Arthur_ (B. XII. cc. i-ii) a
dwarf is mentioned.

[127] Campbell, _The Fians_, p. 265.

[128] S. H. O'Grady, _Silva Gadelica_ (London, 1892), ii. 199.

[129] Commentary on the _Senchas Mar_, i. 70-1, Stokes's translation, in
_Rev. Celt._, i. 256-7.

[130] Sir John Rhys, _Hibbert Lectures_ (London, 1888), p. 592.
Dwarfs supernatural in character also appear in the _Mabinogion_, and
one of them is an attendant on King Arthur. In Beroul's _Tristan_,
Frocin, a dwarf, is skilled in astrology and magic, and in the version
by Thomas we find a similar reference.

[131] Tylor, _Prim. Cult._,{4} i. 385.

[132] Cf. Windle, op. cit., Intro., p. 57.

[133] Hunt, _Anthrop. Mems._, ii. 294; cf. Windle, op. cit., Intro., p.
57.

[134] Smith, _Myths of the Iroquois_, in _Amer. Bur. Eth._, ii. 65.

[135] Skeat, _Malay Magic_, p. 329.

[136] Monier-Williams, _Brahminism and Hinduism_ (London, 1887),
p. 236.

[137] Codrington, _The Melanesians_, p. 152.

[138] _Dwarfs in the East_, in _Folk-Lore_, iv. 401-2.

[139] Lacouperie, _Babylonian and Oriental Record_, v; cf. Windle, op.
cit., Intro., pp. 21-2.

[140] A. H. S. Landor, _Alone with the Hairy Ainu_ (London, 1893), p.
251; also Windle, op. cit., Intro., pp. 22-4.

[141] J. G. Frazer, _Golden Bough_{2} (London, 1900), i. 248 ff.

[142] Cf. A. Wiedemann, _Ancient Egyptian Doctrine Immortality_ (London,
1895), p. 12.

[143] Cf. A. E. Crawley, _Idea of the Soul_ (London, 1909), p. 186.

[144] Examples are in Orcagna's fresco of 'The Triumph of Death', in the
Campo Santo of Pisa (cf. A. Wiedemann, _Anc. Egy. Doct. Immort._, p. 34
ff.); and over the porch of the Cathedral Church of St. Trophimus, at
Arles.

[145] Cf. Crawley, op. cit., p. 187.

[146] General references: Eliphas Levi, _Dogme et Rituel de la Haute
Magie_ (Paris); Paracelsus; A. E. Waite, _The Occult Sciences_ (London,
1891).

[147] W. B. Yeats, _Irish Fairy and Folk-Tales_ (London), p. 2.

[148] W. B. Yeats, _The Celtic Twilight_ (London, 1902), p. 92 n.

[149] In this connexion should be read Mr. Jenner's Introduction, pp.
167 ff.

[150] Cf. Cririe, _Scottish Scenery_ (London, 1803), pp. 347-8; P.
Graham, _Sketches Descriptive of Picturesque Scenery on the Southern
Confines of Perthshire_ (Edinburgh, 1812), pp. 248-50, 253; Mahe, _Essai
sur les Antiquites du Depart. du Morbihan_ (Vannes, 1825); Maury, _Les
Fees du Moyen-Age_ (Paris, 1843).

[151] David MacRitchie, _Druids and Mound Dwellers_, in _Celtic Review_
(January 1910); and his _Testimony of Tradition_.

[152] K. Meyer and A. Nutt, _Voyage of Bran_ (London, 1895-7), ii 231-2.

[153] Cf. Tylor, _Prim. Cult._,{4} ii. 61.

[154] Lawson, _Modern Greek Folklore_, pp. 356, 359.

[155] Rhys, _Hib. Lect._, p. 201; Jubainville, _Cyc. Myth. Irl._, pp.
106-8.

[156] E. O'Curry, _Manners and Customs_ (Dublin, 1873), I. cccxx; from
_Book of Ballymote_, fol. 145, b. b.

[157] Codrington, _The Melanesians_, p. 286.

[158] Ib., p. 275.

[159] Ib., pp. 226, 208-9.

[160] Crawley, _Idea of the Soul_, p. 114.

[161] Codrington, _The Melanesians_, p. 289.

[162] Ib., p. 194.

[163] Cf. Crawley, _Idea of the Soul_, chap. iv.

[164] For a thorough and scientific discussion of this matter, see J. L.
Nevius, _Demon Possession_ (London, 1897).

[165] N. G. Mitchell-Innes, _Birth, Marriage, and Death Rites of the
Chinese_, in _Folk-Lore Journ._, v. 225. Very curiously, the pagan
Chinese mother uses the sign of the cross against the demon as Celtic
mothers use it against fairies; and no exorcism by Catholic or
Protestant to cure a fairy changeling or to drive out possessing demons
is ever performed without this world-wide and pre-Christian sign of the
cross (see pp. 270-1).

[166] R. R. Marett, _The Threshold of Religion_ (London, 1909), p. 58,
&c.; p. 67.

[167] W. James, _Confidences of a 'Psychical Researcher'_, in _American
Magazine_ (October 1909).

[168] Frazer, _The Golden Bough_{3} (London, 1911), i. 220.

[169] Frazer, _The Golden Bough_,{3} i. 221-2.

[170] Ib., chap. iv.

[171] See Apuleius, _De Deo Socratis_; Cicero, _De Natura Deorum_ (lib.
i); Iamblichus, _De Mysteriis Aegypt., Chaldaeor., Assyrior._; Plato,
_Timaeus, Symposium, Politicus, Republic_, ii. iii. x; Plutarch, _De
Defectu Oraculorum, The Daemon of Socrates, Isis and Osiris_; Proclus,
_Commmentarius in Platonis Alcibiadem_.

[172] Pliny, _Natural History_, xxx. 14.

[173] Cf. G. Dottin, _La Religion des Celtes_ (Paris, 1904), p. 44.

[174] The neo-Platonists generally, including Porphyry, Julian,
Iamblichus, and Maximus, being persuaded of man's power to call up and
control spirits, called white magic _theurgy_, or the invoking of good
spirits, and the reverse _goety_, or the calling up and controlling of
evil spirits for criminal purposes. Cf. F. Lelut, _Du Demon de Socrate_
(Paris, 1836).

If white magic be correlated with religion as religion is popularly
conceived, namely the cult of supernatural powers friendly to man, and
black magic be correlated with magic as magic tends to be popularly
conceived, namely witchcraft and devil-worship, we have a satisfactory
historical and logical basis for making a distinction between religion
and magic; religion (including white magic) is a social good, magic
(black magic) is a social evil. Such a distinction as Dr. Frazer makes
is untenable within the field of true magic.

[175] Cf. B. Jowett, _Dialogues of Plato_ (Oxford, 1892), i. 573.

[176] Cf. Meyer and Nutt, _Voyage of Bran_ (London, 1895-7), i. 146.

[177] Campbell, _The Fians_, p. 195.

[178] Cf. Stokes's trans. in _Rev. Celt._, i. 261.

[179] Cf. Stokes's trans. in _Rev. Celt._, xv. 307.

[180] From the _Conception of Mongan_, cf. Meyer, _Voyage of Bran_, i.
77.

[181] Quoted and summarized from _Projectors of 'Malicious Animal
Magnetism'_, in _Literary Digest_, xxxix. No. 17, pp. 676-7 (New York
and London, October 23, 1909).

[182] Cf. Nevius, _Demon Possession_, pp. 300-1.

[183] For a fuller discussion of the history of witchcraft see _The
Superstitions of Witchcraft_, by Howard Williams, London, 1865.

[184] Cf. J. Quicherat, _Proces_ (Paris, 1845), _passim_.

[185] Ib., i. 178.

[186] Codrington, _The Melanesians_, pp. 127, 200, 202-3 ff.

[187] Bergier, _Dict. de Theol._ (Paris, 1848), ii. 541-2, &c.

[188] W. Stokes, _Tripartite Life_ (London, 1887), pp. 13, 115.

[189] I am personally indebted to Dr. W. J. Watson, of Edinburgh, for
having directed my attention to this curious passage, and for having
pointed out its probable significance in relation to druidical
practices.

[190] Adamnan, _Life of S. Columba_, B. II, cc. xvi, xvii.

[191] For this fact I am personally indebted to Mrs. W. J. Watson, of
Edinburgh.

[192] Stokes, _Tripartite Life_, pp. clxxx, 303, 305; from _Book of
Armagh_, fo. 9, A 2, and fo. 9, B 2.

[193] Bergier, _Dict. de Theol._, ii. 545, 431, 233.

[194] See _Instruction sur le Rituel_, par l'Eveque de Toulon, iii.
1-16. 'In the Greek rite (of baptism), the priest breathes thrice on the
catechumen's mouth, forehead, and breast, praying that every unclean
spirit may be expelled.'--W. Bright, _Canons of First Four General
Councils_ (Oxford, 1892), p. 122.

[195] Cf. Godescard, _Vies des Saints_ (Paris, 1835), xiii. 254-66.

[196] _De Incarnatione Verbi_ (ed. Ben.), i. 88; cf. Godescard, op.
cit., xiii. 254-66.

[197] Godescard, _Vies des Saints_, xiii. 263-4.

[198] Par Joly de Choin, Eveque de Toulon, i. 639.

[199] Bergier, _Dict. de Theol._, ii. 335.

[200] Stokes, _Tripartite Life_, Intro., p. 162.

[201] J. E. Mirville, _Des Esprits_ (Paris, 1853), i. 475.

[202] _Instructions sur le Rituel_, par Joly de Choin, iii. 276-7.

[203] G. Evans, _Exorcism in Wales_, in _Folk-Lore_, iii. 274-7.

[204] W. Crooke, in _Folk-Lore_, xiii. 189-90.

[205] For ancient usages see F. Lenormant, _Chaldean Magic_ (London,
1877), pp. 103-4; Iamblichus and other Neo-Platonists; and for modern
usages see Marett, _Threshold of Religion_, chap. iii.

[206] Cf. Marett, _Is Taboo a Negative Magic?_ in _The Threshold of
Religion_, pp. 85-114.

[207] Codrington, _The Melanesians_, p. 277.

[208] Eastman, _Dacotah_, p. 177; cf. Tylor, _Prim. Cult._,{4} ii. 52 n.

[209] Shortland, _Trad. of New Zeal._, p. 150; cf. Tylor, op. cit., ii.
51-2.

[210] Precisely like Celtic peasants, primitive peoples often fail to
take into account the fact that the physical body is in reality left
behind upon entering the trance state of consciousness known to them as
the world of the departed and of fairies, because there they seem still
to have a body, the ghost body, which to their minds, in such a state,
is undistinguishable from the physical body. Therefore they ordinarily
believe that the body and soul both are taken.

[211] Frazer, _Golden Bough_,{2} _passim_.

[212] Cf. ib., i. 344 ff., 348; iii. 390.

[213] Codrington, _The Melanesians_, pp. 177, 218-9.

[214] Cf. Eleanor Hull, _Old Irish Tabus or Geasa_, in _Folk-Lore_, xii.
41 ff.

[215] Cf. Frazer, _Golden Bough_,{2} i. 233 ff., 343.

[216] Cf. E. J. Gwynn, _On the Idea of Fate in Irish Literature_, in
_Journ. Ivernian Society_ (Cork), April 1910.

[217] Cf. our evidence, pp. 38, 44; also Kirk's _Secret Commonwealth_
(c. i), where it is said of the 'good people' or fairies that their
bodies are so 'plyable thorough the Subtilty of the Spirits that agitate
them, that they can make them appear or disappear att Pleasure. Some
have Bodies or Vehicles so spungious, thin, and delecat, that they are
fed by only sucking into some fine spirituous Liquors, that pierce lyke
pure Air and Oyl'.

[218] _Laws_, iv; cf. Jowett, _Dialogues of Plato_, v. 282-90.

[219] Chief general references: _Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_
(Paris, 1884) and _L'Epopee celtique en Irlande_ (Paris, 1892)--both by
H. D'Arbois de Jubainville. Chief sources: The _Book of Armagh_, a
collection of ecclesiastical MSS. probably written at Armagh, and
finished in A. D. 807 by the learned scribe Ferdomnach of Armagh; the
_Leabhar na h-Uidhre_ or 'Book of the Dun Cow', the most ancient of the
great collections of MSS. containing the old Irish romances, compiled
about A. D. 1100 in the monastery of Clonmacnoise; the _Book of
Leinster_, a twelfth-century MS. compiled by Finn Mac Gorman, Bishop of
Kildare; the _Yellow Book of Lecan_ (fifteenth century); and the _Book
of Lismore_, an old Irish MS. found in 1814 by workmen while making
repairs in the castle of Lismore, and thought to be of the fifteenth
century. The _Book of Lismore_ contains the _Agallamh na senorach_ or
'Colloquy of the Ancients', which has been edited by S. H. O'Grady in
his _Silva Gadelica_ (London, 1892), and by Whitley Stokes, _Ir. Texte_,
iv. 1. For additional texts and editions of texts see Notes by R. I.
Best to his translations of _Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_ (Dublin,
1903).

[220] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 144-5.

[221] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 266-7. From the way they are
described in many of the old Irish manuscripts, we may possibly regard
the Tuatha De Danann as reflecting to some extent the characteristics of
an early human population in Ireland. In other words, on an already
flourishing belief in spiritual beings, known as the _Sidhe_, was
superimposed, through anthropomorphism, an Irish folk-memory about a
conquered pre-Celtic race of men who claimed descent from a mother
goddess called Dana.

[222] Page 10, col. 2, ll. 6-8; cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, p. 143.

[223] Rhys, _Hib. Lect._, p. 581 n.; and _Coir Anmann_, in _Ir.
Texte_, III, ii. 355.

[224] Kuno Meyer's trans. in _Voy. of Bran_, ii. 300.

[225] Cf. Standish O'Grady, _Early Bardic Literature_ (London, 1879),
pp. 65-6.

[226] L. U.; cf. A. Nutt, _Voy. of Bran_, i. 157-8.

[227] Before Caeilte appears, Patrick is chanting Mass and pronouncing
benediction 'on the rath in which Finn Mac Cumall (the slain leader of
the Fianna) has been: the rath of Drumderg'. This chanting and
benediction act magically as a means of calling up the ghosts of the
other Fianna, for, as the text continues, thereupon 'the clerics saw
Caeilte and his band draw near them; and fear fell on them before the
tall men with their huge wolf-dogs that accompanied them, _for they were
not people of one epoch or of one time with the clergy_. Then Heaven's
distinguished one, that pillar of dignity and angel on earth, Calpurn's
son Patrick, apostle of the Gael, rose and took the aspergillum to
sprinkle holy water on the great men; floating over whom until that day
there had been [and were now] a thousand legions of demons. Into the
hills and "skalps", into the outer borders of the region and of the
country, the demons forthwith departed in all directions; after which
the enormous men sat down' (_Silva Gadelica_, ii. 103). Here,
undoubtedly, we observe a literary method of rationalizing the ghosts of
the Fianna; and their sudden and mysterious coming and personal aspects
can be compared with the sudden and mysterious coming and personal
aspects of the Tuatha De Danann as recorded in certain Irish
manuscripts.

[228] Kuno Meyer's trans. in _Rev. Celt._, x. 214-27. This tale is
probably as old as the ninth or tenth century, so far as its present
form is concerned, though representing very ancient traditions (Nutt,
_Voy. of Bran_, i. 209).

[229] Stokes's trans. in _Rev. Celt._, xxii. 36-40. This text is one of
the earliest with references to fairy beings, and may go back to the
eighth or ninth century as a literary composition, though it too
represents much older traditions.

[230] E. O'Curry, _Lectures on Manuscript Materials_ (Dublin, 1861), p.
504.

[231] In the _Book of Leinster_, pp. 245-6; cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._,
p. 269.

[232] Cf. _Mesca Ulad_, Hennessy's ed., in _Todd Lectures_, Ser. 1
(Dublin, 1889), p. 2.

[233] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 273-6.

[234] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 273-6.

[235] Cf. _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 222-3.

[236] Ib., ii. 343-7.

[237] Ib., ii. 94-6.

[238] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 204-20.

[239] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 290-1. In many old texts mortals are not
forcibly _taken_; but go to the fairy world through love for a fairy
woman; or else to accomplish there some mission.

No doubt the most curious elements in this text are those which
represent the prince and his warrior companions, fresh come from
Fairyland, as in some mysterious way so changed that they must neither
dismount from their horses and thus come in contact with the earth, nor
allow any mortal to touch them; for to his father the king who came
forward in joy to embrace him after having mourned him as dead,
Laeghaire cried, 'Approach us not to touch us!' Some unknown magical
bodily transmutation seems to have come about from their sojourn among
the Tuatha De Danann, who are eternally young and unfading--a
transmutation apparently quite the same as that which the 'gentry' are
said to bring about now when one of our race is taken to live with them.
And in all fairy stories no mortal ever returns from Fairyland a day
older than on entering it, no matter how many years may have elapsed.
The idea reminds us of the dreams of mediaeval alchemists who thought
there exists, if one could only discover it, some magic potion which
will so transmute every atom of the human body that death can never
affect it. Probably the Christian scribe in writing down these strange
words had in mind what Jesus said to Mary Magdalene when she beheld him
after the Resurrection:--'Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended unto
the Father.' The parallel would be a striking and exact one in any case,
for it is recorded that Jesus after he had arisen from the dead--had
come out of Hades or the invisible realm of subjectivity which, too, is
Fairyland--appeared to some and not to others--some being able to
recognize him and others not; and concerning the nature of Jesus's body
at the Ascension not all theologians are agreed. Some believe it to have
been a physical body so purified and transmuted as to be like, or the
same as, a spiritual body, and thus capable of invisibility and of
entrance into the Realm of Spirit. The Scotch minister and seer used
this same parallel in describing the nature and power of fairies and
spirits (p. 91); hence it would seem to follow, if we admit the
influence in the Irish text to be Christian, that early, like modern
Christians, have, in accordance with Christianity, described the nature
of the _Sidhe_ so as to correspond with what we know it to be in the
Fairy-Faith itself, both anciently and at the present day.

[240] _Death of Muirchertach_, Stokes's trans., in _Rev. Celt._, xxiii.
397.

[241] Cf. J. Loth, _Les Mabinogion_ (Paris, 1889), i. 38-52.

[242] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 187-92.

[243] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 142-4.

[244] Campbell, _The Fians_, pp. 79-80. In _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 522, it
is stated that the mother of Ossian bore him whilst in the shape of a
doe. The mother of Ossian in animal shape may be an example of an
ancient Celtic totemistic survival.

[245] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 311-24.

[246] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 311-24.

[247] For an enumeration of the Tuatha De Danann chieftains and their
respective territories see _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 225.

[248] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, p. 285.

[249] I am personally indebted for these names to Dr. Douglas Hyde.

[250] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 284-9; cf. _Rev. Celt._, iii. 347.

[251] Cf. E. S. Hartland, _Science of Fairy Tales_ (London, 1891), cc.
x-xi.

[252] Stokes's trans. in _Rev. Celt._, xvi. 274-5.

[253] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 222 ff.; ii. 290. In another version of the
second tale, referred to above (on page 295), Laeghaire and his fifty
companions enter the fairy world through a _dun_.

[254] Sometimes, as in _Da Choca's Hostel_ (_Rev. Celt._, xxi. 157,
315), the _Badb_ appears as a weird woman uttering prophecies. In this
case the _Badb_ watches over Cormac as his doom comes. She is described
as standing on one foot, and with one eye closed (apparently in a bird's
posture), as she chanted to Cormac this prophecy:--'I wash the harness
of a king who will perish.'

[255] Synonymous names are _Badb-catha_, _Fea_, _Ana_. Cf. _Rev. Celt._,
i. 35-7.

[256] Cf. Hennessy, _Ancient Irish Goddess of War_, in _Rev. Celt._, i.
32-55.

[257] Stokes, _Second Battle of Moytura_, in _Rev. Celt._, xii. 109-11.

[258] Luzel, _Contes populaires de Basse Bretagne_, iii. 296-311.

[259] The Celtic examples recall non-Celtic ones: the raven was sacred
among the ancient Scandinavians and Germans, being looked upon as the
emblem of Odin; in ancient Egypt and Rome commonly, and to a less extent
in ancient Greece, gods often declared their will through birds or even
took the form of birds; in Christian scriptures the Spirit of God or the
Holy Ghost descended upon Jesus at his baptism in the semblance of a
dove; and it is almost a world-wide custom to symbolize the human soul
under the form of a bird or butterfly. Possibly such beliefs as these
are relics of a totemistic creed which in times long previous to history
was as definitely held by the ancestors of the nations of antiquity,
including the ancient Celts, as any totemistic creed to be found now
among native Australians or North American Red Men. At all events, in
the story of a bird ancestry of Conaire we seem to have a perfectly
clear example of a Celtic totemistic survival--even though Dr. Frazer
may not admit it as such (cf. _Rev. Celt._, xxii. 20, 24; xii. 242-3).

[260] Hennessy, _The Ancient Irish Goddess of War_, in _Rev. Celt._, i.
32-57.

[261] _Aoibheall_, who came to tell Brian Borumha of his death at
Clontarf, was the family banshee of the royal house of Munster. Cf. J. H.
Todd, _War of the Gaedhil with the Gaill_ (London, 1867), p. 201.

[262] Hyde, _Literary History of Ireland_, p. 440.

