blesses the good and shows grace to the humble?  How can there be
punishment for the bad (as it is taught in your holy books),[FN#316]
that Heaven curses the evil and inflicts punishment on the proud?


[FN#315]  Shu King and I King.

[FN#316]  Ibid.


Again, if even all such evils as wars, treacheries, and rebellions
depend on the heavenly will, those Sages would be in the wrong who,
in the statement of their teaching, censure or chastise men, but not
Heaven or the heavenly will.  Therefore, even if Shi[FN#317] is full
of reproofs against maladministration, while Shu[FN#318] of eulogies
for the reigns of the wisest monarchs-even if Propriety[FN#319] is
recommended as a most effectual means of creating peace between the
governors and the governed, while Music[FN#320] (is recommended as a
means of) ameliorating the customs and manners of the people--still,
they can hardly be said to realize the Will on High or to conform to
the wishes of the Creator.  Hence you must acknowledge that those who
devote themselves to the study of these doctrines are not able to
trace man to his origin.


[FN#317]  Shu King, a famous book of odes.

[FN#318]  Shu King, the records of the administrations of the wisest
monarchs of old.

[FN#319]  Li Ki, the book on proprieties and etiquette.

[FN#320]  It is said in Hiao King that music is the best means to
improve customs and manners.




CHAPTER II

REFUTATION OF INCOMPLETE AND SUPERFICIAL (DOCTRINE)[FN#321]



There are in the Buddhist doctrines, to state briefly, the five
grades (of development), beginning with the most superficial, and
ending with the most profound teachings.  (They are as follows:) (1)
The Doctrine for Men and Devas; (2) the Doctrine of the Hinayanists;
(3) the Mahayana Doctrine of Dharma-laksana; (4) the Mahayana
Doctrine of the Nihilists[FN#322]; (5) the Ekaydna Doctrine that
teaches the Ultimate Reality.[FN#323]


[FN#321]  A. 'The imperfect doctrines taught by the Buddha.'

[FN#322]  A. 'These first four doctrines are treated of in this
chapter.'

[FN#323]  A. 'This is mentioned in the third chapter.'



1. The Doctrine for Men and Devas.

The Buddha, to meet temporarily the spiritual needs of the
uninitiated, preached a doctrine concerning good or bad Karma as the
cause, and its retribution as the effect, in the three existences (of
the past, the present, and the future).  That is, one who commits the
tenfold sin[FN#324] must be reborn after death in hell, when these
sins are of the highest grade;[FN#325] among Pretas,[FN#326] when of
the middle grade; and among animals, when of the lowest grade.


[FN#324]  (1) Taking life, (2) theft, (3) adultery, (4) lying, (5)
exaggeration, (6) abuse, (7) ambiguous talk, (8) coveting, (9)
malice, (10) unbelief.

[FN#325]  There are three grades in each of the tenfold sin.  For
instance, the taking of the life of a Buddha, or of a sage, or of a
parent, etc., is of the highest grade; while to kill fellow-men is of
the middle; and to kill beasts and birds, etc., is of the lowest.
Again, to kill any being with pleasure is of the highest grade; while
to repent after killing is of the middle; and killing by mistake is
of the lowest.

[FN#326]  Hungry spirits.


Therefore the Buddha for a temporary purpose made these (uninitiated)
observe the Five Precepts similar to the Five Virtues[FN#327] of the
outside doctrine, in order to enable them to escape the three (worst)
States[FN#328] of Existence, and to be reborn among men.  (He also
taught that) those who cultivate[FN#329] the tenfold virtue[FN#330]
of the highest grade, and who give alms, and keep the precepts, and
so forth, are to be born in the Six Celestial Realms of Kama[FN#331]
while those who practise the Four[FN#332] Dhyanas, the Eight
Samadhis,[FN#333] are to be reborn in the heavenly worlds of
Rupa[FN#334] and Arupa.  For this reason this doctrine is called the
doctrine for men and Devas.  According to this doctrine Karma is the
origin of life.[FN#335]

[FN#327]  The five cardinal virtues of Confucianism are quite similar
to the five precepts of Buddhism, as we see by this table:

VIRTUES.---PRECEPTS.

1. Humanity.---1. Not to take life.
2. Uprightness.---2. Not to steal.
3. Propriety.---3. Not to be adulterous.
4. Wisdom.---4. Not to get drunk.
5. Sincerity.---5. Not to lie.

[FN#328]  (1) Hell, (2) Pretas, (3) Beasts.

[FN#329]  A. 'The Buddhist precepts are different from the Confucian
teachings in the form of expression, but they agree in their warning
against the evil and in encouraging the good.  The moral conduct of
the Buddhist can be secured by the cultivation of the five virtues of
humanity, uprightness, etc., as though people in this country hold up
their hands joined in the respectable salutation, while the same
object is attained by those of The Fan, who stand with their bands
hanging down.  Not to kill is humanity.  Not to steal is uprightness.
 Not to be adulterous is propriety.  Not to lie is sincerity.  Not to
drink spirits nor eat meat is to increase wisdom, keeping mind pure.'

[FN#330]  (1) Not to take life, (2) not to steal, (3) not to be
adulterous, (4) not to lie, (5) not to exaggerate, (6) not to abuse,
(7) not to talk ambiguously, (8) not to covet, (9) not to be
malicious, (10) not to unbelieve.

[FN#331]  Kama-loka, the world of desire, is the first of the Three
Worlds.  It consists of the earth and the six heavenly worlds, all
the inhabitants of which are subject to sensual desires.

[FN#332]  The Buddhists taught the four Dhyanas, or the four
different degrees of abstract contemplation, by which the mind could
free itself from all subjective and objective trammels, until it
reached a state of absolute absence of unconcentrated thought.  The
practiser of the four Dhyanas would be born in the four regions of
the Rupa-lokas in accordance with his spiritual state.

[FN#333]  Namely, the above-mentioned four degrees of contemplation,
and other four deeper ecstatic meditations.  The practiser of the
latter would be born in the four spiritual regions of Arupa-loka in
accordance with his state of abstraction.

[FN#334]  Rupa-loka, the world of form, is the second of the Three
Worlds.  It consists of eighteen heavens, which were divided into
four regions.  The first Dhyana region comprised the first three of
the eighteen heavens, the second Dhyana region the next three, the
third Dhyana region the following three, and the fourth Dhyana region
the remaining nine.

Arupa-loka, the world of formlessness, is the third of the Three
Worlds.  It consists of four heavens.  The first is called 'the
heaven of unlimited space,' the second 'the heaven of unlimited
knowledge,' the third 'the heaven of absolute non-existence,' the
fourth 'the heaven of neither consciousness nor unconsciousness.'

A. 'None of heavens, or of hells, or of the worlds of spirits, is
mentioned in the title of this book, because these worlds are
entirely different from ours, and absolutely beyond the sight and
hearing.  Ordinary people know not even the phenomena actually
occurring before them; how could they understand the unseen?  So I
entitled it simply, "The Origin of Man " in agreement with the
worldly teachings.  Now that I treat, however, of the Buddhist
doctrine, it is reasonable to enumerate these worlds in full.'

[FN#335]  A. 'But there are three sorts of Karmas: (1) The bad, (2)
the good, (3) the immovable.  There are the three periods for
retribution: (1) In this life, (2) in the next life, (3) in some
remote future life.'


Now let me raise some questions by way of objection.  Granting that
one has to be born in the Five States of Existences[FN#336] by virtue
of Karma produced (in previous lives), is it not doubtful who is the
author of Karma, and who the recipient of its consequences?  If it
might be said that the eyes, ears, hands, and feet produce Karma,
then the eyes, ears, hands, and feet of a newly-dead person are still
as they were. So why do they not see and hear and thus produce Karma?


[FN#336]  The states of--(1) heavenly beings, (2) men, (3) beings in
hell, (4) hungry spirits, (5) beasts.


If it be said that it is the mind that produces Karma (I ask), what
is the mind?  If you mean the heart, the heart is a material thing,
and is located within the body.  How can it, by coming quickly into
the eyes and ears, distinguish the pleasing from the disgusting in
external objects?  If there be no distinction between the pleasing
and the disgusting, why does it accept the one or reject the other?

Besides, the heart is as much material and impenetrable as the eyes,
ears, hands, and feet.  How, then, can the heart within freely pass
to the organs of sense without?  How can this one put the others in
motion, or communicate with them, in order to co-operate in producing
Karma?
If it be said that only such passions as joy, anger, love, and hatred
act through the body and the mouth and enable them to produce Karma,
(I should say) those passions--joy, anger, and the rest--are too
transitory, and come and go in a moment.  They have no Substance
(behind their appearances).  What, then, is the chief agent that
produces Karma?

It might be said that we should not seek after (the author of Karma)
by taking mind and body separately (as we have just done), because
body and mind, as a whole, conjointly produce Karma.  Who, then,
after the destruction of body by death, would receive the retribution
(in the form) of pain or of pleasure?

If it be assumed that another body is to come into existence after
death, then the body and mind of the present life, committing sins or
cultivating virtues, would cause another body and mind in the future
which would suffer from the pains or enjoy the pleasures.
Accordingly, those who cultivate virtues would be extremely unlucky,
while those who commit sins very lucky.  How can the divine law of
causality be so unreasonable?  Therefore we (must) acknowledge that
those who merely follow this doctrine are far from a thorough
understanding of the origin of life, though they believe in the
theory of Karma.



2. The Doctrine of the Hinayanists.

This doctrine tells us that (both) the body, that is formed of
matter, and the mind, that thinks and reflects, continually exist
from eternity to eternity, being destroyed and recreated by means of
direct or indirect causes, just as the water of a river glides
continually, or the flame of a lamp keeps burning constantly.  Mind
and body unite themselves temporarily, and seem to be one and
changeless.  The common people, ignorant of all this, are attached to
(the two combined) as being Atman.[FN#337]


[FN#337]  Atman means ego, or self, on which individuality is based.


For the sake of this Atman, which they hold to be the most precious
thing (in the world), they are subject to the Three Poisons Of
lust,[FN#338] anger,[FN#339] and folly,[FN#340] which (in their turn)
give impulse to the will and bring forth Karma of all kinds through
speech and action.  Karma being thus produced, no one can evade its
effects.  Consequently all must be born[FN#341] in the Five States of
Existence either to suffer pain or to enjoy pleasure; some are born
in the higher places, while others in the lower of the Three
Worlds.[FN#342]


[FN#338]  A. 'The passion that covets fame and gain to keep oneself
in prosperity.'

[FN#339]  A. 'The passion against disagreeable things, for fear of
their inflicting injuries on oneself.'

[FN#340]  A. 'Wrong thoughts and inferences.'

[FN#341]  A. 'Different sorts of beings are born by virtue of the
individualizing Karma.'

[FN#342]  A. 'Worlds are produced by virtue of the Karma common to
all beings that live in them.'


When born (in the future lives) they are attached again to the body
(and mind) as Atman, and become subject to lust and the other two
passions.  Karma is again produced by them, and they have to receive
its inevitable results.  (Thus) body undergoes birth, old age,
disease, death, and is reborn after death; while the world passes
through the stages of formation, existence, destruction, and
emptiness, and is re-formed again after emptiness.  Kalpa after
Kalpa[FN#343] (passes by), life after life (comes on), and the circle
of continuous rebirths knows no beginning nor end, and resembles the
pulley for drawing water from the well.[FN#344]


[FN#343]  Kalpa, a mundane cycle, is not reckoned by months and
years.  lt is a period during which a physical universe is formed to
the moment when another is put into its place.

A. "The following verses describe how the world was first created in
the period of emptiness: A strong wind began to blow through empty
space.  Its length and breadth were infinite.  It was 16 lakhs thick,
and so strong that it could not be cut even with a diamond.  Its name
was the world-supporting-wind.  The golden clouds of Abhasvara heaven
(the sixth of eighteen heavens of the Rupa-loka) covered all the
skies of the Three Thousand Worlds.  Down came the heavy rain, each
drop being as large as the axle of a waggon.  The water stood on the
wind that checked its running down.  It was 11 lakhs deep.  The first
layer was made of adamant (by the congealing water).  Gradually the
cloud poured down the rain and filled it.  First the Brahma-raja
worlds, next the Yama-heaven (the third of six heavens of the Kama
loka), were made.  The pure water rose up, driven by the wind, and
Sumeru, (the central mountain, or axis of the universe) and the seven
concentric circles of mountains, and so on, were formed.  Out of
dirty sediments the mountains, the four continents, the hells,
oceans, and outer ring of mountains, were made.  This is called the
formation of the universe.  The time of one Increase and one Decrease
(human life is increased from 10 to 84,000 years, increasing by one
year at every one hundred years; then it is decreased from 84,000 to
10 years, decreasing by one year at every one hundred years) elapsed.
 In short, those beings in the second region of Rupa-loka, whose good
Karma had spent its force, came down on the earth.  At first there
were the 'earth bread' and the wild vine for them.  Afterwards they
could not completely digest rice, and began to excrete and to
urinate.  Thus men were differentiated from women.  They divided the
cultivated land among them.  Chiefs were elected; assistants and
subjects were sought out; hence different classes of people.  A
period of nineteen Increases and Decreases elapsed.  Added to the
above-mentioned period, it amounted to twenty Increases and
Decreases. This is called the Kalpa of the formation of the universe.

"Now let us discuss this point.  The Kalpa of Emptiness is what the
Taoist calls the Path of Emptiness.  The Path or the Reality,
however, is not empty, but bright, transcendental, spiritual, and
omnipresent.  Lao Tsz, led by his mistaken idea, called the Kalpa of
Emptiness the Path; otherwise he did so for the temporary purpose of
denouncing worldly desires.  The wind in the empty space is what the
Taoist calls the undefinable Gas in the state of Chaos.  Therefore
Lao Tsz said, 'The Path brings forth one.'  The golden clouds, the
first of all physical objects, is (what the Confucianist calls) the
First Principle.  The rain-water standing (on the wind) is the
production of the Negative Principle.  The Positive, united with the
Negative, brought forth the phenomenal universe.  The
Brahma-raja-loka, the Sumeru, and others, are what they call the
Heaven.  The dirty waters and sediment are the Earth.  So Lao Tsz
said, 'One produces two.'  Those in the second region of the
Rupra-loka, whose good Karma had spent its force, came down upon the
earth and became human beings.  Therefore Lao Tsz said, 'The two
produce three.'  Thus the Three Powers were completed.  The
earth-bread and different classes of people, and so on, are the
so-called 'production of thousands of things by the Three.'  This was
the time when people lived in eaves or wandered in the wilderness,
and knew not the use of fire.  As it belongs to the remote past of
the prehistoric age, previous to the reigns of the first three
Emperors, the traditions handed down to us are neither clear nor
certain.  Many errors crept into them one generation after another,
and consequently no one of the statements given in the various works
of scholars agrees with another.  Besides, when the Buddhist books
explain the formation of the Three Thousand Worlds, they do not
confine themselves merely within the limits of this country.  Hence
their records are entirely different from those of the outsiders
(which are confined to China).

"'Existence' means the Kalpa of Existence that lasts twenty Increases
