    go upright.'--LEV. xxvi. 13.

The history of Israel is a parable and a prophecy as well as a history.

The great central word of the New Testament has been drawn from it,
viz. 'redemption,' _i.e._ a buying out of bondage.

The Hebrew slaves in Egypt were 'delivered.' The deliverance made them
a nation. God acquired them for Himself, and they became His servants.

The great truths of the gospel are all there.

Henceforth the fact of their deliverance became the basis of all His
appeals to them; the ground of His law; the reason for their obedience.
In the previous context it has shaped the institution of slavery. Here
it is the foundation of a general exhortation to obedience. The
emphatic picture of the men stooping beneath the yoke, and then
straightening themselves up, erect, illustrates the joyful freedom
which Christ gives. That freedom is our subject.

I. Jesus gives freedom from the slavery of sin.

Freedom consists in power to follow unhindered the law of our being. So
sin is slavery because it is contrary to that law.

When Jesus promised freedom through the truth, the Jews indignantly
spurned the offer with the proud boast, which the presence of a Roman
garrison in Jerusalem should have made to stick in their throats: 'We
were never in bondage to any man.' A like hardy shutting of eyes to
plain facts characterises the attitude of multitudes to the Christian
view of man's condition. Jesus answered the Jews by the deep saying:
'He that committeth sin is the servant of sin.' A man fancies himself
showing off his freedom by throwing off the restraints of morality or
law, and by 'doing as he likes,' but he is really showing his
servitude. Self-will looks like liberty, but it is serfdom. The
libertine is a slave. That slavery under sin takes two forms. The man
who sins is a slave to the power of sin. Will and conscience are meant
to guide and impel us, and we never sin without first coercing or
silencing them and subjecting them to the upstart tyranny of desires
and senses which should obey and not command. The 'beggars' are on
horseback, and the 'princes' walking. There is a servile revolt, and we
know what horrors accompany that.

But that slavery under sin is shown also by the terrible force with
which any sin, if once committed, appeals to the doer to repeat it. It
is not only in regard to sensual sins that the awful insistence of
habit grips the doer, and makes it the rarest thing that evil once done
is done only once.

But he who sins is also a slave to the guilt of sin. True, that sense
of guilt is for the most part and in most men dormant, but the snake is
but hibernating, and often wakes and stings at most unexpected moments.
'The deceitfulness of sin' lies to the sinner, so that for the most
part he 'wipes his mouth, saying I have done no harm,' but some chance
incident may at any time, and certainly something will at some time,
dissipate the illusion, as a stray sunbeam might scatter a wisp of mist
and show startled eyes the grim fact that had always been there. And
even while not consciously felt, guilt hampers the soul's insight into
divine realities, clips its wings so that it cannot soar, paralyses its
efforts after noble aims, and inclines it to ignoble grovelling as far
away from thoughts of God and goodness as may be.

Christ makes the man bound and tied by the cords of his sins lift
himself up and stand erect. By His death He brings forgiveness which
removes guilt and the consciousness of it. By His inbreathed life He
gives a new nature akin to His own, and brings into force a new motive,
even transforming love, which is stronger than the death with which sin
has cursed its doers. 'The law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus
has made me free from the law of sin and death.'

II. Jesus gives freedom from a slavish relation to God.

Apart from Him, God, if recognised at all, is for the most part thought
of as 'austere, reaping where He did not sow,' and His commandments as
grievous. Men may sullenly recognise that they cannot resist, but they
do not submit. They may obey in act, but there is no obedience in their
wills, nor any cheerfulness in their hearts. The elder brother in the
parable could say, 'Neither transgressed I at any time thy
commandment,' but his service had been joyless, and he never remembered
having received gifts that made him 'merry with his friends.'

But from all such slavish, and therefore worthless, obedience, and all
such reluctant, and therefore unreal, submission, Jesus liberates those
who believe on Him and abide in His word. He declares God as our loving
Father, and through Him we have authority to become sons of God. He
'sends forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts,' and that makes us
to be no more slaves but sons. Sullen obedience becomes glad choice,
and it is the inmost desire, and the deepest delight, of the loving
child to do always the things that please the loving Father. 'I ought'
and 'I will' coalesce, and so there is no slavery, but perfect freedom,
in recognising and bowing to the great 'I must' which sweetly rules the
life.

III. Christ gives deliverance from servility to men.

We need not touch on the historical connection, plain as that is,
between modern conceptions of individual freedom and the influence of
Christ's teaching. Modern democracy is rooted in Christ, though it is
often unaware of its genesis, and blindly attacks the force to which it
owes its existence.

Because all men are redeemed by Christ, because by that redemption all
stand in the same relation to Him, because all have equal access to
Him, and are taught and guided by His Spirit, because 'we must all
appear before the judgment-seat of Christ,' therefore class
prerogatives and subject classes fade away, and there is 'neither bond
nor free,' but 'all are one in Christ Jesus.'

But there are other ways in which men tyrannise over men and in which
Christ's redemption sets us free.

There is the undue authority of favourite teachers and examples.

There is the tyranny of public opinion.

There is undue regard to human approbation.

There is the sway of priestcraft.

How does Christianity deliver from these? It makes Christ's law our
unconditional duty. It makes His approbation our highest joy. It gives
legitimate scope to the instinct of loyalty, submission, and imitation,
and of subjection to authority. It reduces to insignificance men's
judgment, and all their loud voices to a babble of nothings. 'With me
it is a very small matter to be judged of man's judgment.' It brings
the soul into direct communion with God, and sweeps away all
intermediaries.

'Not for that we have dominion over your faith but are helpers of your
joy; for by faith ye stand.'

So personal independence and individuality of character are the result
of Christianity. 'I have made you go upright.

IV. Christ gives us freedom from the power of circumstances.

Most men are made by these. We need not here enter on questions of the
influence of their environment on all men's development.

But Christ gives us--

_(a)_ A great aim for our lives high above these.

_(b)_ A foothold in Him outside of them. We are not the slaves of our
circumstances, but their masters.

_(c)_ The power to utilise them.

So Christians are 'free' in all senses of the word.

The great Act of Emancipation has been passed for us all. Only Christ
has rule over us, and we have our perfect freedom in His service. We
have been sitting in the prison-house, and He has come and declared
'The Spirit of the Lord is upon Me to proclaim liberty to the captives.'




THE BOOK OF NUMBERS




THE WARFARE OF CHRISTIAN SERVICE


    'All that enter in to perform the service, to do the
    work in the tabernacle.'
    NUM. iv. 23.

These words occur in the series of regulations as to the functions of
the Levites in the Tabernacle worship. The words 'to perform the
service' are, as the margin tells us, literally, to 'war the warfare.'
Although it may be difficult to say why such very prosaic and homely
work as carrying the materials of the Tabernacle and the sacrificial
vessels was designated by such a term, the underlying suggestion is
what I desire to fix upon now--viz., that work for God, of whatever
kind it be, which Christian people are bound to do, and which is mainly
service for men for God's sake, will never be rightly done until we
understand that it is a _warfare_, as well as a work.

The phrase on which I am commenting occurs again and again in the
regulations as to the Levitical service, and is applied, not only as in
my text to those who were told off to bear the burdens on the march,
but also to the whole body of Levites, who did the inferior services in
connection with the ritual worship. They were not, as it would appear,
sacrificing priests, but they belonged to the same tribe as these, and
they had sacred functions to discharge. So we come to this principle,
that Christian service is to be looked at as warfare.

Now, that is a principle which ought to be applied to all Christians.
For there is no such thing as designating a portion of Christ's Church
to service which others have not to perform. The distinction of
'priest' and 'layman' existed in the Old Testament; it does not exist
under the New Covenant, and there is no obligation upon any one
Christian man to devote himself for Christ's sake to Christ's service
and man's help (which is Christ's service), that does not lie equally
upon all Christian people. The function is the same for all; the
methods of discharging it may be widely different. Within the limits of
the priestly tribe there may still be those whose office it is to carry
the vessels, and those whose office it is to act more especially as
ministering priests; but they are all 'of the tribe of Levi.' We, if we
are Christian people at all, are all bound to do this work of 'the
tabernacle,' and war this warfare.

It is important that we Christian people should elevate our thoughts of
our duties in the world to the height of this great metaphor. The
metaphor of the Christian life as being a 'warfare' is familiar enough,
but that is not exactly the point which I wish to dwell upon now. When
we speak about 'fighting the good fight of faith,' we generally mean
our wrestle and struggle with our own evils and with the things that
hinder us from developing a Christlike character, and 'growing in the
grace and knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.' But it is
another sort of warfare about which I am now speaking, the warfare
which every Christian man has to wage who flings himself into the work
of diminishing the world's miseries and sins, and tries to make people
better, and happier because they are better. That is a fight, and will
always be so, if it is rightly done.

I. Think of the foes.

Speaking generally, society is constituted upon a non-Christian basis.
We talk about 'Christian' nations. There is not one on the face of the
earth. There is not a nation whose institutions and maxims and politics
and the practices of its individual members are ruled and moulded
predominantly by the Gospel of Jesus Christ. So every man that has come
into personal touch with that Lord, and has felt that His commandments
are the supreme authority in his own individual life, when he goes out
into society, comes full tilt against a whole host of things that are
in pronounced antagonism, or in real though unacknowledged
contradiction, to the principles by which a Christian has to live for
himself, and to commend to his brethren. So we have to fight. There are
two things to be done--the imparting of good which will increase the
sum of the world's happiness, and the destruction of evil, which will
subtract some of the world's sorrows. The latter is always a conflict,
for there are arrayed in defence of the evil vested interests, and the
influence of habit, and the lowered vitality and sensitiveness of
conscience which has come from breathing the polluted atmosphere which
evil has vitiated. So that if we set ourselves, in humble, quiet,
out-and-out dependence on Jesus Christ and submission to His will, to
lead other people to submit to His will, there is nothing in the world
more certain than that we shall find against us, starting up, as it
were, out of the mist and taking form suddenly, a whole host of
enemies. So we Christian men, as individuals, as members of a community
and able to bring some influence to bear upon the conscience of
society, have to fight against popular social evils, and to war for
righteousness' sake.

There is another foe. There is nothing that men dislike more than being
lifted up into a clearer atmosphere and made to see truths which they
do not see or care for. When we first become Christians we are all hot
to go and teach and preach; and we fancy that we have only to stand up,
with a Bible in our hand, and read two or three texts, and our fellows
will grasp them as gladly as we have done. But soon we find out that it
is not so easy to draw men to Christ as we thought it would be. We have
to fight against gravitation and unwillingness, when we would lift a
poor brother into the liberty and the light that we are in. We have to
struggle with the men that we are trying to help. We have to war, in
order to bring 'the peace of God which passes understanding' into their
hearts.

But the worst of all our foes, in doing Christian service, is our own
miserable selves, with our laziness, and our vanity, and our wondering
what A, B, and C will think about us, and the mingling of impure
motives with nobler ones, and our being angry with people because they
are so insensible, not so much to Christ's love as to our words and
pleadings. Unless we can purge all that devil's leaven out of
ourselves, we have little chance of working 'the work of the
tabernacle,' or warring the warfare of God. Ah! brethren, to do
anything for this world of unbelief and sin, of which we ourselves are
part, is a struggle. And I know of no work that needs more continual
putting a firm heel upon self, in all its subtle manifestations, than
the various forms of Christian service. Not only we preachers, but
Sunday-school teachers, mothers in their nurseries, teaching their
children, and all of us, if we are trying to do anything for men, for
Christ's sake, must feel, if we are honest with ourselves and about our
work, that the first condition of success in it is to fight down self,
and that only then, being emptied of ourselves, are we ready to be
filled with the Spirit, by which we are made mighty to pull down the
strongholds of sin.

II. The weapons of this warfare.

There are two great passages in the New Testament, both of which deal
with the Christian life under this metaphor of warfare. One of these is
the detailed description of the Christian armour in the Epistle to the
Ephesians. There we have described the equipment for that phase of the
fight of the Christian life which has to do mainly with the perfecting
of the individual character. But somewhat different is the armour which
is to be worn, when the Christian man goes out into the world to labour
and to wage war there for Jesus Christ. We may turn, then, rather to
the other of the two passages in question for the descriptions of the
equipment, armour, and weapons of the Christian in his warfare for the
spread of truth and goodness in the world. The passage to which I refer
is in 2 Cor. vi. What are the weapons that Paul specifies in that
place? I venture to alter their order, because he seems to have put
them down just as they came into his mind, and we can put some kind of
logical sequence into them. 'By the Word of God'--that is the first
one. 'By the Holy Ghost,' which is otherwise given as 'by the power of
God,' is the next. Get your minds and hearts filled with the truth of
the Gospel, and dwell in fellowship with God, baptized with His Holy
Spirit; and then you will be clothed 'as with a vesture down to your
heels' with the power of God. These are the divine side, the weapons
given us from above--'the Word of God' which is 'the sword of the
Spirit,' and the indwelling Holy Ghost manifesting Himself in power.
Then follow a series of human qualities which, though they are 'the
fruit of the Spirit,' are yet not produced in us without our own
co-operation. We have to forge and sharpen these weapons, though the
fire in which they are forged is from above, and the metal of which
they are made is given from heaven, like meteoric iron. These are
'kindness, long-suffering, love unfeigned.' We have to dismiss from our
minds the ordinary characteristics of warfare in thinking of that which
Christians are to wage. Like the old Knights Templars, we must carry a
sword which has a cross for its hilt, and must be clad in gentleness,
and long-suffering, and unfeigned love. 'The wrath of men worketh not
the righteousness of God.' You cannot bully people into Christianity,
you cannot scold them into goodness. There must be sweetness in order
to attract, and he imperfectly echoes the music of the voice that came
from 'the lips into which grace was poured,' whose words are harsh and
rough, and who preaches the Gospel as if he were thundering damnation
into people's ears.

Brethren, whatever be our warfare against sin, we must never lose our
tempers. Harsh words break no bones indeed, but neither do they break
hearts. A character like Jesus Christ--that is the victorious weapon.
Let a man go and live in the world with these weapons that I have been
naming, the truth of God in his heart, the Holy Spirit in his spirit,
the power that comes therefrom animating his deadness and strengthening
his weakness, and himself an emblem and an embodiment of the redeeming
love of Christ--and though he spoke no word he would be sure to preach
Christ; and though he struck no blow he would be a formidable
antagonist to the hosts of evil, and the icebergs of sin and
godlessness would run down into water before his silent and omnipotent
shining. These are the weapons.

III. Note the temper, or disposition, of the Christian warrior-servant.

Courage goes without saying. If a man expects to be beaten, and to do
nothing by his Christian witness but clear his conscience, he deserves
nothing else than what he will get--viz. that his expectation will be
fulfilled and he _will_ do nothing else _but_ clear his conscience, and
that imperfectly. That is why so many preachers and Sunday-school
teachers never see any conversions in their congregation or
classes--because they do not expect any; because they go to their work
without the enthusiastic boldness which would give power to their
utterances.

I suppose concentration, too, goes without saying. When a man is on the
battlefield with the swords whirling about his head, and the bayonets
an inch from his breast, he does not go dreaming of scenes a hundred
miles off, or think anything else than the one thing, how to keep a
whole skin and wound an enemy. If Christian men will do their work in
the dawdling, half-interested, and half-indifferent way in which so
many of us promenade through our Christian service as if it was a
review and not a fight, they are not likely to bring back many trophies
of victory. You must put your whole selves into the battle. I said we
must subdue ourselves ere we begin to fight. That is no contradiction
to what I am saying now, for, as we all know, there is a distinction
between the two selves in us--the self-centred self, which is to be
crucified, and the God-centred self, which is to be nourished. You must
put your whole selves into the battle.

There must, too, be discipline. One difference between a mob and an
army is that the mob has as many wills as there are heads in it, and
the army has only one will, that of the commander. He says to one man
'Go!' and he goes, and gets shot; and to another one 'Come!' and he
comes; and to a third one 'Do this!' and, no matter what it is,
straightway he goes and does it. So if we are soldiers we have to take
orders from headquarters, and to be sure that we pay no attention to
any other commands. Suppose a man is set at a certain post by his
captain, and a corporal comes and says, 'You go and do this other
thing; never mind your post, I will look after that,' to obey that is
mutiny. If Jesus Christ tells you to do anything, and any others say
'Do not do it just yet!' neglect them, and obey Him. If your own heart
says, 'Stop a little while and try something other and easier before
you tackle that task,' be sure of the Captain's voice, and then,
whatever happens, obey, and obey at once. Warfare is a diabolical
thing, but there is a divine beauty in one aspect of it--

  Their's not to make reply,
  Their's not to reason why,
  Their's but to do--

even if it mean 'to die.' Thus let us wage warfare.

IV. The Relieving Guard.

This metaphor of warfare is used in the Book of Job, in a passage where
our English Version does not show it. So I venture to substitute the
right translation for the one in the Authorised Version, 'All the days
of my warfare will I wait till my change comes.' The guard will be
relieved some day, and the private that has been tramping up and down
in the dark or the snow, perhaps within rifle's length of the enemy,
will shoulder his gun and go into the comfortable guardhouse, and hang
up his knapsack, and fling off his dirty boots, and sit down by the
fire, and make himself comfortable. There is a 'heavenly manner of
relieving guard.' Soon it will be the end of the sentry's time, and
then, as one of those that had done a good day's work, and a long one,
said with a sigh of relief, 'I have fought a good fight.' Henceforth
the helmet is put off, which is 'the hope of salvation,' and the crown
is put on, which is salvation in its fullness. 'All the days of my
warfare will I wait'--till my Captain relieves the guard.




THE GUIDING PILLAR


    'So it was alway: the cloud covered [the tabernacle] by
    day, and the appearance of fire by night.'--Num. ix. 16.

The children of Israel in the wilderness, surrounded by miracle, had
nothing which we do not possess. They had some things in an inferior
form; their sustenance came by manna, ours comes by God's blessing on
our daily work, which is better. Their guidance came by this
supernatural pillar; ours comes by the reality of which that pillar was
nothing but a picture. And so, instead of fancying that men thus led
were in advance of us, we should learn that these, the supernatural
manifestations, visible and palpable, of God's presence and guidance
were the beggarly elements: 'God having provided some better thing for
us that they without us should not be made perfect.'

With this explanation of the relation between the miracle and symbol of
the Old, and the reality and standing miracle of the New, Covenants,
let us look at the eternal truths, which are set before us in a
transitory form, in this cloud by day and fiery pillar by night.

I. Note, first, the double form of the guiding pillar.

The fire was the centre, the cloud was wrapped around it. The former
was the symbol, making visible to a generation who had to be taught
through their senses, the inaccessible holiness and flashing brightness
and purity of the divine nature; the latter tempered and veiled the too
great brightness for feeble eyes.

The same double element is found in all God's manifestations of Himself
to men. In every form of revelation are present both the heart and core
of light, which no eye can look upon, and the merciful veil which,
because it veils, unveils; because it hides, reveals; makes visible
because it conceals; and shows God because it is 'the hiding of His
power.' So, through all the history of His dealings with men, there has
ever been what is called in Scripture language the 'face,' or the 'name
of God'; the aspect of the divine nature on which the eye can look; and
manifested through it, there has always been the depth and inaccessible
abyss of that Infinite Being. We have to be thankful that in the cloud
is the fire, and that round the fire is the cloud. For only so can our
eyes behold and our hands grasp the else invisible and remote central
Sun of the universe. God hides to make better known the glories of His
character. His revelation is the flashing of the uncreated and
intolerable light of His infinite Being through the encircling clouds
of human conceptions and words, or of deeds which each show forth, in
forms fitted to our apprehension, some fragment of His lustre. After
all revelation, He remains unrevealed. After ages of showing forth His
glory, He is still 'the King invisible, whom no man hath seen at any
time nor can see.' The revelation which He makes of Himself is 'truth
and is no lie.' The recognition of the presence in it of both the fire
and the cloud does not cast any doubt on the reality of our imperfect
knowledge, or of the authentic participation in the nature of the
central light, of the sparkles of it which reach us. We know with a
real knowledge what we know of Him. What He shows us is Himself, though
not His whole self.

This double aspect of all possible revelation of God, which was
symbolised in comparatively gross external form in the pillar that led
Israel on its march, and lay stretched out and quiescent, a guarding
covering above the Tabernacle when the weary march was still, recurs
all through the history of Old Testament revelation by type and
prophecy and ceremony, in which the encompassing cloud was
comparatively dense, and the light which pierced it relatively faint.
It reappears in both elements in Christ, but combined in new
proportions, so as that 'the veil, that is to say, His flesh,' is
thinned to transparency and all aglow with the indwelling lustre of
manifest Deity. So a light, set in some fair alabaster vase, shines
through its translucent walls, bringing out every delicate tint and
meandering vein of colour, while itself diffused and softened by the
enwrapping medium which it beautifies by passing through its purity.
Both are made visible and attractive to dull eyes by the conjunction.
'He that hath seen Christ hath seen the Father,' and he that hath seen
the Father in Christ hath seen the man Christ, as none see Him who are
blind to the incarnate deity which illuminates the manhood in which it
dwells.

But we have to note also the varying appearance of the pillar according
to need. There was a double change in the pillar according to the hour,
and according as the congregation was on the march or encamped. By day
it was a cloud, by night it glowed in the darkness. On the march it
moved before them, an upright pillar, as gathered together for
energetic movement; when the camp rested it 'returned to the many
thousands of Israel' and lay quietly stretched above the Tabernacle
like one of the long-drawn, motionless clouds above the setting summer
sun, glowing through all its substance with unflashing radiance
reflected from unseen light, and 'on all the glory' (shrined in the
Holy Place beneath) was 'a defence.'

Both these changes of aspect symbolise for us the reality of the
Protean capacity of change according to our ever-varying needs, which
for our blessing we may find in that ever-changing, unchanging, divine
Presence which will be our companion, if we will.

It was not only by a natural process that, as daylight declined, what
had seemed but a column of smoke in the fervid desert sunlight,
brightened into a column of fire, blazing amid the clear stars. But we
may well believe in an actual admeasurement of the degree of light,
correspondent to the darkness and to the need for certitude and
cheering sense of God's protection, which the defenceless camp would
feel as they lay down to rest.

When the deceitful brightness of earth glistens and dazzles around us,
our vision of Him may be 'a cloudy screen to temper the deceitful ray';
and when 'there stoops on our path, in storm and shade, the frequent
night,' as earth grows darker, and life becomes greyer and more sombre,
and verges to its eventide, the pillar blazes brighter before the
weeping eye, and draws nearer to the lonely heart. We have a God who
manifests Himself in the pillar of cloud by day, and in flaming fire by
night.

II. Note the guidance of the pillar.

When it lifts the camp marches; when it glides down and lies motionless
the march is stopped, and the tents are pitched. The main point which
is dwelt upon in this description of the God-guided pilgrimage of the
wandering people is the absolute uncertainty in which they were kept as
to the duration of their encampment, and as to the time and
circumstances of their march. Sometimes the cloud tarried upon the
Tabernacle many days; sometimes for a night only; sometimes it lifted
in the night. 'Whether it was by day or by night that the cloud was
taken up, they journeyed. Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a
year that the cloud tarried upon the Tabernacle, remaining thereon, the
children of Israel abode in their tents, and journeyed not: but when it
was taken up they journeyed.' So never, from moment to moment, did they
know when the moving cloud might settle, or the resting cloud might
soar. Therefore, absolute uncertainty as to the next stage was visibly
represented before them by that hovering guide which determined
everything, and concerning whose next movement they knew absolutely
nothing.

Is not that all true about us? We have no guiding cloud like this. So
much the better. Have we not a more real guide? God guides us by
circumstances, God guides us by His word, God guides us by His Spirit,
speaking through our common-sense and in our understandings, and, most
of all, God guides us by that dear Son of His, in whom is the fire and
round whom is the cloud. And perhaps we may even suppose that our Lord
implies some allusion to this very symbol in His own great words, 'I am
the Light of the world. He that followeth Me shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life.' For the conception of
'following' the light seems to make it plain that our Lord's image is
not that of the sun in the heavens, or any such supernal light, but
that of some light which comes near enough to a man to move before him,
and behind which he can march. So, I think, that Christ Himself laid
His hand upon this ancient symbol, and in these great words said in
effect, 'I am that which it only shadowed and foretold.' At all events,
whether in them He was pointing to our text or no, we must feel that He
is the reality which was expressed by this outward symbol. And no man
who can say, 'Jesus Christ is the Captain of my salvation, and after
His pattern I march; at the pointing of His guiding finger I move; and
in His footsteps, He being my helper, I try to tread,' need feel or
fancy that any possible pillar, floating before the dullest eye, was a
better, surer, or diviner guide than he possesses. They whom Christ
guides want none other for leader, pattern, counsellor, companion,
reward. This Christ is our Christ 'for ever and ever, He will be our
guide even unto death' and beyond it. The pillar that we follow, which
will glow with the ruddy flame of love in the darkest hours of
life--blessed be His name!--will glide in front of us through the
'valley of the shadow of death,' brightest then when the murky midnight
is blackest. Nor will the pillar which guides us cease to blaze, as did
the guide of the desert march, when Jordan has been crossed. It will
still move before us on paths of continuous and ever-increasing
approach to infinite perfection. They who here follow Christ afar off
and with faltering steps shall there 'follow the Lamb whithersoever He
goeth.'

In like manner, the same absolute uncertainty which was intended to
keep the Israelites (though it failed often to do so) in the attitude
of constant dependence, is the condition in which we all have to live,
though we mask it from ourselves. That we do not know what lies before
us is a commonplace. The same long tracts of monotonous continuance in
the same place and doing the same duties befall us that befell these
men. Years pass, and the pillar spreads itself out, a defence above the
unmoving sanctuary. And then, all in a flash, when we are least
thinking of change, it gathers itself together, is a pillar again,
shoots upwards, and moves forwards; and it is for us to go after it.
And so our lives are shuttlecocked between uniform sameness which may
become mechanical monotony, and agitation by change which may make us
lose our hold of fixed principles and calm faith, unless we recognise
that the continuance and the change are alike the will of the guiding
God, whose will is signified by the stationary or moving pillar.

III. That leads me to the last thing that I would note--viz. the docile
following of the Guide.

In the context, the writer does not seem to be able to get away from
the thought that whatever the pillar indicated, immediate prompt
obedience followed. He says so over and over and over again. 'As long
as the cloud abode they rested, and when the cloud tarried long they
journeyed not'; and 'when the cloud was a few days on the Tabernacle
they abode'; and 'according to the commandment they journeyed'; and
'when the cloud abode until the morning they journeyed'; and 'whether
it were two days, or a month, or a year that the cloud tarried they
journeyed not, but abode in their tents.' So, after he has reiterated
the thing half a dozen times or more, he finishes by putting it all
again in one verse, as the last impression which he would leave from
the whole narrative--'at the commandment of the Lord they rested in
their tents, and at the commandment of the Lord they journeyed.'
Obedience was prompt; whensoever and for whatsoever the signal was
given, the men were ready. In the night, after they had had their tents
pitched for a long period, when only the watchers' eyes were open, the
pillar lifts, and in an instant the alarm is given, and all the camp is
in a bustle. That is what we have to set before us as the type of our
lives. We are to be as ready for every indication of God's will as they
were. The peace and blessedness of our lives largely depend on our
being eager to obey, and therefore quick to perceive, the slightest
sign of motion in the resting, or of rest in the moving, pillar which
regulates our march and our encamping.

What do we need in order to cultivate and keep such a disposition? We
need perpetual watchfulness lest the pillar should lift unnoticed. When
Nelson was second in command at Copenhagen, the admiral in command of
the fleet hoisted the signal for recall, and Nelson put his telescope
to his blind eye and said, 'I do not see it.' That is very like what we
are tempted to do. When the signal for unpleasant duties that we would
gladly get out of is hoisted, we are very apt to put the telescope to
the blind eye, and pretend to ourselves that we do not see the
fluttering flags. We need still more to keep our wills in absolute
suspense, if His will has not declared itself. Do not let us be in a
hurry to run before God. When the Israelites were crossing the Jordan,
they were told to leave a great space between themselves and the
guiding ark, that they might know how to go, because they had 'not
passed that way heretofore.' Impatient hurrying at God's heels is apt
to lead us astray. Let Him get well in front, that you may be quite
sure which way He desires you to go, before you go. And if you are not
sure which way He desires you to go, be sure that He does not at that
moment desire you to go anywhere.

We need to hold the present with a slack hand, so as to be ready to
fold our tents and take to the road, if God will. We must not reckon on
continuance, nor strike our roots so deep that it needs a hurricane to
remove us. To those who set their gaze on Christ, no present, from
which He wishes them to remove, can be so good for them as the new
conditions into which He would have them pass. It is hard to leave the
spot, though it be in the desert, where we have so long encamped that
it has come to feel like home. We may look with regret on the circle of
black ashes on the sand where our little fire glinted cheerily, and our
feet may ache, and our hearts ache more, as we begin our tramp once
again, but we must set ourselves to meet the God-appointed change
cheerfully, in the confidence that nothing will be left behind which it
is not good to lose, nor anything met which does not bring a blessing,
however its first aspect may be harsh or sad.

We need, too, to cultivate the habit of prompt obedience. It is usually
reluctance which puts the drag on. Slow obedience is often the germ of
incipient disobedience. In matters of prudence and of intellect, second
thoughts are better than first, and third thoughts, which often come
back to first ones, better than second; but in matters of duty, first
thoughts are generally best. They are the instinctive response of
conscience to the voice of God, while second thoughts are too often the
objections of disinclination, or sloth, or cowardice. It is easiest to
do our duty when we are at first sure of it. It then comes with an
impelling power which carries us over obstacles as on the crest of a
wave, while hesitation and delay leave us stranded in shoal water. If
we would follow the pillar, we must follow it at once.

A heart that waits and watches for God's direction, that uses
common-sense as well as faith to unravel small and great perplexities,
and is willing to sit loose to the present, however pleasant, in order
that it may not miss the indications which say, 'Arise, this is not
your rest,' fulfils the conditions on which, if we keep them, we may be
sure that He will guide us by the right way, and bring us at last to
'the city of habitation.'




HOBAB


    'And Moses said unto Hobab ... Come thou with us, and
    we will do thee good: for the Lord hath spoken good
    concerning Israel.'--NUM. x. 29.

There is some doubt with regard to the identity of this Hobab. Probably
he was a man of about the same age as Moses, his brother-in-law, and a
son of Jethro, a wily Kenite, a Bedouin Arab. Moses begs him to join
himself to his motley company, and to be to him in the wilderness
'instead of eyes.' What did Moses want a man for, when he had the
cloud? What do we want common-sense for, when we have God's Spirit?
What do we want experience and counsel for, when we have divine
guidance promised to us? The two things work in together. The cloud led
the march, but it was very well to have a man that knew all about the
oases and the wells, the situation of which was known only to the
desert-born tribes, and who could teach the helpless slaves from Goshen
the secrets of camp life. So Moses pressed Hobab to change his
position, to break with his past, and to launch himself into an
altogether new and untried sort of life.

And what does he plead with him as the reason? 'We will do thee good,
for the Lord hath spoken good concerning Israel.' Probably Hobab looked
rather shy at the security, for I suppose he was no worshipper of
Jehovah, and he said, 'No; I had rather go home to my own people and my
own kindred and my father's house where I fit in, and keep to my own
ways, and have something a little more definite to lay hold of than
your promise, or the promise of your Jehovah that lies behind it. These
are not solid, and I am going back to my tribe.' But Moses pressed and
he at last consented, and the following verses suggest that the
arrangement was made satisfactorily, and that the journeyings began
prosperously. In the Book of Judges we find traces of the presence of
Hobab's descendants as incorporated among the people of Israel. One of
them came to be somebody, the Jael who struck the tent-peg through the
temples of the sleeping Sisera, for she is called 'the wife of Heber
the _Kenite_.' Probably, then, in some sense Hobab must have become a
worshipper of Jehovah, and have cast in his lot with his brother-in-law
and his people. I do not set Hobab up as a shining example. We do not
know much about his religion. But it seems to me that this little
glimpse into a long-forgotten and unimportant life may teach us two or
three things about the venture of faith, the life of faith, and the
reward of faith.

I. The venture of faith.

I have already said that Hobab had nothing in the world to trust to
except Moses' word, and Moses' report of God's Word. 'We will do you
good; God has said that He will do good to us, and you shall have your
share in it.' It was a grave thing, and, in many circumstances, would
have been a supremely foolish thing, credulous to the verge of
insanity, to risk all upon the mere promise of one in Moses' position,
who had so little in his own power with which to fulfil the promise;
and who referred him to an unseen divinity, somewhere or other; and so
drew bills upon heaven and futurity, and did not feel himself at all
bound to pay them when they fell due, unless God should give him the
cash to do it with. But Hobab took the plunge, he ventured all upon
these two promises--Moses' word, and God's word that underlay it.

Now that is just what we have to do. For, after all talking about
reasons for belief, and evidences of religion, and all the rest of it,
it all comes to this at last--will you risk everything on Jesus
Christ's bare word? There are plenty of reasons for doing so, but what
I wish to bring out is this, that the living heart and root of true
Christianity is neither more nor less than the absolute and utter
reliance upon nothing else but Christ, and therefore on His word. He
did not even condescend to give reasons for that reliance, for His most
solemn assurance was just this, 'Verily, verily, I say unto you.' That
is as much as to say, 'If you do not see in Me, without any more
argument, reason enough for believing Me, you do not see Me at all.'

Christ did not argue--He asserted, and in default of all other proof,
if I might venture to say so, He put His own personality into the
scales and said, 'There, that will outweigh everything.' So no wonder
that 'they were astonished at His doctrine,'--not so much at the
substance of it as at the tone of it, 'for He taught them _with
authority_.'

But what right had He to teach them with authority? What right has He
