    shall ye see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand
    of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven. 65. Then
    the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He hath spoken
    blasphemy; what further need have we of witnesses?
    behold, now ye have heard His blasphemy. 66. What think
    ye? They answered and said, He is guilty of death.
    67. Then did they spit in His face, and buffeted Him;
    and others smote Him with the palms of their hands,
    68. Saying, Prophesy unto us, Thou Christ, Who is he
    that smote Thee?'--MATT. xxvi. 57-68.

John's Gospel tells us that Jesus was brought before 'Annas first,'
probably in the same official priestly residence as Caiaphas, his
son-in-law, occupied. That preliminary examination brought out
nothing to incriminate the prisoner, and was flagrantly illegal,
being an attempt to entrap Him into self-accusing statements. It was
baffled by Jesus being silent first, and subsequently taking His
stand on the undeniable principle that a charge must be sustained by
evidence, not based on self-accusation. Annas, having made nothing
of this strange criminal, 'sent Him bound unto Caiaphas.'

A meeting of the Sanhedrin had been hastily summoned in the dead of
night, which was itself an illegality. Now Jesus stands before the
poor shadow of a judicial tribunal, which, though it was all that
Rome had left a conquered people, was still entitled to sit in
judgment on Him. Strange inversion, and awful position for these
formalists! And with sad persistence of bitter prejudice they
proceeded to try the prisoner, all unaware that it was themselves,
not Him, that they were trying.

They began wrongly, and betrayed their animus at once. They were
sitting there to inquire whether Jesus was guilty or no; they had
made up their minds beforehand that He was, and their effort now was
but to manufacture some thin veil of legality for a judicial murder.
So they 'sought false witness, ... that they might put Him to
death.' Matthew simply says that no evidence sufficient for the
purpose was forthcoming; Mark adds that the weak point, was that the
lies contradicted each other. Christ's presence has a strange,
solemn power of unmasking our falsehoods, both of thought and deed,
and it is hard to speak evil of Him before His face. If His
calumniators were confused when He stood as Prisoner, what will they
be when He sits as a Judge?

Only Matthew and Mark tell us of the two witnesses whose twisted
version of the word about 'destroying the Temple and rebuilding it
in three days' seemed to Caiaphas serious enough to require an
answer. Their mistake was one which might have been made in good
faith, but none the less was their travesty 'false witness.' Their
version of His great word shows how easily the teaching of a lofty
soul, passed through the popular brain, is degraded, and made to
mean the opposite of what he had meant by it. For the destruction of
the Temple had appeared in the saying as the Jews' work, and Jesus
had presented Himself in it as the Restorer, not the Destroyer, of
the Temple and of all that it symbolised. We destroy, He rebuilds.
The murder of Jesus was the suicide of the nation. Caiaphas and his
council were even now pulling down the Temple. And that murder was
the destruction, so far as men could effect it, of the true 'Temple
of His body,' in which the fulness of the Godhead dwelt, and which
was more gloriously reconstituted in the Resurrection. The risen
Christ rears the true temple on earth, for through Him the Holy
Ghost dwells in His Church, which is collectively 'the Temple,' and
in all believing spirits, which are individually 'the temples' of
God. So the false witnesses distorted into a lie a great truth.

The Incarnate Word was dumb all the while. He 'was still and
refrained' Himself. It was the silence of the King before a lawless
tribunal of rebels, of patient meekness, 'as a sheep before her
shearers'; of innocence that will not stoop to defend itself from
groundless accusations; of infinite pity and forbearing love, which
sees that it cannot win, but will not smite. Jesus is still silent,
but one day, 'with the breath of His lips shall He slay the wicked.'
Caiaphas seems to have been annoyed as well as surprised at Jesus'
silence, for there is a trace of irritation, as at 'contempt of
court,' in his words. But our Lord's continued silence appears to
have somewhat awed him, and the dawning consciousness of his dignity
is, perhaps, the reason for the high priest's casting aside all the
foolery of false witnessing, and coming at last to the real
point,--the Messianic claims of Jesus.

Caiaphas was doing his duty as high priest in inquiring into such
claims, but he was somewhat late in the day, and he had made up his
mind before he inquired. What he wished to get was a plain assertion
on which the death sentence could be pronounced. Jesus knew this,
and yet He answered. But Luke tells us that He first scathingly
pointed to the unreality and animus of the question by saying, 'If I
tell you, ye will not believe.' But yet it was fitting that He
should solemnly, before the supreme court, representative of the
nation, declare that He was the Messiah, and that, if He was to be
rejected and condemned, it should be on the ground of that
declaration. Before Caiaphas He claimed to be Messiah, before Pilate
He claimed to be King. Each rejected Him in the character that
appealed to them most. The many-sidedness of the perfect Revealer of
God brings Him to each soul in the aspect that most loudly addresses
each. Therefore the love in the appeal and the guilt in its
rejection are the greater.

But Christ's self-attestation to the council was not limited to the
mere claim to the name of Messiah. It disclosed the implications of
that name in a way altogether unlike the conceptions held by
Caiaphas. When Caiaphas put in apposition 'the Christ' and 'the Son
of God,' he was not speaking from the ordinary Jewish point of view,
but from some knowledge, of Christ's teaching, and there are two
charges combined into one.

But Jesus' answer, while plainly claiming to be the Messiah, expands
itself in regard to the claim to be 'Son of God,' and shows its
tremendous significance. It involves participation in divine
authority and omnipotence. It involves a future coming to be the
Judge of His judges. It declares that these blind scribes and elders
will see Him thus exalted, and it asserts that all this is to begin
then and there ('henceforth'), as if that hour of humiliation was to
His consciousness the beginning of His manifestation as Lord, or, as
John has it, 'the hour that the Son of Man should be glorified.' Nor
must we leave out of sight the fact that it is 'the Son of Man' of
whom all this is said, for thereby are indicated the raising of His
perfect humanity to participation in Deity, and the possibility that
His brethren, too, may sit where He sits. Much was veiled in the
answer to the council, much is veiled to us. But this remains,--that
Jesus, at that supreme moment, when He was bound to leave no
misunderstandings, made the plainest claim to divinity, and could
have saved His life if He had not done so. Either Caiaphas, in his
ostentatious horror of such impiety, was right in calling Christ's
words blasphemy, and not far wrong in inferring that Jesus was not
fit to live, or He is the everlasting 'Son of the Father,' and will
'come to be our Judge.'




JESUS CHARGED WITH BLASPHEMY


    'Then the high priest rent his clothes, saying, He
    hath spoken blasphemy; what further need have we of
    witnesses?'--MATT. xxvi. 65.

Jesus was tried and condemned by two tribunals, the Jewish
ecclesiastical and the Roman civil. In each case the charge
corresponded to the Court. The Sanhedrin took no cognisance of, and
had no concern with, rebellion against Caesar; though for the time
they pretended loyalty. Pilate had still less concern about Jewish
superstitions. And so the investigation in each case turned on a
different question. In the one it was, 'Art Thou the Son of God?' in
the other, 'Art Thou the King of Israel?' The answer to both was a
simple 'Yes!' but with very significant differences. Pilate received
an explanation; the Sanhedrin none. The Roman governor was taught
that Christ's title of King belonged to another region altogether
from that of Caesar, and did not in the slightest degree infringe
upon the dominion that he represented. But 'Son of God' was capable
of no explanation that could make it any less offensive; and the
only thing to be done was to accept it or to condemn Him.

So this saying of the high priest differs from other words of our
Lord's antagonists, which we have been considering in recent pages,
in that it is no distortion of our Lord's characteristics or
meaning. It correctly understands, but it fatally rejects, His
claims; and does not hesitate to take the further step, on the
ground of these, of branding Him as a blasphemer.

We may turn the high priest's question in another direction: 'What
further need have we of witnesses?' These horror-stricken judges,
rending their garments in simulated grief and zeal, and that silent
Prisoner, knowing that His life was the forfeit of His claims, yet
saying no word of softening or explanation of them, may teach us
much. They are witnesses to some of the central facts of the
revelation of God in Christ. Let us turn to these for a few moments.

I. First, then, they witness to Christ's claims.

The question that was proposed to Jesus, 'Art Thou the Christ, the
Son of the living God?' was suggested by the facts of His ministry,
and not by anything that had come out in the course of this
investigation. It was the summing up of the impression made on the
ecclesiastical authorities of Judaism by His whole attitude and
demeanour. And if we look back to His life we shall see that there
were instances, long before this, on which, on the same ground, the
same charge was flung at Him. For example, when He would heal the
paralytic, and, before He dealt with bodily disease, attended to
spiritual weakness, and said, 'Thy sins be forgiven thee,' ere He
said, 'Take up thy bed and walk,' there was a group of keen-eyed
hunters after heresy sitting eagerly on the watch, who snatched at
the words in a moment, and said, 'Who is this that forgiveth sins?
No _man_ forgiveth sins, but God only! This man speaketh
blasphemies!' And they were right. He did claim a divine
prerogative; and either the claim must be admitted or the charge of
blasphemy urged.

Again, when He infringed Rabbinical Sabbath law by a cure, and they
said, 'This Man has broken the Sabbath day,' His vindication was
worse than His offence, for He answered, 'My Father worketh
hitherto, and I work.' And then they sought the more to kill Him,
because He not only brake the Sabbath, but also called God His own
Father, making Himself equal with God.' And again, when He declared
that the safety of His sheep in His hands was identical with their
safety in His Father's hands, and vindicated the audacious
parallelism by the tremendous assertion, 'I and My Father are One,'
the charge of blasphemy rang out; and was inevitable, unless the
claim was true.

These outstanding instances are but, as it were, summits that rise
above the general level. But the general level is that of One who
takes an altogether unique position. No one else, professing to lead
men in paths of righteousness, has so constantly put the stress of
His teaching, not upon morality, nor religion, nor obedience to God,
but upon this, 'Believe in Me'; or ever pushed forward His own
personality into the foreground, and made the whole nobleness and
blessedness and security and devoutness of a life to hinge upon that
one thing, its personal relation to Him.

People talk about the sweet and gentle wisdom that flowed from
Christ's lips, and so on; about the lofty morality, about the beauty
of pity and tenderness, and all the other commonplaces so familiar
to us, and we gladly admit them all. But I venture to go a step
further than all these, and to say that the outstanding
_differentia_, the characteristic which marks off Christ's
teaching as something new, peculiar, and altogether _per se_,
is not its morality, not its philanthropy, not its meek wisdom, not
its sweet reasonableness, but its tremendous assertions of the
importance of Himself.

And if I am asked to state the ground upon which such an assertion
may be vindicated, I would point you to such facts as these, that
this Man took up a position of equality with, and of superiority to,
the legislation which He and the people to whom He was speaking
regarded as being divinely sent, and said, 'Ye have heard that it
hath been said to them of old time' so and so; 'but I say unto you':
that this Man declared that to build upon His words was to build
upon a rock; that this Man declared that He--He--was the legitimate
object of absolute trust, of utter submission and obedience; that He
claimed from His followers affiance, love, reverence which cannot be
distinguished from worship, and that He did not therein conceive
that He was intercepting anything that belonged to the Father. This
Man professed to be able to satisfy the desires of every human heart
when He said, 'If any man thirst let him come to Me and drink.' This
Man claimed to be able to breathe the sanctity of repose in the
blessedness of obedience over all the weary and the heavy laden; and
assured them that He Himself, through all the ages, and in all
lands, and for all troubles, would give them rest. This Man declared
that He who stood there, in the quiet homes of Galilee, and went
about its acres with those blessed feet for our advantage, was to be
Judge of the whole world. This Man said that His name was 'Son of
God'; and this Man declared, 'He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father.'

And then people say to us, 'Oh! your Gospel narratives, even if they
be the work of men in good faith, telling what they suppose He said,
mistook the Teacher; and if we could strip away the accretion of
mistaken reverence, and come to the historical person, we should
find no claims like these.'

Well, this is not the time to enter into the large questions which
that contention involves, but I point you to the incident which
makes my text, and I say, 'What need we any further witnesses?'
Nobody denies that Jesus Christ was crucified as the result of a
combination of Sanhedrin and Pilate. What set the Jewish rulers
against Him with such virulent and murderous determination? Is there
anything in the life of Jesus Christ, if it is watered down as the
people, who want to knock out all the supernatural, desire to water
it down--is there anything in the life that will account for the
inveterate acrimony and hostility which pursued Him to the death?
The fact remains that, whether or not Evangelists and Apostles
misconceived His teaching when they gave such prominence to His
personality and His lofty claims, His enemies were under the same
delusion, if it were a delusion; and the reason why the whole
orthodox religionism of Judaism rejoiced when He was nailed to the
Cross was summed up in the taunt which they flung at Him as He hung
there, 'If He be the Son of God, let Him come down, and we will
believe Him.'

So, brethren, I put into the witness-box Annas and Caiaphas and all
their satellites, and I say, 'What need we any further witnesses?'
He died because He declared that He was the Son of God.

And I beseech you ask yourselves whether we are not being put off
with a maimed version of His teaching, if there is struck out of it
this its central characteristic, that He, 'the sage and humble,'
declared that He was 'likewise One with the Creator.'

II. Secondly, note how we have here the witness that Jesus Christ
assented always to the loftiest meaning that men attached to His
claims.

I have already pointed out the remarkable difference between the
explanations which He condescended to give to the Roman governor as
to the perfectly innocent meaning of His claim to be the King of
Israel, and His silence before the Sanhedrin. That silence is only
explicable because they rightly understood the meaning of the claim
which they contemptuously and perversely rejected. Jesus Christ knew
that His death was the forfeit, as I have said, and yet He locked
His lips and said not a word.

In like manner when, on the other occasion to which I have already
referred, the Pharisees stumbled at His claims to forgive sins, He
said nothing to soften down that claim. If He had meant then only
what some people would desire to make Him mean when He said, 'Thy
sins be forgiven thee'--viz., that He was simply acting as a
minister of the divine forgiveness, and assuring a poor sinner that
God had pardoned him--why in common honesty, in discharge of His
plain obligations of a teacher, did He not say so--not for His own
sake, but for the sake of preventing such a tremendous
misunderstanding of His meaning? But He let them go away with the
conviction that He intended to claim a divine prerogative, and
vindicated the assertion by doing what only a divine power could do:
'That ye may know that the Son of Man hath power enough on earth to
forgive sins, He saith unto the sick of the palsy, Take up thy bed
and walk.' There was no need for Him to have wrought a miracle to
establish His right to tell a poor soul that God forgave sin. And
the fact that the miracle was supposed to be the demonstration and
the vindication of His right to declare forgiveness shows that He
was exercising that prerogative which belongs, as they rightly said,
to God only.

And in precisely the same manner, the commonest obligations of
honesty, the plain duty of a misunderstood Teacher, to say nothing
of the duty of self-preservation, ought to have opened His lips in
the presence of the Jewish authorities, if they understood wrongly
and set too high their estimate of the meaning of His claims. His
silence establishes the fact that they understood these aright.

And so, all through His life, we note this peculiarity, that He
never puts aside as too lofty for truth men's highest interpretations
of His claims, nor as too lowly for their mutual relation the lowest
reverence which bowed before Him. Peter, in the house of Cornelius,
said, 'Stand up! for I myself also am a man.' Paul and Barnabas, when
the priests brought out the oxen and garlands to the gates of Lystra,
could say, 'We also are men of like passions with yourselves.' But
this meek Jesus lets men fall at His feet; and women wash them with
their tears and wipe them with the hairs of their head; and souls
stretch out maimed hands of faith, and grasp Him as their only hope.
When His apostle said, 'Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,'
His answer was, 'Blessed art thou, for flesh and blood hath not revealed
it unto thee,' and when another exclaimed, 'My Lord and my God!' this
Pattern of all meekness accepted and endorsed the title, and pronounced
a benediction on all who, not having seen Him, should hereafter attain
a like faith.

Now I want to know whether that characteristic, which runs through all
His life, and is inseparable from it, can be vindicated on any ground
except the ground that He was 'God manifest in the flesh.' Either
Jesus Christ had a greedy appetite for excessive adoration, was a
victim to diseased vanity and ever-present self-regard--the most
damning charge that you can bring against a religious teacher--or He
accepted love and reverence and trust, because the love and the
reverence and the trust knit souls to the Incarnate God their Saviour.

III. And so, lastly we have here witness to the only alternative to
the acceptance of His claims.

He hath spoken 'blasphemy,' not because He had derogated from the
dignity of divinity, but because He had presumed to participate in
it. And it seems to me, with all deference, that this rough
alternative is the only legitimate one. If Jesus Christ did make
such claims, and His relation to the Jewish hierarchy and His death
are, as I have shown you, apart even from the testimony of the
Evangelists, strong confirmation of the fact that He did--if Jesus
Christ did make such claims, and they were not valid, one of two
things follows. Either He believed them, and then, what about His
sanity? or He did not believe them, and then, what about His
honesty? In either case, what about His claims to be a Teacher of
religion? What about His claims to be the Pattern of humanity? That
part of His teaching and character is either the manifestation of
His glory or it is like one of those fatal black seams that run
through and penetrate into the substance of a fair white marble
statue, marring all the rest of its pale and celestial beauty.
Brethren, it seems to me that, when all is said and done, we come to
one of three things about Jesus Christ. Either 'He blasphemeth' if
He said these things, and they were not true, or 'He is beside
Himself' if He said these things and believed them, or

  'Thou art the King of Glory, O Christ;
   Thou art the everlasting Son of the Father.'

Now I know that there are many men who, I venture to say, are far
better than their creed, and who, believing it impossible to accept,
in their plain meaning, the plain claims of Jesus Christ to
divinity, do yet cleave to Him with a love and a reverence and an
obedience which more orthodox men might well copy. And far be it
from me to say one word which might seem even to quench the faintest
beam of light that, shining from His perfect character, draws any
heart, however imperfectly, to Himself. Only, if I speak to any such
at this time, I beseech them to follow the light which draws them,
and to see whether their reverence for that fair character should
not lead them to accept implicitly the claims that came from His own
lips. I humbly venture to say that if we know anything at all about
Jesus Christ, we know that He lived declaring Himself to be the
Everlasting Son of the Father, and that He died because He did so
declare Himself. And I beseech you to ponder the question whether
reverence for Him and admiration of His character can be logically
and reasonably retained, side by side with the repudiation of that
which is the most distinctive part of His message to men.

Oh, brethren, if it is true that God has come in the flesh, and that
that sweet, gracious, infinitely beautiful life is really the
revelation of the heart of God, then what a beam of sunshine falls
upon all the darkness of this world! Then God is love; then that
love holds us all; did not shrink from dying for us, and lives for
ever to bless us. If these claims are true, what should our attitude
be but that of infinite trust, love, submission, obedience, and the
shaping of our lives after the pattern of His life?

These rejectors, when they said, 'He speaketh blasphemies,' were
sealing their own doom, and the ruined Temple and nineteen centuries
of wandering misery show what comes to men who hear Christ declaring
that He is the Son of the living God and the Judge of the world, and
who find nothing in the words but blasphemy. On the other hand, if
we will answer His question, 'Whom say ye that I am?' as the apostle
answered it, we shall, like the apostle, receive a benediction from
His lips, and be set on that faith as on a rock against which the
'gates of hell' shall not prevail.




'SEE THOU TO THAT!'


    'I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent
    blood. And they said, What is that to us? See thou to
    that. 24. I am innocent of the blood of this just
    Person: see ye to it.'--MATT. xxvii. 4, 24.

So, what the priests said to Judas, Pilate said to the priests. They
contemptuously bade their wretched instrument bear the burden of his
own treachery. They had condescended to use his services, but he
presumed too far if he thought that that gave him a claim upon their
sympathies. The tools of more respectable and bolder sinners are
flung aside as soon as they are done with. What were the agonies or
the tears of a hundred such as he to these high-placed and heartless
transgressors? Priests though they were, and therefore bound by
their office to help any poor creature that was struggling with a
wounded conscience, they had nothing better to say to him than this
scornful gibe, 'What is that to us? See thou to that.'

Pilate, on the other hand, metes to them the measure which they had
meted to Judas. With curious verbal correspondence, he repeats the
very words of Judas and of the priests. 'Innocent blood,' said
Judas. 'I am innocent of the blood of this just Person,' said
Pilate. 'See thou to that,' answered they. 'See ye to it,' says he.
He tries to shove off his responsibility upon them, and they are
quite willing to take it. Their consciences are not easily touched.
Fanatical hatred which thinks itself influenced by religious motives
is the blindest and cruellest of all passions, knowing no
compunction, and utterly unperceptive of the innocence of its
victim.

And so these three, Judas, the priests, and Pilate, suggest to us, I
think, a threefold way in which conscience is perverted. Judas
represents the agony of conscience, Pilate represents the shuffling
sophistications of a half-awakened conscience, and those priests and
people represent the torpor of an altogether misdirected conscience.

I. Judas, or the agony of conscience.

'I have sinned in that I have betrayed the innocent blood.' We do
not need to enter at any length upon the difficult question as to
what were the motives of Judas in his treachery. For my part I do
not see that there is anything in the Scripture narrative, simply
interpreted, to bear out the hypothesis that his motives were
mistaken zeal and affection for Christ; and a desire to force Him to
the avowal of His Messiahship. One can scarcely suppose zeal so
strangely perverted as to begin by betrayal, and if the object was
to make our Lord speak out His claims, the means adopted were
singularly ill-chosen. The story, as it stands, naturally suggests a
much less far-fetched explanation.

Judas was simply a man of a low earthly nature, who became a
follower of Christ, thinking that He was to prove a Messiah of the
vulgar type, or another Judas Maccabaeus. He was not attracted by
Christ's character and teaching. As the true nature of Christ's work
and kingdom became more obvious, he became more weary of Him and it.
The closest proximity to Jesus Christ made eleven enthusiastic
disciples, but it made one traitor. No man could live near Him for
three years without coming to hate Him if he did not love Him. Then,
as ever, He was set for the fall and for the rise of many. He was
the 'savour of life unto life, or of death unto death.'

But be this as it may, we have here to do with the sudden revulsion
of feeling which followed upon the accomplished act. This burst of
confession does not sound like the words of a man who had been
actuated by motives of mistaken affection. He knows himself a
traitor, and that fair, perfect character rises before him in its
purity, as he had never seen it before--to rebuke and confound him.

So this exclamation of his puts into a vivid shape, which may help it to
stick in our memories and hearts, this thought--what an awful difference
there is in the look of a sin before we do it and afterwards! Before we
do it the thing to be gained seems so attractive, and the transgression
that gains it seems so comparatively insignificant. Yes! and when we
have done it the two change places; the thing that we win by it seems
so contemptible--thirty pieces of silver! pitch them over the Temple
enclosure and get rid of them!--and the thing that we did to win them
dilates into such awful magnitude!

For instance, suppose we do anything that we know to be wrong, being
tempted to it by a momentary indulgence of some mere animal impulse.
By the very nature of the case, that dies in its satisfaction and
the desire dies along with it. We do not wish the prize any more
when once we have got it. It lasts but a moment and is past. Then we
are left alone with the thought of the sin that we have done. When
we get the prize of our wrong-doing, we find out that it is not as
all-satisfying as we expected it would be. Most of our earthly aims
are like that. The chase is a great deal more than the hare. Or, as
George Herbert has it, 'Nothing between two dishes--a splendid
service of silver plate, and when you take the cover off there is no
food to eat--such are the pleasures here.'

Universally, this is true, that sooner or later, when the delirium
of passion and the rush of temptation are over and we wake to
consciousness, we find that we are none the richer for the thing
gained, and oh! so infinitely the poorer for the means by which we
gained it. It is that old story of the Veiled Prophet that wooed and
won the hearts of foolish maidens, and, when he had them in his
power in the inner chamber, removed the silver veil which they had
thought hid dazzling glory and showed hideous features that struck
despair into their hearts. Every man's sin does that for him. And to
you I come now with this message: every wrong thing that you do,
great or small, will be like some of those hollow images of the gods
that one hears of in barbarian temples--looked at in front, fair,
but when you get behind them you find a hollow, full of dust and
spiders' webs and unclean things. Be sure of this, every sin is a
blunder.

That is the first lesson that lies in these words of this wretched
traitor; but again, here is an awful picture for us of the hell upon
earth, of a conscience which has no hope of pardon. I do not suppose
that Judas was lost, if he were lost, because he betrayed Jesus
Christ, but because, having betrayed Jesus Christ, he never asked to
be forgiven. And I suppose that the difference between the traitor
who betrayed Him and the other traitor who denied Him, was this,
that the one, when 'he went out and wept bitterly,' had the thought
of a loving Master with him, and the other, when 'he went out and
hanged himself,' had the thought of nothing but that foul deed
glaring before him. I pray you to learn this lesson--you cannot
think too much, too blackly, of your own sins, but you may think too
exclusively of them, and if you do they will drive you to madness of
despair.

My dear friend, there is no penitence or remorse which is deep
enough for the smallest transgression; but there is no transgression
which is so great but that forgiveness for it may come. And we may
have it for the asking, if we will go to that dear Christ that died
for us. The consciousness of sinfulness is a wholesome consciousness.
I would that every man and woman listening to me now had it deep in
their consciences, and then I would that it might lead us all to that
one Lord in whom there is forgiveness and peace. Be sure of this,
that if Judas Iscariot, when his 'soul flared forth in the dark,'
died without hope and without pardon, it was not because his crime
was too great for forgiveness, but because the forgiveness had never
been asked. There is no unpardonable sin except that of refusing the
pardon that avails for all sin.

II. So much, then, for this first picture and the lessons that come
out of it. In the next place we take Pilate, as the representative
of what I have ventured to call the shufflings of a half-awakened
conscience.

'I am innocent of the blood of this just Person,' says he: 'see ye
to it.' He is very willing to shuffle off his responsibility upon
priests and people, and they, for their part, are quite as willing
to accept it; but the responsibility can neither be shuffled off by
him nor accepted by them. His motive in surrendering Jesus to them
was probably nothing more than the low and cowardly wish to humour
his turbulent subjects, and so to secure an easy tenure of office.
For such an end what did one poor man's life matter? He had a great
contempt for the accusers, which he is scarcely at the pains to
conceal. It breaks out in half-veiled sarcasms, by which he
cynically indemnifies himself for his ignoble yielding to the
constraint which they put upon him. He knows perfectly well that the
Roman power has nothing to fear from this King, whose kingdom rested
on His witness to the Truth. He knows perfectly well that unavowed
motives of personal enmity lie at the bottom of the whole business.
In the words of our text he acquits Christ, and thereby condemns
himself. If Pilate knew that Jesus was innocent, he knew that he, as
governor, was guilty of prostituting Roman justice, which was Rome's
best gift to her subject nations, and of giving up an innocent man
to death, in order to save himself trouble and to conciliate a
howling mob. No washing of his hands will cleanse them. 'All the
perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten that hand. But his words let us
see how a man may sophisticate his conscience and quibble about his
guilt.

Here, then, we get once more a vivid picture that may remind us of
what, alas! we all know in our own experience, how a man's
conscience may be clearsighted enough to discern, and vocal enough
to declare, that a certain thing is wrong, but not strong enough to
restrain from doing it. Conscience has a voice and an eye; alas! it
has no hands. It shares the weakness of all law, it cannot get
itself executed. Men will get over a fence, although the board that
says, 'Trespassers will be prosecuted' is staring them in the face
in capital letters at the very place where they leap it. Your
conscience is a king without an army, a judge without officers. 'If
it had authority, as it has the power, it would govern the world,'
but as things are, it is reduced to issuing vain edicts and to
saying, 'Thou shalt not,' and if you turn round and say, 'I will,
though,' then conscience has no more that it can do.

And then here, too, is an illustration of one of the commonest of
the ways by which we try to slip our necks out of the collar, and to
get rid of the responsibilities that really belong to us. 'See ye to
it' does not avail to put Pilate's crime on the priests' shoulders.
Men take part in evil, and each thinks himself innocent, because he
has companions. Half-a-dozen men carry a burden together; none of
them fancies that he is carrying it. It is like the case of turning
out a platoon of soldiers to shoot a mutineer--nobody knows whose
bullet killed him, and nobody feels himself guilty; but there the
man lies dead, and it was somebody  that did it. So corporations,
churches, societies, and nations do things that individuals would
not do, and each man of them wipes his mouth and says, 'I have done
no harm.' And even when we sin alone we are clever at finding
scapegoats. 'The woman tempted me, and I did eat,' is the formula
universally used yet. The schoolboy's excuse, 'Please, sir, it was
not me, it was the other boy,' is what we are all ready to say.

Now I pray you, brethren, to remember that, whether our consciences
try to shuffle off responsibility for united action upon the other
members of the firm, or whether we try to excuse our individual
actions by laying blame on our tempers, or whether we adopt the
modern slang, and talk about circumstances and heredity and the
like, as being reasons for the diminution or the extinction of the
notion of guilt, it is sophistical trifling; and down at the bottom
most of us know that we alone are responsible for the volition which
leads to our act. We could have helped it if we had liked. Nobody
compelled us to keep in the partnership of evil, or to yield to the
tempter. Pilate was not forced by his subjects to give the
commandment that 'it should be as they required.' They had their own
burden to carry. Each man has to bear the consequences of his
actions. There are many 'burdens' which we can 'bear for one
another, and so fulfil the law of Christ'; but every man has to bear
as his own the burden of the fruits of his deeds. In that harvest,
he that soweth and he that reapeth are one, and each of us has to
drink as we ourselves have brewed. You have to pay for your share,
however many companions you may have had in the act.

So do not you sophisticate your consciences with the delusion that
your responsibility may be shifted to any other person or thing.
These may diminish, or may modify your responsibility, and God takes
all these into account. But after all these have been taken into
account there is this left--that you yourselves have done the act,
which you need not have done unless you had so willed, and that
having done it, you have to carry it on your back for evermore. 'See
thou to that,' was a heartless word, but it was a true one. 'Every
one of us shall give an account of himself to God,' and as the old
Book of Proverbs has it, 'If thou be wise, thou shalt be wise for
thyself: and if thou scornest, thou alone shalt bear it.'

III. And so, lastly, we have here another group still--the priests
and people. They represent for us the torpor and misdirection of
conscience.

'Then answered all the people and said, His blood be on us and on
our children.' They were perfectly ready to take the burden upon
themselves. They thought that they were 'doing God service' when
they slew God's Messenger. They had no perception of the beauty and
gentleness of Christ's character. They believed Him to be a
blasphemer, and they believed it to be a solemn religious duty to
slay Him then and there. Were they to blame because they slew a
blasphemer? According to Jewish law--no. They were to blame because
they had brought themselves into such a moral condition that that
was all which they thought of and saw in Jesus Christ. With their
awful words they stand before us, as perhaps the crowning instances
in Scripture history of the possible torpor which may paralyse
consciences.

I need not dwell, I suppose, even for a moment, upon the thought of
how the highest and noblest sentiments may be perverted into
becoming the allies of the lowest crime. 'O Liberty! what crimes
have been done in thy name!' you remember one of the victims of the
guillotine said, as her last words. 'O Religion! what crimes have
been done in _thy_ name!' is one of the lessons to be gathered
from Calvary.

But, passing that, to come to the thing that is of more consequence
to each of us, let us take this thought, dear brethren, as to the
awful possibility of a conscience going fast asleep in the midst of
the wildest storm of passion, like that unfaithful prophet Jonah,
down in the hold of the heathen ship. You can lull your consciences
into dead slumber. You can stifle them so that they shall not speak
a word against the worst of your sins. You can do so by simply
neglecting them, by habitually refusing to listen to them. If you
keep picking all the leaves and buds off the tree before they open,
it will stop flowering. You can do it by gathering round yourself
always, and only, evil associations and evil deeds. The habit of
sinning will lull a conscience faster than almost anything else. We
do not know how hot a room is, or how much the air is exhausted,
when we have been sitting in it for an hour and a half. But if we
came into it from outside we should feel the difference. Styrian
peasants thrive and fatten upon arsenic, and men may flourish upon
all iniquity and evil, and conscience will say never a word. Take
care of that delicate balance within you; and see that you do not
tamper with it nor twist it.

Conscience may be misguided as well as lulled. It may call evil
good, and good evil; it may take honey for gall, and gall for honey.
And so we need something outside of ourselves to be our guide, our
standard. We are not to be contented that our consciences acquit us.
'I know nothing against myself, yet I am not hereby justified,' says
the apostle; 'he that judgeth me is the Lord.' And it is quite
possible that a man may have no prick of conscience and yet have
done a very wrong thing. So we want, as it seems to me, something
outside of ourselves that shall not be affected by our variations.
Conscience is like the light on the binnacle of a ship. It tosses up
and down along with the vessel. We want a steady light yonder on
that headland, on the fixed solid earth, which shall not heave with
the heaving wave, nor vary at all. Conscience speaks lowest when it
ought to speak loudest. The worst man is least troubled by his
conscience. It is like a lamp that goes out in the thickest
darkness. Therefore we need, as I believe, a revelation of truth and
goodness and beauty outside of ourselves to which we may bring our
consciences that they may be enlightened and set right. We want a
standard like the authorised weights and measures that are kept in
the Tower of London, to which all the people in the little country
villages may send up their yard measures and their pound weights,
and find out if they are just and true. We want a _Bible_, and
we want a _Christ_ to tell us what is duty, as well as to make
it possible for us to do it.

These groups which we have been looking at now, show us how very
little help and sympathy a wounded conscience can get from its
fellows. The conspirators turn upon each other as soon as the
detectives are amongst them, and there is always one of them ready
to go into the witness-box and swear away the lives of the others to
save his own neck. Wolves tear sick wolves to pieces.

Round us there stand Society, pitiless and stern, and Nature, rigid
and implacable; not to be besought, not to be turned. And when I, in
the midst of this universe of fixed law and cause and consequence,
wail out, 'I have sinned,' a thousand voices say to me, 'What is
that to us? See thou to that.' And so I am left with my guilt--it
and I together. There comes One with outstretched, wounded hands,
and says, 'Cast all thy burden upon Me, and I will free thee from it
all.' 'Surely He hath borne our griefs and carried our sorrows!'
Trust in Him, in His great sacrifice, and you will find that His
'innocent blood' has a power that will liberate your conscience from
its torpor, its vain excuses, its agony and despair.




THE SENTENCE WHICH CONDEMNED THE JUDGES


    And Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor
    asked Him, saying, Art Thou the King of the Jews? And
    Jesus said unto him, Thou sayest. 12. And when He was
    accused of the chief priests and elders, He answered
    nothing. 13. Then said Pilate unto Him, Hearest Thou
    not how many things they witness against Thee? 14. And
    He answered him to never a word; insomuch that the
    governor marvelled greatly. 15. Now at that feast the
    governor was wont to release unto the people a prisoner,
    whom they would. 16. And they had then a notable
    prisoner, called Barabbas. 17. Therefore when they were
    gathered together, Pilate said unto them, Whom will ye
    that I release unto you? Barabbas, or Jesus which is
    called Christ? 18. For he knew that for envy they had
    delivered Him. 19. When he was set down on the judgment
    seat, his wife sent unto him, saying, Have thou nothing
    to do with that just man: for I have suffered many
    things this day in a dream because of Him. 20. But the
    chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that
    they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus. 21. The
    governor answered and said unto them, Whether of the
    twain will ye that I release unto you? They said,
    Barabbas. 22. Pilate saith unto them, What shall I do
    then with Jesus which is called Christ? They all say
    unto him, Let Him be crucified. 23. And the governor
    said, Why, what evil hath He done? But they cried out
    the more, saying, Let him be crucified. 24. When Pilate
    saw that he could prevail nothing, but that rather a
    tumult was made, he took water, and washed his hands
    before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the
    blood of this just Person: see ye to it. 25. Then
    answered all the people, and said, His blood be on us,
    and on our children. 26. Then released he Barabbas unto
    them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he delivered Him
    to be crucified.'--ST. MATT. xxvii. 11-26.

The principal figures in this passage are Pilate and the Jewish
rulers and people. Jesus is all but passive. They are busy in
condemning Him, and little know that they are condemning themselves.
They are unconsciously exemplifying the tragic truth of Christ's
saying, 'Whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken.' They
do not dislodge it, but their attempt to dislodge it wounds them.

I. Matthew gives a very summary account of our Lord's appearing
before Pilate, but, brief as it is, and much as it omits, it throws
up into strong light the two essential points,--Christ's declaration
that He was the King of the Jews, and His silence while a storm of
accusations raged around Him. As to the former, it was the only
charge with which Pilate was properly concerned. He had a right to
know whether this strange criminal was dangerous to Rome, because He
claimed kingship, and, if he were satisfied that He was not, his
bounden duty was to liberate Him. One can understand the scornful
emphasis which Pilate laid on 'Thou' as he looked on his Prisoner,
who certainly would not seem to his practical eyes a very formidable
leader of revolt. There is a world of contempt, amused rather than
