its fulness and all-sufficiency, and yet think of the poor, partial
realisation of it that has passed into our experience. Be sure that you
have what you have, and that you make your own what God has made yours.

II. Then, let me suggest, again, how our text hints for us, not only
the difference between possession and realisation, but also our strange
contentment in imperfect possession.

Ahab's remonstrances with his servants, which make the starting-point
of my remarks, seem to suggest that there were two reasons for their
acquiescence in the domination of a foreign power on a bit of their
soil. They had not realised that Ramoth was theirs, and they were too
lazy and cowardly to go and take it. Ignorance of the fulness of the
gift, and slothful timidity in daring everything in the effort to make
it ours, explain a great deal of the present condition of Christian
people.

Is not that condition of passive acquiescence in their small present
attainments, and of careless indifference to the great stretch of the
unattained, the characteristic of the mass of professing Christians?
They have got a foothold on a new continent, and their possession of it
is like the world's drawing of the map of Africa when we were children,
which had a settlement dotted here and there along the coast, and all
the broad regions of the interior were blank. The settlers huddle
together upon the fringe of barren sand by the salt water, and never
dream of pressing forward into the heart of the land. And so, too, many
of us are content with what we have got, a little bit of God, when we
might have Him all; a settlement on the fringe and edge of the land,
when we might traverse the whole length of it; and behold! it is all
ours.

That unfamiliarity with the thought of unattained possibilities in the
Christian life is a damning curse of thousands of people who call
themselves Christians. They do not think, they never realise--and some
of us are guilty in this respect--they never realise that it is
possible for them to be all unlike what they are now, and that, instead
of the miserable partial hallowing of their nature, and the poor,
weak--I was going to say strength, but it is not worth calling strength,
that they possess, they might be as the angels of God: 'the weakest as
David,' and David as a very angel of heaven itself. Why is it, why is
it, that there is this unfamiliarity?

And then, another reason for the woful disproportion between what we
have and what we utilise is the love of ease, such as kept these
Israelites from going up to Ramoth-Gilead. It was a long way off; there
was a river to be forded; there were heights to be climbed; there were
weary marches to be taken; there were hard knocks going in front of the
walls of Ramoth before they got inside it; and on the whole it was more
comfortable to sit at home, or look after their farms and their
merchandise, than to embark on the quixotic attempt to win back a city
that had not been theirs for ever so long, and that they had got on
very well without.

And so it is with hosts of Christian people; we do not realise how much
we have that we never get any good out of. And, in the second place, we
had rather just stay where we are, and make the best of the world as it
is, and the desires of our hearts go in another direction than for our
increase in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Saviour. Ah,
brethren! if we had a claim to some great property, or any other wealth
that we really cared about, should we be so very indifferent as to
asserting our rights? Should we not fight to the death, some of us, for
the last inch of soil, for the last ounce of treasure, that belonged to
us? When you really value a thing, you secure the greatest possible
amount of it; and there is very little margin between what you own and
what you use.

And if there is such a tremendous difference between the breadth of the
one and the narrowness of the other in our Christian life, there can be
no reason for it except this, that we do not care enough about
spiritual blessings and forces to make the effort that is needed to win
and keep, and get the good of, all that is ours.

And is not that something like despising the birthright? Is it not a
criminal thing for Christian people thus to neglect, and to put aside,
and never to seek to obtain, all these great gifts of God? There they
lie at our doors, and they are ours for the taking. Suppose a carrier
brought you a whole waggon full of precious goods, and put them down at
your door, and you were not at the trouble to open your doors, or to
carry the goods into your cellars. That would not look as if you cared
much either for the goods or for the giver. And I wonder how many of us
are chargeable with that criminal despising of God's gifts, which is
clearly the explanation of our letting them lie rotting, as it were, at
our gates? We are starving paupers in the midst of plenty.

'My God shall supply all your need according to His riches in glory, by
Christ Jesus,' says Paul. You have the right to them all. Draw cheques
against the capital that is lodged in your name in that great bank.

III. And so, lastly, my text suggests the effort that is needed to make
our own ours.

'We be still, and take it not out of the hands of the King of Syria.'
Then these things that are ours, by God's gift, by Christ's purchase,
by the Spirit's influence, will need our effort to secure them. And
that is no contradiction, nor any paradox. God does exactly in the same
way with regard to a great many of His natural gifts as He does with
regard to His spiritual ones. He gives them to us, but we hold them on
this tenure, that we put forth our best efforts to get and to keep
them. His giving them does not set aside our taking. However much we
tried we could not take them out of His hand if it were clenched. Open
as His hand is, and stretched out to us as it is, the gifts that
sparkle in it are not transferred to our hands unless we ourselves put
forth an effort.

So let me say that one large part of the discipline by which men make
their own their own is by familiarising themselves with the thought of
the larger possibilities of unattained possessions which God has given
them. That is true in everything. To recognise our present
imperfection, and to see stretching before us glorious and immense
possibilities, opening out into a vista where our eyesight fails us to
travel to its end, is the very salt of life in every region. Artist,
student, all of us 'are saved by hope,' in a very much wider sense than
the Apostle meant by that great saying. And whosoever has once lost, or
felt becoming dim, the vision before him of a possible better than his
present best, in any region, is in that region condemned to grow no
more. If we desire to have any kind of advancement, it is only possible
for us, when there gleams ever before us the untravelled road, and we
see at the end of it unattained brightnesses and blessings.

And we Christian people have an endless prospect of that sort
stretching before us. Oh, if we looked at it oftener, 'having respect
unto the recompense of the reward,' we should find it easier to dash at
any Ramoth-Gilead, and get it out of the hands of the strongest of the
enemies that may bar our way to it. Let us familiarise ourselves with
the thought of our present imperfection, and of our future
completeness, and of the possibilities which may become actualities,
even here and now; and let us not fitfully use what power we have, but
make the best of what graces are ours, and enjoy and expatiate in the
spiritual blessings of peace and rest which Christ has already given to
us. 'To him that hath shall be given,' and the surest way to lose what
we have is to neglect to increase it.

And, above all, let us keep nearer to our Master, and live more in
fellowship with our Lord, and that will help us to deny ourselves to
ungodliness and worldly lusts. It is the prevalence of these, and the
absence of self-denial, that ruins most of the Christian lives that are
ruined in this world. If a man wants to be what he is not, he must
cease to be what he is.

Self-sacrifice, and the emptying of our hearts of trash and trifles, is
the only way to get our hearts filled with God and with His blessing.
Let us keep near Jesus Christ. If we have Him for ours we have peace,
we have power, we have purity. 'He of God is made unto us' all in all,
and every gift that may adorn humanity, and make our lives joyous and
ourselves noble, is given to us in Jesus Christ. Let us put away from
ourselves, then, this slothful indifference to our unattained
possessions. 'Know ye that Ramoth is ours?' 'Let us be still' no
longer. 'All things are yours, whether the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come: all are yours if ye are Christ's.'




AHAB AND MICAIAH

'And Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the Lord besides,
that we might enquire of him? 8. And the king of Israel said unto
Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, Micaiah the son of Imlah, by whom we
may enquire of the Lord: but I hate him; for he doth not prophesy good
concerning me, but evil.'--1 KINGS xxii. 7,8.


An ill-omened alliance had been struck up between Ahab of Israel and
Jehoshaphat of Judah. The latter, who would have been much better in
Jerusalem, had come down to Samaria to join in an assault on the
kingdom of Damascus; but, like a great many other people, Jehoshaphat
first made up his mind without asking God, and then thought that it
might be well to get some kind of varnish of a religious sanction for
his decision. So he proposes to Ahab to inquire of the Lord about this
matter. One would have thought that that should have been done before,
and not after, the determination was made. Ahab does not at all see the
necessity for such a thing, but, to please his scrupulous ally, he
sends for his priests. They came, four hundred of them, and of course
they all played the tune that Ahab called for. It is not difficult to
get prophets to pat a king on the back, and tell him, 'Do what you
like.'

But Jehoshaphat was not satisfied yet. Perhaps he thought that Ahab's
clergy were not exactly God's prophets, but at all events he wanted an
independent opinion; and so he asks if there is not in all Samaria a
man that can be trusted to speak out. He gets for answer the name of
this 'Micaiah the son of Imlah.' Ahab had had experience of him, and
knew his man; and the very name leads him to an explosion of passion,
which, like other explosions, lays bare some very ugly depths. 'I hate
him; for he doth not prophesy good concerning me, but evil.'

That is a curious mood, is it not? that a man should know another to be
a messenger of God, and therefore know that his words are true, and
that if he asked his counsel he would be forbidden to do the thing that
he is dead set on doing, and would be warned that to do it was
destruction; and that still he should not ask the counsel, nor ever
dream of dropping the purpose, but should burst out in a passion of
puerile rage against the counsellor, and will have none of his
reproofs. Very curious! But there are a great many of us that have
something of the same mood in us, though we do not speak it out as
plainly as Ahab did. It lurks more or less in us all, and it largely
determines the attitude that some of us take to Christianity and to
Christ. So I wish to say a word or two about it.

I. My text suggests the inevitable opposition between a message from
God, and man's evil.

No doubt, God is love; and just because He is, it is absolutely
necessary that what comes from Him, and is the reflex and cast, so to
speak, of His character, should be in stern and continual antagonism to
that evil which is the worst foe of men, and is sure to lead to their
death. It is because God is love, that 'to the froward He shows Himself
froward.' and opposes that which, unopposed and yielded to, will ruin
the man that does it. So this is one of the characteristic marks of all
true messages from God, that men who will not part with their evil call
them 'stern,' 'rigid,' 'gloomy,' 'narrow' Yes, of course; because God
must look upon godless lives with disapprobation, and must desire by
all means to draw men away from that which is drawing them away _from_
Him and to their death.

Now, I suppose I need not spend time in enumerating or describing the
points in the attitude of Christianity towards the solemn fact of human
sin, which correspond to Ahab's complaint that the prophet spake always
'not good concerning him, but evil.' The 'gospel' of Jesus Christ
proves its name to be true, and that it _is_ 'good news,' not only by
its graciousness, its promises, its offers, and the rich blessings of
eternal life with which its hands are full, but by its severity, as men
call it. One characteristic of the gospel is the altogether unique
place which the fact of sin fills in it. There is no other religion on
the face of the earth that has so grasped and made prominent this
thought: 'All have sinned and come short of the glory of God.' There is
none that has painted human nature as it is in such dark colours,
because there is none that knows itself to be able to change human
nature into such radiance of glory and purity. The gospel has, if I
might so say, on its palette a far greater range of pigments than any
other system. Its blacks are blacker; its whites are whiter; its golds
are more lustrous than those of other painters of human nature as it is
and as it may become. It is a mark of its divine origin that it
unfalteringly looks facts in the face, and will not say smooth things
about men as they are.

Side by side with that characteristic of the dark picture which it
draws of us, as we are in ourselves, is its unhesitating restraint or
condemnation of deep-seated desires and tendencies. It does not come to
men with the smooth words on its lips, 'Do as thou wilt.' It does not
seek for favour by relaxing bonds, but it rigidly builds up a wall on
either side of a narrow path, and says, 'Walk within these limits and
thou art safe. Go beyond them a hair's-breadth, and thou perishest.' It
may suit Ahab's prophets to fling the reins on the neck of human
nature; God's prophet says, 'Thou shalt not,' That is another of the
tests of divine origin, that there shall be no base compliance with
inclinations, but rigid condemnation of many of our deep desires.

Side by side with these two, there is a third characteristic that the
Word, which is the outcome and expression of the divine love, is
distinguished by its plain and stern declarations of the bitter
consequences of evil-doing. I need not dwell upon these, brethren. They
seem to me to be far too solemn to be spoken of by a man to men in
other words than Scripture's. But I beseech you to remember that this,
too, is the characteristic of Christ's message. So a man should feel,
when he thinks of the dark and solemn things that the Old Testament
partially, and the New Testament more clearly, utter as to the death
which is the outcome of sin, that these are indeed the very voice of
infinite love pleading with us all. Brother I do not so misapprehend
facts as to think that the restraints and threatenings and dark
pictures which Christ and His servants have drawn are anything but the
utterance of the purest affection.

II. Now, secondly, let me ask you to look for a moment at the strange
dislike which this attitude of Christianity kindles.

I have said that Ahab's mental condition was a very odd one. Strange as
it is, it is, as I have already remarked, in some degree a very
frequent one. There are in us all, as we see in many regions of life,
the beginnings of the same kind of feeling. Here, for example, is a
course that I am quite sure, if I pursue it, will land me in evil. Does
the drunkard take a glass the less, because he knows that if he goes on
he will have a drunkard's liver and die a miserable death? Does the
gambler ever take away his hand from the pack of cards or the dice-box,
because he knows that play means, in the long run, poverty and
disgrace? When a man sets his will upon a certain course, he is like a
bull that has started in its rage. Down goes the head, and, with eyes
shut, he will charge a stone wall or an iron door, though he knows it
will smash his skull. Men are very foolish animals; and there is no
greater mark of their folly than the conspicuous and oft-repeated fact
that the clearest vision of the consequences of a course of conduct is
powerless to turn a man from it, when once his passions, or his will,
or, worse still, his weakness, or, worst of all, his habits, have bound
him to it.

Take another illustration. Do we not all know that honest friends have
sometimes fallen out of favour, perhaps with ourselves, because they
have persistently kept telling us what our consciences and common-sense
knew to be true, that if we go on by that road we shall be suffocated
in a bog? A man makes up his mind to a course of conduct. He has a
shrewd suspicion that an honest friend will condemn him, and that the
condemnation will be right. What does he do, therefore? He never
consults his friend, but if by chance that friend should say what was
expected of him, he gets angry with his adviser and doggedly goes his
own road. I suppose we all know what it is to treat our consciences in
the style in which Ahab treated Micaiah. We do not listen to them
because we know what they will say before they have said it; and we
call ourselves sensible people! Martin Luther once said, 'It is neither
safe nor _wise_ to do anything against conscience.' But Ahab put
Micaiah in prison; and we shut up our consciences in a dungeon, and put
a gag in their mouths, and a muffler over the gag, that we may hear
them say no word, because we know that what we are doing, and we are
doggedly determined to do, is wrong.

But the saddest illustration of this infatuation is to be found in the
attitude that many men take in regard to Christianity. There is a great
craving to-day, more perhaps than there has been in some other periods
of the world's history, for a religion which shall adorn, but shall not
restrain; for a religion which shall be toothless, and have no bite in
it; for a religion that shall sanction anything that it pleases our
sovereign mightiness to want to do. We should all like to have God's
sanction for our actions. But there are a great many of us who will not
take the only way to secure that--viz. to do the actions which He
commands, and to abstain from those which He forbids. Popular
Christianity is a very easy-fitting garment; it is like an old shoe
that you can slip off and on without any difficulty. But a religion
which does not put up a strong barrier between you and many of your
inclinations in not worth anything. The mark of a message from God is
that it restrains and coerces and forbids and commands. And some of you
do not like it because it does.

There is a great tendency in this day to cut out of the Old and New
Testaments all the pages that say things like this, 'The soul that
sinneth it shall die'; or things like this, 'This is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather than
light'; or things like this, 'Then shall the wicked go away into outer
darkness.' Brethren, men being what they are, and God being what He is,
there can be no divine message without a side of what the world calls
threatening, or what Ahab called' prophesying evil.' I beseech you, do
not be carried away by the modern talk about Christianity being gloomy
and dark, or fancy that we put a blot and an excrescence upon the pure
religion of the Man of Nazareth, when we speak of the death that
follows sin, and of the darkness into which unbelief carries a man.

III. Once more, let me say a word about the intense folly of such an
attitude.

Ahab hated Micaiah. Why? Because Micaiah told him what would come to
him as the fruit of his own actions. That was foolish. It is no less
foolish for people to take up a position of dislike, and to turn away
from the gospel of Jesus Christ because it speaks in like manner. I
said that men are very foolish animals; there is surely nothing in all
the annals of human stupidity more stupid than to be angry with the
word that tells you the truth about what you are bringing down upon
your heads. It is absurd, because Micaiah did not make the evil, but
Ahab made it; and Micaiah's business was only to tell him what he was
doing. It is absurd, because the only question to be asked is. Are the
warnings true? are the threatenings representations of what really will
come? are the prohibitions reasonable? And it is absurd, because, if
these things are so--if it is true that the soul that sinneth dies, and
will die; if it is true that you, who have heard of the name and the
salvation of Jesus Christ over and over again, and have turned away
from it, will, if you continue in that negligence and unbelief, reap
bitter fruits here and hereafter therefrom--if these things are true,
surely the man that tells you so, and the gospel that tells you so,
deserve better treatment than Ahab's petulant hatred or your stolid
indifference and neglect.

Would you think it wise for a sea-captain to try to take the clapper
out of the bell that floats and tolls above a shoal on which his ship
will be wrecked if it strikes? Would it be wise to put out the
lighthouse lamps, and then think that you had abolished the reef? Does
the signalman with his red flag make the danger of which he warns, and
is it not like a baby to hate and to neglect the message that comes to
you and says, 'Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die'?

IV. So, lastly, I notice the end of this foolish attitude.

Ahab was told in plain words by Micaiah, before the interview closed,
that he would never come back again in peace. He ordered the bold
prophet into prison, and rode away gaily, no doubt, to his campaign.
Weak men are very often obstinate, because they are not strong enough
to rise to the height of changing a purpose when reason condemns it.
This weak man was always obstinate in the wrong place, as so many of us
are. So away he went, down from Samaria, across the plain, down to the
fords of the Jordan. But when he had crossed to the other side, and was
coming near his objective point, the memories of Micaiah in prison at
Samaria began to sit heavy on his soul.

So he tried to deceive divine judgment, and got up an ingenious scheme
by which his ally was to go into the field in royal pomp, and he to
slip into it disguised. A great many of us try to hoodwink God, and it
does not answer. The man who 'drew the bow at a venture' had his hand
guided by a higher Hand. Ahab was plated all over with iron and brass,
but there is always a crevice through which God's arrow can find its
way; and, where God's arrow finds its way, it kills. When the night
fell, he was lying dead on his chariot floor, and the host was
scattered, and Micaiah, the prisoner, was avenged; and his word had
taken hold on the despiser of it.

So it always will be. So it will be with us, dear brethren, if we do
not give heed to our ways and listen to the word which may be bitter in
the mouth, but, eaten, turns sweet as honey. Nailing the index of the
barometer to 'set fair' will not keep off the thunderstorm, and no
negligence or dislike of divine threatenings will arrest the slow,
solemn march, inevitable as destiny, of the consequences of our doings.
Things will be as they will be. Believed or unbelieved, the avalanche
will come.

Dear brethren, there is one way to get Micaiah on your side. Listen to
him, and then he will speak good to you, and not what you foolishly
call evil. Let God's word convince you of sin. Let it bring you to the
Cross for pardon. Jesus Christ addresses each of us in the Apostle's
words: 'Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth?'
The sternest threatenings in the Bible come from the lips of that
infinite Love. If you will listen to Him, if you will yield yourselves
to Him, if you will take Him for your Saviour and your Lord, if you
will cast your confidence and anchor your love upon Him, if you will
let Him restrain you, if you will consult Him about what He would have
you do, if you will accept His prohibitions as well as His permissions,
then His word and His act to you, here and hereafter, will be only good
and not evil, all the days of your life.

Remember Ahab lying dead on the floor of his chariot in a pool of his
own blood, and bethink yourselves of what despising the threatenings,
and turning away from the rebukes and prohibitions of the divine word,
come to. These threatenings are spoken that they may never need to be
put in effect. If you give heed to them they will never be put in
effect in regard to you, if you neglect them and 'will none of' God's
'reproof,' they will come down on you like a mighty rock loosed from
the mountain, and will grind you to powder.




THE CHARIOT OF FIRE

'And it came to pass, when the Lord would take up Elijah into heaven by
a whirlwind, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal. 2. And Elijah
said unto Elisha, Tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord hath sent me to
Beth-el. And Elisha said unto him, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul
liveth, I will not leave thee. 80 they went down to Beth-el 3, And the
sons of the prophets that were at Beth-el came forth to Elisha and said
unto him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy
head to-day? And he said, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace. 4. And
Elijah laid unto him, Elisha, tarry here, I pray thee; for the Lord
hath sent me to Jericho. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy
soul liveth, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho. 5. And the
sons of the prophets that were at Jericho came to Elisha, and laid unto
him, Knowest thou that the Lord will take away thy master from thy head
to-day? And he answered, Yea, I know it; hold ye your peace. 6. And
Elijah said unto him, Tarry, I pray thee, here: for the Lord hath sent
me to Jordan. And he said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth,
I will not leave thee. And they two went on. 7. And fifty men of the
eons of the prophets went, and stood to view afar off: and they two
stood by Jordan. 8. And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it
together, and smote the waters, and they were divided hither and
thither, so that they two went over on dry ground. 9. And it came to
pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said unto Elisha, Ask what
I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from thee. And Elisha said,
I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me. 10. And he
said, Thou hast asked a hard thing; nevertheless, if thou see me when I
am taken from thee, it shall be so unto thee; but if not, it shall not
be so. 11. And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked,
that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and
parted them both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into
heaven.'--2 KINGS ii. 1-11.


Elijah's end is in keeping with his career. From his first abrupt
appearance it had been fitly symbolised by the stormy wind and flaming
fire which he heard and saw at Horeb, and now these were to be the
vehicles which should sweep him into the heavens. He came like a
whirlwind, he burned like a fire, and in fire and whirlwind he
disappeared. The story is wonderful in pathos and simplicity. Surely
never was such a miracle told so quietly. The actual ascension is
narrated in a sentence. Its preliminaries take up the rest of this
narrative.

I. This journey from Gilgal to the eastern side of Jordan is minutely
described in its stages. Apparently this Gilgal is not the well-known
place so called, which was down in the Jordan valley close to Jericho,
else the road from it to Bethel could not have been called a going down
(v. 2). It probably lay to the north of Bethel, which would then be
between it and Jericho, where the Jordan was to be passed. Elijah was
not sent on an aimless round of farewell visits, but by the direct road
to his destination. Note that he and Elisha and the 'sons of the
prophets' all know that he is near his end. How this came about we are
not told, and need not speculate; but though all knew, none seems to
have known that the others knew. Elijah does not explain to Elisha why
he wished him to stay behind, nor Elisha to Elijah why he was so
resolved to keep by him. The knowledge and the silence would give
peculiar solemnity and sweet bitterness to these last hours. How often
a similar combination weighs on the hearts of a household, who all know
that a dear one is soon to be taken away, and yet can only be silent
about what is uppermost in their thoughts!

Why did Elijah wish Elisha to stay behind? Apparently to spare him the
pain of seeing his master depart. With loving concealment, he tried to
make Elisha suppose that his errand to Bethel and then to Jericho was
but a common one, to be soon despatched. It was a little touch of
tenderness in the strong, rough man. Note, too, the gradual disclosure
to Elijah of the places to which he was to go. He is only bid to go to
Bethel, and not till he gets there is he further sent on to Jericho,
and, presumably, only when there is directed to cross Jordan. God does
not show all the road at once, even if it lead to glory, but step by
step, and a second stage only when we have obediently traversed the
first. We get light as we go. Elisha's clinging to his master till the
very last is but too intelligible to many of us who have gone through
the same sorrow, and counted each moment of companionship with some
dear one about to leave earth as priceless gain, to be treasured in the
sacredest recesses of memory for evermore.

It has been thought that the object of the visits to Bethel and Jericho
was to give parting directions to the schools of the prophets at each
place; but that is read into the narrative, which gives no hint that
Elijah had any communication with these. Rather the contrary is
implied, both in the fact that the 'sons of the prophets' came to the
travellers, not the travellers to them, and in their addressing Elisha,
as if some awe of the master kept them from speaking to him. An Elijah
marching to his chariot of fire was not a man for raw youths to
approach lightly. Their question is met by Elisha with curtness and
scant courtesy, which indicates that it was asked in no sympathetic
spirit, but from mere love of telling bad news, and of vulgar
excitement. Even the gentle Elisha is stirred to rebuke the gossiping
chatterers, who intrude their curiosity into that sacred hour. There
are abundance of such busy-bodies always ready to buzz about any
bleeding heart, and sorrow has often to be stern in order to be
unmolested.

II. The second stage is the passage of Jordan. The verbal repetition of
the same dialogue at Jericho as at Bethel increases the impression of
prolonged loving struggle between the two prophets. At last, they stand
on the western bank of Jordan, at their feet the spot where the
hurrying river had been stayed by the ark till the tribes had passed
over, before them the mountains bordering Elijah's homeland of Gilead
on the left, and away on the right the lone peak where Moses had died
'by the mouth of the Lord.' The soil was redolent of the miracles of
the Mosaic age, and the dividing of the waters by Elijah is meant to
bring the present into vital connection with that past, and to
designate him as parallel with the former leader. Note the vigour with
which he twists his characteristic mantle into a kind of rod, and
strikes the waters strongly. The repetition of the former miracle is a
sign that the unexhausted Power which wrought it is with Elijah. The
God of yesterday is the God of to-day, and nothing that was done in the
past but will be repeated in essence, though not in form, in the
present. 'As we have heard so have we seen.' The former miracle had
been done for a nation; this is performed for two men. It teaches the
preciousness of His individual servants in God's eyes. The former had
been done through the ark; this, by the prophet's mantle. Power is
lodged in the faithful messenger. God's strength dwells in those who
love Him. The former miracle had been the close of the desert
wanderings and the gateway to Canaan. Though Elijah's face is turned in
the opposite direction, does not its repetition suggest that for him,
too, the impending translation was to be the end of wilderness
weariness and toil, and the entrance on rest?

III. Elisha's request is the next stage in the story. How far they two
'went on' is not told. The Bible does not foster the craving to know
the exact situation where sacred things happened, the gratification of
which might feed superstition, but could not increase reverence.
Possibly they had drawn near the eastern hills, and were out of sight
of the fifty curious gazers on the other hank. Elijah at last spoke the
truth which both knew. How true to nature is that reticence kept up
till the last moment, and then broken so tenderly!--'Ask what I shall
do for thee, before.' Probably he did not mean any supernatural gift,
but simply some parting token of love; for he is startled at the
response of Elisha. A true disciple can desire nothing more than a
portion of his master's spirit. 'It is enough for the disciple that he
be as his Master.' They covet wisely and with a noble covetousness who
most desire spiritual gifts to fit them for their vocation. It was an
unworldly soul which asked but for such a legacy.

The 'double portion' does not mean twice as much as Elijah's portion
had been, but twice as much as other 'sons of the prophets' would
receive. Elisha reckoned himself Elijah's first-born spiritual son, and
asked for the elder brother's share, because he had been designated as
successor, and would require more than others for his work. The new
sense of responsibility is coming on him, and teaching him his need.
Well for us if higher positions make us lowlier, in the consciousness
of our own unfitness without divine help! Elijah knows that his spirit
was not his to give, and can only refer his successor to the Fountain
from which he had drawn; for the sign which he gives is obviously not
within his power to determine. If the Lord shows the ascending master
to him who is left, He will give the servant his desire.

A portion of their 'spirit' is the very thing which teachers and
prophets cannot give. They may give their systems or their methods,
their favourite ideas or cut-and-dry maxims and principles, and so
leave a race of pygmies who give themselves airs as being their
disciples, but their spirit they cannot impart. Contrast with this
limitation of power confessed by Elijah, His consciousness who breathed
on eleven poor men, and said, 'Receive ye the Holy Ghost.' No man could
say that without absurdity or blasphemy. The gift impossible to man is
the very characteristic gift of Jesus, who 'has power over the Spirit
of holiness.'  Must He not thereby be 'declared to be the Son of God'?

IV. The climax of this lesson is that stupendous scene of the
translation. Note how the 'Behold' suggests the suddenness of the
appearance of the fiery chariot, which came flaming between the two men
eagerly talking, and drove them apart. The description of the
departure, in its brevity and incompleteness, sounds like the report of
the only eye-witness, who had the fiery chariot between him and Elijah,
and was too bewildered to see precisely what happened. All he knew was
the sudden appearance of the fiery equipage, and then that, suddenly,
and apparently swiftly, a rushing mighty wind swept away chariot and
prophet into the heavens. He saw it, as the next verse after this
passage tells us, only long enough to break into one rapturous and yet
lamenting cry, and then all vanished, and he stood alone with an
apparently empty heaven above him, the whirlwind sunk to calm, and
Elijah's mantle at his feet.

The teaching of the event is plain. As for the pre-Mosaic ages the
translation of Enoch, and for the earlier Mosaic epoch the mysterious
death of Moses, so for the prophetic period the carrying to heaven of
Elijah, witnessed of a life beyond death, and of death as the wages of
sin, which God could remit, if He willed, in the case of faithful
service. Enoch and Elijah were led round the head of the valley on the
heights, and reached the other side without having to go down into the
cold waters flowing in the bottom; and though we cannot tread their
path, the joy of their experience has not ceased to be a joy to us, if
we walk with God. Death is still the coming of the chariot and horses
of fire to bear the believer home. The same exclamation which fell from
Elisha's lips, as he saw the chariot sweep up the sky, was spoken over
him as he lay sick 'of the sickness whereof he should die.'

But the most instructive view of Elijah's translation is its parallel
and contrast with Christ's Ascension. The one was by outward means; the
other by inward energy. Storm and fire bore Elijah up into a region
strange to him. Christ 'ascended up where He was before,' returning by
the propriety of His nature to His eternal dwelling-place. The one is
accomplished with significant disturbance, of whirlwind and flame; the
other is gentle, like the life which it closed, and the last sight of
Him was with extended hands of blessing. Each life closed in a manner
corresponding to its character. The one was swift and sudden. The other
was a slow, solemn motion, vividly described as being 'borne upwards'
and as 'going into heaven.' The one bore a mortal into 'heaven.' In the
other, the Son of God, our great High Priest, 'hath passed through the
heavens,' and now, far above them all, He is 'Head over all things.'




THE TRANSLATION OF ELIJAH AND THE ASCENSION OF CHRIST

'And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold,
there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, and parted them
both asunder; and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.'--2 KINGS
ii. 11.

'And it came to pass, while He blessed them, He was parted from them,
and carried up into heaven.'--LUKE xxiv. 51.


These two events, the translation of Elijah and the Ascension of our
Lord, have sometimes been put side by side in order to show that the
latter narrative is nothing but a 'variant' of the former. See, it is
said, the source of your New Testament story is only the old legend
shaped anew by the wistful regrets of the early disciples. But to me it
seems that the simple comparison of the two narratives is sufficient to
bring out such fundamental difference in the ideas which they
respectively embody as amount to opposition, and make any such theory
of the origin of the latter absurdly improbable, I could wish no better
foil for the history of the Ascension than the history of Elijah's
rapture. The comparison brings out contrasts at every step, and there
is no readier way of throwing into strong relief the meaning and
purpose of the former, than holding up beside it the story of the
latter. The real parallel makes the divergences the more remarkable,
for likeness sharpens our perception of unlikeness, and no contrast is
so forcible as the contrast of things that correspond. I am much
mistaken if we shall not find almost every truth of importance
connected with our Lord's Ascension emphasised for us by the comparison
to which we now proceed.

I. The first point which may be mentioned is the contrast between the
manner of Elijah's translation, and that of our Lord's Ascension.

It is perhaps not without significance that the place of the one event
was on the uplands or in some of the rocky gorges beyond Jordan, and
that of the other, the slopes of Olivet above Bethany. The lonely
prophet, who had burst like a meteor on Israel from the solitudes of
Gilead, whose fervour had ever and again been rekindled by return to
the wilderness, whose whole career had isolated him from men, found the
fitting place for that last wonder amidst the stern silence where he
had so often sought asylum and inspiration. He was close to the scenes
of mighty events in the past. There, on that overhanging peak, the
lawgiver whose work he was continuing, and with whom he was to be so
strangely associated on the Mount of Transfiguration, had made himself
ready for his lonely grave. Here at his feet, the river had parted for
the victorious march of Israel. Away down on his horizon the sunshine
gleamed on the waters of the Dead Sea; and thus, on his native soil,
surrounded by memorials of the Law which he laboured to restore, and of
the victories which he would fain have brought back, and of the
judgments which he saw again impending over Israel, the stern, solitary
ascetic, the prophet of righteousness, whose single arm stayed the
downward course of a nation, passed from his toil and his warfare.

What a different set of associations cluster round the place of
Christ's Ascension--'Bethany,' or, as it is more particularly specified
in the Acts, 'Olivet'! In the very heart of the land, close by and yet
out of sight of the great city, in no wild solitude, but perhaps in
some dimple of the hill, neither shunning nor courting spectators, with
the quiet home where He had rested so often in the little village at
their feet there, and Gethsemane a few furlongs off, in such scenes did
the Christ 'whose delights were with the sons of men,' and His life
lived in closest companionship with His brethren, choose the place
whence He should 'ascend to their Father and His Father.' Nor perhaps
was it without a meaning that the Mount which received the last print
of His ascending footstep was that which a mysterious prophecy
designated as destined to receive the first print of the footstep of
the Lord coming at a future day to end the long warfare with evil.

But more important than the localities is the contrasted manner of the
two ascents. The prophet's end was like the man. It was fitting that he
should be swept up the skies in tempest and fire. The impetuosity of
his nature, and the stormy energy of his career, had already been
symbolised in the mighty and strong wind which rent the rocks, and in
the fire that followed the earthquake; and similarly nothing could be
more appropriate than that sudden rapture in storm and whirlwind,
escorted by the flaming chivalry of heaven.

Nor is it only as appropriate to the character of the prophet and his
work that this tempestuous translation is noteworthy. It also suggests
very plainly that Elijah was lifted to the skies by power acting on him
from without. He did not ascend; he was carried up; the earthly frame
and the human nature had no power to rise. 'No man hath ascended into
heaven.' The two men of whom the Old Testament speaks were alike in
this, that 'God _took_ them.' The tempest and the fiery chariot tell us
how great was the exercise of divine power which bore the gross
mortality thither, and how unfamiliar was the sphere into which it
passed.

How full of the very spirit of Christ's whole life is the contrasted
manner of His Ascension! The silent gentleness, which did not strive
nor cry nor cause His voice to be heard in the streets, marks Him even
in that hour of lofty and transcendent triumph. There is no outward
sign to accompany His slow upward movement through the quiet air. No
blaze of fiery chariots, nor agitation of tempest is needed to bear Him
heavenwards. The outstretched hands drop the dew of His benediction on
the little company, and so He floats upward, His own will and
indwelling power the royal chariot which bears Him, and calmly 'leaves
the world and goes unto the Father.' The slow, continuous movement of
ascent is emphatically made prominent in the brief narratives, both by
the phrase in Luke, 'He was carried up,' which expresses continuous
leisurely motion, and by the picture in the Acts, of the disciples
gazing into heaven 'as He went up,' in which latter word is brought
out, not only the slowness of the movement, but its origin in His own
will and its execution by His own power.

Nor is this absence of any vehicle or external agency destroyed by the
fact that 'a cloud' received Him out of their sight, for its purpose
was not to raise Him heavenward, but to hide Him from the gazers' eyes,
that He might not seem to them to dwindle into distance, but that their
last look and memory might be of His clearly discerned and loving face.
Possibly, too, it may be intended to remind us of the cloud which
guided Israel, the glory which dwelt between the cherubim, the cloud
which overshadowed the Mount of Transfiguration, and to set forth a
symbol of the Divine Presence welcoming to itself, His battle fought,
the Son of His love.

Be that as it may, the manner of our Lord's Ascension by His own
inherent power is brought into boldest relief when contrasted with
Elijah's rapture, and is evidently the fitting expression, as it is the
consequence, of His sole and singular divine nature. It accords with
His own mode of reference to the Ascension, while He was on earth,
which ever represents Him not as _being taken_, but as _going_: 'I
leave the world and go to the Father.' 'I ascend to My Father and your
Father.' The highest hope of the devoutest souls before Him had been,
'Thou wilt afterwards take me to glory.' The highest hope of devout
souls since Him has been, 'We shall be caught up to meet the Lord.' But
this Man ever speaks of Himself as able when He will, by His own power,
to rise where no man hath ascended. His divine nature and pre-existence
shine clearly forth, and as we stand gazing at Him blessing the world
as He rises into the heavens, we know that we are looking on no mere
mysterious elevation of a mortal to the skies, but are beholding the
return of the Incarnate Lord, who willed to tarry among our earthly
tabernacles for a time, to the glory where He was before, 'His own calm
home, His habitation from eternity.'

II. Another striking point of contrast embraces the relation which
these two events respectively bear to the life's work which had
preceded them.

The falling mantle of Elijah has become a symbol known to all the
world, for the transference of unfinished tasks and the appointment of
successors to departed greatness. Elisha asked that he might have a
double portion of his master's spirit, not meaning twice as much as his
master had had, but the eldest son's share of the father's possessions,
the double of the other children's portion. And, though his master had
no power to bestow the gift, and had to reply as one who has nothing
that he has not received, and cannot dispose of the grace that dwells
in him, the prayer was answered, and the feebler nature of Elisha was
fitted for the continuance of the work which Elijah left undone.

The mantle that passed from one to the other was the symbol of office
and authority transferred; the functions were the same, whilst the
holders had changed. The sons of the prophets bow before the new
master; 'the spirit of Elijah doth rest on Elisha.'

So the world goes on. Man after man serves his generation by the will
of God, and is gathered to his fathers; and a new arm grasps the mantle
to smite Jordan, and a new voice speaks from his empty place, and men
recognise the successor, and forget the predecessor.

We turn to Christ's Ascension, and there we meet with nothing analogous
to this transference of office. No mantle falling from His shoulders
lights on any of that group, none are hailed as His successors. What He
has done bears and needs no repetition whilst time shall roll, whilst
eternity shall last. His work is unique: 'the help that is done on
earth, He doeth it all Himself.' His Ascension completed the witness of
heaven, begun at His resurrection, that 'He has offered one sacrifice
for sins, for ever.' He has left no unfinished work which another may
perfect. He has done no work which another may do again for new
generations. He has spoken all truth, and none may add to His words. He
has fulfilled all righteousness, and none may better His pattern. He
has borne all the world's sin, and no time can waste the power of that
sacrifice, nor any man add to its absolute sufficiency. This King of
men wears a crown to which there is no heir. This Priest has a
priesthood which passes to no other. This 'Prophet' does 'live for
ever,' The world sees all other guides and helpers pass away, and every
man's work is caught up by other hands and carried on after he drops
it, and the short memories and shorter gratitudes of men turn to the
rising sun; but one Name remains undimmed by distance, and one work
remains unapproached and unapproachable, and one Man remains whose
office none other can hold, whose bow none but He can bend, whose
mantle none can wear. Christ has ascended up on high and left a
finished work for all men to trust, for no man to continue.

III. Whilst our Lord's Ascension is thus marked as the seal of a work
in which He has no successor, it is also emphatically set forth, by
contrast with Elijah's translation, as the transition to a continuous
energy for and in the world.

Clearly the other narrative derives all its pathos from the thought
that Elijah's work is done. His task is over, and nothing more is to be
hoped for from him. But that same absence from the history of Christ's
Ascension, of any hint of a successor, to which we have referred in the
previous remarks, has an obvious bearing on His present relation to the
world as well as on the completeness of His unique past work.

When Christ ascended up on high, He relinquished nothing of His
activity for us, but only cast it into a new form, which in some sense
is yet higher than that which it took on earth. His work for the world
is in one aspect completed on the Cross, but in another it will never
be completed until all the blessings which that Cross has lodged in the
