worship due to God alone, when the dying martyr outside the city wall
cried and said, 'Lord Jesus! receive my spirit.' Nor is it any
departure from the solemnest obligations laid upon us by the unity of
the divine nature, nor are we bringing idolatrous petitions to another
than the Father, when we draw near to Christ and ask Him to give us
that which He gives as the Father's gift, and to work on us that which
the Father that dwelleth in Him works through Him for us.

Trust yourselves to Christ, and let your desires be stilled, to listen
to His voice in you, and let that voice speak. And then, dear
brethren, we shall be lifted above ourselves, and strength will flow
into us, and we shall be able to say, 'I can do all things, through
the Christ that dwells in me and makes me strong.' And just as the
glad, sunny waters of the incoming tide fill the empty places of some
oozy harbour, where all the ships are lying as if dead, and the mud is
festering in the sunshine, so into the slimy emptiness of our corrupt
hearts there will pour the flashing sunlit wave, the ever fresh rush
of His power; and 'everything will live whithersoever it cometh,' and
we shall be able to say in all humility, and yet in glad recognition
of Christ's faithfulness to this, His transcendent promise, 'I live,
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me,' 'because the life which I live in
the flesh I live by faith of the Son of God.'




LOVE AND OBEDIENCE

'If ye love Me, keep My commandments.'--JOHN xiv, 15.

As we have seen in former sermons, the keyword of the preceding
context is 'Believe!' and that word passes now into 'Love.' The order
here is the order of experience. There is first the believing gaze
upon the Christ as He is revealed--the image of the invisible God.
That kindles love, and prompts to obedience.

There is another very beautiful and subtle link of connection between
these words and the preceding. Our Lord has just been saying,
'Whatsoever ye shall ask in My name, that will I do.' Is the parallel
wholly accidental or fanciful between the Lord who does as the servant
asks and the servant who is to do as the Lord commands? On both sides
there is love delighting to be set in motion by a message from the
other side. On the one part there is love supreme which commands and
delights to be asked, on the other part there is love dependent, which
asks and delights to be commanded; and though the gulf between the two
is great, and the difference between Christ's law and our petitions is
infinite, yet there is an analogy.

I pause on these words, though they are introduced here only as the
basis of the great promise which follows, because they open out into
such wide fields. They contain the all-sufficient law of Christian
conduct. They contain the one motive adequate to bring that law into
realisation. They disclose the very roots of Christian morality, and
part of the secret of Christ's unique power and influence amongst men.
They come with a message of encouragement to all souls despairing of
being able to do that which they would, and of freedom to all men
burdened with a crowd of minute and external regulations. 'If ye love
Me, keep My commandments'--there are three points to be dwelt upon
here--namely, the all-sufficient ideal or guide of life, the
all-powerful motive which Christ brings to bear, and the all-subduing
gaze of faith by which that motive is brought into action.

I. We have here the all-sufficient ideal or guide for life.

Jesus Christ is not speaking merely to that little handful of men in
the upper chamber, but to all generations and to all lands, to the end
of time and round the world. The authoritative tone which He assumes
here is very noteworthy. He speaks as Jehovah spoke from Sinai, and
quotes the very words of the old law when He speaks of 'keeping My
commandments.' There are distinctly involved in this quite incidental
utterance of Christ's two startling things--one the assumption of His
right to impose His will upon every human being, and the other His
assumption that His will contains the all-sufficient directory for
human conduct.

What, then, are His commandments? Those which He spoke are plain and
simple; and people who wish to pick holes in the greatness of Christ's
work in the world tell us that you can match almost all His precepts
up and down amongst moralists and philosophers, and they crow very
loud if, scratching amongst Rabbinical dust-heaps, they find something
that looks like anything that He once said. Be it so! What does that
matter? Christ's 'commandments' are Christ Himself. This is the
originality and uniqueness of Christ as a moral Teacher, that He says,
not 'Do this, that, and the other thing,' but 'Copy Me.' 'Take My yoke
upon you and learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.' His
commandments are Himself; and the sum of them all is this--a character
perfectly self-oblivious, and wholly penetrated and saturated with
joyful, filial submission to the Father, and uttermost and entire
giving Himself away to His brethren. That is Christ's commandment
which He bids us keep, and His law is to be found in His life.

And then, if that be so, what a change passes on the aspect of law,
when we take Christ as being our living embodiment of it! Everything
that was hard, repellent, far-off, cold, vanishes. We have no longer
'tables of stone,' but 'fleshy tables of the heart'; and the Law
stands before us, a Being to be loved, to be clung to, to be trusted,
and whom it is blessedness to know and perfection to resemble. The
rails upon which the train travels may be rigid, but they mean safety,
and they carry men smoothly into otherwise inaccessible lands. So the
life of Jesus Christ brought to us is the firm and plain track along
which we are to travel; and all that was difficult and hard in the
cold thought of _duty_ becomes changed into the attraction of a living
Pattern and Example. This living and breathing and loving commandment
is all-sufficient for every detail and complexity of human life. It is
so by the confession of believers and of unbelievers, by the joyful
confession of the one, and by the frank acknowledgment of many of the
others. Listen to one of them. 'Whatever else may be taken away from
us by rational criticism, Christ is still left, a unique Figure, not
more unlike all His predecessors than all His followers.... Religion
cannot be said to have made a bad choice in selecting this Man as the
ideal Representative and Guide of humanity; nor even now would it be
easy, even for an unbeliever, to find a better translation of the rule
of virtue from the abstract into the concrete than to endeavour so to
live that Christ would approve our life.'

It is enough for conduct, it is enough for character, it is enough in
all perplexities of conflicting duties, that we listen to and obey the
voice that says, 'Keep My commandments.'

II. Now note, secondly, the all-powerful motive.

Probably my text is best understood as the Revised Version understands
it, which reads, 'If ye love Me, ye will keep My commandments,' making
it an assurance and not an injunction. Christ speaks with the calm
confidence that love to Him will have power enough to sway the life.
His utterance here is not the addition of another commandment to the
list, but rather the pointing out of how they may all be kept.

The principle that underlies these words, then, is this, that love is
the foundation of obedience, and obedience is the sure outcome and
result of love. That is true in regard to those lower forms of love,
which may teach us something of the operation of the higher. We all
know that love which is real, and not simply passion and selfishness
with a mask on, delights most chiefly in knowing and conforming to the
will of the beloved, and that there is nothing sweeter than to be
commanded by the dear voice and to obey for dear love's sake. And you
have only to take that which is the experience of every true heart, in
a thousand sweet ways in daily life, and to lift it into the higher
region, and to transfer it to the bond that unites us with Jesus
Christ, to see that He has invoked no illusory, but an omnipotent
power when He has rested the whole force of His transforming and
sanctifying energy upon this one principle, 'If ye love Me, the
Lawgiver, ye will keep the commandments of My Law.'

That is exactly what distinguishes and lifts the morality of the
Gospel above all other systems. The worst man in the world knows a
great deal more of his duty than the best man does. It is not for want
of knowledge that men go to the devil, but it is for want of power or
will to live their knowledge. And what morality fails to do, with its
clearest utterances of human duty, Christ comes and does. The one law
is like the useless proclamations posted up in some rebellious
district, where there is no army to back them, and the king's
authority from whom they come is flouted. The other law gets itself
obeyed. Such is the difference between the powerless morality of the
world and the commandment of Jesus Christ. Here is the road plain and
straight. What matters that, if there is no force to draw the cart
along it? There might as well be no road at all. Here stand all your
looms, polished and in perfect order, but there is no steam in the
boilers; and so there is no motion, and nothing is woven. What we want
is not law, but power, and what the Gospel gives us, and stands alone
in giving us, is not merely the knowledge of the will of God, and the
clear revelation of what we ought to be, but the power to become it.

Love does that, and love alone. That strong force brought into action
in our hearts will drive out from thence all rivals, all false and low
things. The true way to cleanse the Augean stables, as the old myth
has it, was to turn the river into them. It would have been endless
work to wheel out the filth in wheelbarrows loaded by spades: turn the
stream in, and it will sweep away all the foulness. When the Ark comes
into the Temple, Dagon lies, a mutilated stump, upon the threshold.
When Christ comes into my heart, then all the obscene and
twilight-loving shapes that lurked there, and defiled it, will vanish
like ghosts at cock-crowing before His calm and pure Presence. He, and
He alone, entering my heart by the portals of my love, will coerce my
evil and stimulate my good. And if I love Him, I shall keep His
commandments.

Now, brethren, here is a plain test and a double-barrelled one, which
tries both our love and our obedience with a sharp touchstone. 'If ye
love Me, ye will keep My commandments.' That implies, first, that
there is no love worth calling so which does not keep the commandment.
All the emotional and the mystic, and the so-called higher parts of
Christian experience, have to be content to submit to this plain
test--do they help us to live as Christ would have us, and that
because He would have us? Love to Him that does not keep His
commandments is either spurious or dangerously feeble. The true sign
of its presence in the heart and the noblest of its operations is not
to be found in high-pitched expressions of fervid emotion, nor even in
the sacred joys of solitary communion, but in its making us, while in
the rough struggle of daily life, and surrounded by trivial tasks,
live near Him, and by Him, and for Him, and like Him. If I live so, I
love Him; if not, not. Not that I mean to say that in regard to each
individual action of a Christian man's life there must be the
conscious presence of reference to the supreme love, but that each
individual action of the life ought to come from a character of which
that reference to the supreme love is the very formative principle and
foundation. The colouring matter put in at the fountain will dye every
drop of the stream; and they whose inmost hearts are tinged and
tinctured with the sweet love of Jesus Christ, from their hearts will
go forth issues of life all coloured and moulded thereby. Test your
Christian love by your practical obedience.

And, on the other hand, there is no obedience worth calling so which
is not the child of love; and all the multitude of right things which
Christians do without that motive are made short work of by that
consideration. Obedience which is formal, mechanical, matter-of-course,
without the presence in it of a loving submission of the will;
obedience which is reluctant, calculated, forced upon us by dread,
imitated from others--all that is nothing; and Jesus Christ does not
count it as obedience at all. This is a sieve with very small meshes,
and there will be a great deal of rubbish left in it after the
shaking. 'If ye love Me, keep My commandments.' The 'keeping of My
commandments' which has not 'love to Me' underlying it is no keeping
at all.

III. And so, lastly, notice the all-subduing gaze.

That is not included in my text, but it is necessary in order to
complete the view of the forces to which Jesus Christ here entrusts
the hallowing of life and the sanctifying of our nature; and we are
led to refer to it by what I have already pointed out; the connection
between the 'love' of my text and the 'believe' of the preceding
verses. I can fancy a man saying, 'Keep His commandments? Woe is me!
How am I to keep?' The answer is 'Love.' And I can fancy him saying
'Love?' Yes! 'And how am I to love? I cannot get up love at the word
of command, or by any voluntary effort.' And the answer comes again,
'Believe!' Trust Christ, and you will love Him. Love Him and you will
do His will. And then the question comes again, 'Believe what?' And
the answer comes, 'Believe that He is the Son of God who died for
you.'

Nothing else will kindle a man's love than the faithful contemplation
and grasp of Christ in that character and aspect. Only the redeeming
Christ affords a reasonable ground for our love to Him. Here is a dead
man, dead for nineteen centuries, expecting you and me to have towards
Him a vivid personal affection which will influence our conduct and
our character. What right has He to expect that? There is only one
reasonable ground upon which I may be called to love Jesus Christ, and
that is that He died for me, and such a love towards such a Christ is
the only thing which will wield power sufficient to guide, to coerce,
to restrain, to constrain, and to sustain my weak, wayward,
rebellious, and sluggish will. All other emotions of so-called
admiration and worship and reverence and affection for Jesus Christ
are apt to be tepid; but this one has power and warmth in it.

Here is a unique fact in the history of the world, that not only did
He make this astounding claim upon all subsequent generations; but
that all subsequent generations have responded to it, and that to-day
there are millions of men who love Jesus Christ with a love warm,
personal, deep, powerful--the spring of all their goodness and the
Lord of their lives. Why do they? For one reason only. Because they
believe that He died for them individually, and that He lives an
ascended yet ever-present Helper and Lover of their souls.

My brethren, that conviction, and that conviction only, as I venture
to affirm, has power to send a glow of love into the heart which will
move all the limbs in swift and happy obedience. That conviction, and
that conviction alone, will melt the thick-ribbed ice of our spirits
and will make it flow down in sweet waters. The love that has looked
upon the Cross will be the fulfilling of the law of Him that speaks
from the Throne. When our faith has grasped Him, as enduring that
cross for us, then our love will be awakened to hear and to do His
commandments.

'We love Him because He first loved us,' and such love will flower and
fruit in obedience. I shall keep His commandments when I love Him. I
shall love Him with a love that makes my will plastic and my life a
glad service, when by faith I grasp Him as the Incarnate Lord, 'who
loved me and gave Himself for me.'




THE COMFORTER GIVEN

'And I will pray the Father, and He shall give you another Comforter,
that He may abide with you for ever; Even the Spirit of Truth; whom
the world cannot receive, because it seeth Him not, neither knoweth
Him: but ye know Him; for He dwelleth with you, and shall be in
you.'--JOHN xiv. 16,17.

The 'and' at the beginning of these words shows us that they are
continuous with and the consequence of what precedes. 'If ye love Me,
_ye_ will _keep_ My commandments, and _I_ will _pray_ ... and _He_
will _send_.' Such is the series; but we must also remember that, as
we have seen in previous sermons, the obedience spoken of in the
clause before my text is itself treated as a consequence of some
preceding steps. The ladder that is fixed upon earth and has its
summit in heaven has for its rungs, first and lowest, 'believe';
second, 'love'; third, 'obey.' And thus the context carries us from
the very basis of the Christian life up into its highest reward, even
the larger gift to an obedient spirit of that Great Spirit, who is the
Comforter and the Teacher.

And there is another very striking link of connection between these
words and the preceding. There are, if I may so say, two telephones
across the abyss that separates the ascended Christ and us. One of
them is contained in His words, 'If ye ask anything in My name I will
do it'; the other is contained in these words, 'If ye keep My
commandments I will ask.' Love on this side of the great cleft sets
love on the other side of it in motion in a twofold fashion. If we
ask, He does; if we do, He asks. His action is the answer to our
prayers, and His prayers are the answer to our obedient action. So we
have here these points--the praying Christ and the giving Father; the
abiding Gift; the blind world and the recipient disciples.

I. Note, then, first, the praying Christ and the giving Father.

'I will ask and He will give' seems a strange drop from the lofty
claims with which we have become familiar in the earlier verses of
this chapter. 'Believe in God, believe also in Me'; 'He that hath seen
Me hath seen the Father'; 'If ye shall ask anything in My name I will
do it'; 'Keep My commandments.' All these distinctly express, or
necessarily imply, divine nature, prerogatives, and authority. But
here the voice that spake the perfect revelation of God, and gave
utterance authoritatively to the perfect law of life, softens and
lowers its tones in petition; and Jesus Christ joins the rank of the
suppliants. Now common sense tells us that apparently diverse views
lying so close together in one continuous stream of speech cannot have
seemed to the utterer of them to be contradictory; and I venture to
affirm that there is no explanation which does justice to these two
sides of Christ's consciousness--the one all divine and authoritative
and lofty, and the other all lowly and identifying Himself with
petitioners and suppliants everywhere--except the old-fashioned and
to-day discredited belief that He is 'God manifest in the flesh,' who
prays in His Manhood and hears prayer in His Divinity. The bare
humanistic view which emphasises such utterances as these of my text
does not, for the life of it, know what to do with the other ones, and
cannot manage to unite these two images into a stereoscopic solid.
That is reserved for the faith which believes in the Manhood and in
the Deity of our Lord and Saviour.

His intercession is the great hope of the Christian heart. His
intercession is the great activity of His present exalted and glorious
state. His intercession is no mere verbal utterance, nor the
representation to the Father of an alien or a diverse will, but His
intercession, mysterious as it is, and unfathomable to our poor, short
lines and light plummets, must mean this at all events--His continual
activity in presenting before the divine Father, as the motive and
condition of His petition being granted, His own great work upon the
Cross. The High Priest passes within the veil, bearing in His hand the
offering which He has made, and by reason of that offering, and of His
powerful presence before the mercy-seat, all the spiritual gifts which
redeem and regenerate and sanctify humanity are for ever coming forth.
'I will pray, and He will give,' is but one way of saying, 'Seeing
then, that we have a great High Priest over the House of God who is
entered within the veil, let us draw near.'

But I would have you notice how, as is always the case in all
utterances of Jesus Christ which express the lowest humiliation and
completest identification of Himself with humanity, there is ever
present some touch of obscured glory, some all but suppressed flash of
brightness which will not be wholly concealed. Note two things in this
great utterance; one, Christ's quiet assumption that all through the
ages, and today, nineteen centuries after He died, He knows, at the
moment of their being done, His servants' deeds. 'Keep my
commandments, and, knowing that you keep them, I will then and there
pray for you.' He claims in the lowly words an altogether
supernatural, abnormal, divine cognisance of all the acts of men down
the ages and across the gulf between earth and heaven.

And the other signature of divinity stamped on the prayer of Christ is
His certitude of the answer. 'I will ask and He will give': He puts,
as it were, the Father's act in pledge to us, and assures us, in a
tone of certainty, which is not merely the assurance of faith, but the
certitude of One who is 'one with the Father,' that His prayer brings
ever its answer. 'Father! I will that they whom Thou hast given Me be
with Me.' How strange! How far beyond the warrantable language of man!
And how impossible for a fisherman of Bethsaida to imagine, if he had
not heard, that strange blending of submission and of authority which
speaks in such words!

Then, remember what I have already said, that, according to the
teaching of this verse, taken in connection with its context, that
which put in motion Christ's Intercessory activity, as represented in
my text, is the obedience of a Christian man. If you obey He will
pray, and the Father will send. So the reward of imperfect obedience
is the larger measure given to us of that divine Spirit by whose
indwelling obedience becomes possible, and self-surrender a joy and a
power. And that is not merely because of the natural operation by
which any kind of conduct tends to repeat itself in more complete
measure, nor is it merely a case of 'to him that hath shall be given';
as a man's arm is strengthened by exercise, and any faculty becomes
more assured, and swift, and at the command of its owner, by use. But
there is a distinct supernatural impartation to every obedient heart
of divine gifts which come straight through Jesus Christ to it. He
Himself, in this immediate context, says, 'If I depart I will send Him
unto you,' and the true conception is that in that Spirit's gift,
which is a reality waiting as its crown and reward upon our poor
stained obedience, the whole Godhead is present; the Father the
Source, the Son the Channel, the Spirit the Gift.

II. And so, secondly, note what our text tells us of that abiding
gift.

'He will send another Comforter,' 'that He may abide with you for
ever, even the Spirit of Truth.' I suppose I may take it for granted
that most of my audience know all that need be said as to the meaning
of this word 'Comforter.' In our present modern English it has a very
much narrower range of meaning than its etymology would give it, and
than probably it had when it was first used in an English translation.
'Comforter' means a great deal more than 'consoler,' though we have
narrowed it to that signification almost exclusively. It means not
only one who administers sweet whispers of consolation in sorrow, but
one who, in any circumstances, by his presence makes strong. And the
original Greek word, of which it is the translation here, has a
precisely analogous meaning; its original signification being that of
'one who is called to the aid of another,' primarily as an advocate in
a court of law, but more widely as a helper in any form whatsoever.
And that is the idea which is to be attached to the word here:--a
Comforter who makes strong by His presence; the Paraclete, who is our
Advocate, Helper, Guide, and Instructor. Need I dwell upon the great
thoughts that spring from that metaphor; how we have to look for a
Person, and not merely a vague influence; a divine Person who will be
by our sides on condition of our faith, love, and obedience, to be our
Strength in all weakness, our Peace in all trouble, our Wisdom in all
darkness, our Guide in every perplexity, our Comforter and Cherisher,
our Righteousness when sin is strong, the Victor over our temptations,
and the Companion and Sweetener of our solitude? The metaphors with
which Scripture represents this great personal Influence are full of
instruction and beauty. He comes as 'the Fire,' which melts, which
warms, which cleanses, which quickens. He comes as the 'rushing,
mighty Wind,' which bears health upon its wings, and sometimes
breathes softly as an infant's breath, and sometimes sweeps with
irresistible power. He comes as the 'Oil,' gently flowing,
lubricating, making every joint supple, nourishing. He comes as the
'Water of Life,' refreshing, vitalising, quickening all growth. He
comes fluttering down as the Dove of God, the bird of peace that will
brood upon our hearts. The predicates which Scripture attaches to that
great Name are equally various, and are full of teaching as to the
manner in which He is the Comforter and the Advocate. He is the Spirit
of Holiness, the Spirit of Truth, the Spirit of Wisdom, the Spirit of
Power, the Spirit of Love, the Spirit of a sound Mind, the Spirit of
Sonship, the Spirit of Supplication, and of many great things besides.
And this sweet, strong, all-sufficient Person is offered to each of
us, and waits to enter our hearts.

And, says Christ, this Strengthener and Advocate is to replace Me and
to carry on My work. 'He will send _another_ Comforter.' Who was the
other but the Master who was speaking? So all that that handful of men
had found of sweetness and shelter and assured guidance, and stay for
their weakness, and enlightenment for their darkness, and
companionship for their solitude, and a breast on which to rest their
heads, and love in which to bathe their hearts, all _these_ this
divine Spirit will bring to each of us if we will.

And further, our Lord tells us that this strong continuer of His
presence will be a permanent Companion. 'He will abide with you for
ever.' He was comforting the disciples who were trembling at the
thought of His departure, and knowing that all the sweetness of these
three short years had come to an end; and He says to them, and through
them to all the ages to the end of time: 'Here is the abiding Guest,
that nothing but your own sin will ever cast out from your hearts.'

And Christ tells us how this great Spirit will do His work. He is the
'Spirit of Truth,' not as if He brought new truth. To suppose that He
does so, opens the door to all manner of fanaticism, but the truth,
the revelation of which is all summed and finished in the person and
work of Jesus Christ, is the weapon by which the divine Spirit works
all His conquests, the staff on which He makes us lean and be strong.
He is the Spirit by whom the truth passes into our personal
possession, by no mere imperfect form of outward teaching which is
always confused and insufficient, but by the inward teaching that
deals with our hearts and our spirits.

But Christ speaks, too, of the blind world. There is a tone of deep
sadness in His words. The thought of the immense multitude of men who
were incapacitated to receive this Strengthener steals across and
casts a momentary shadow upon even the brightness and greatness of His
promise. 'The world cannot receive because it seeth Him not, neither
knoweth Him.' The 'world' is the mass of man, considered as godless
and separate from Him, and there is a bit of the world in us all; but
there are men who are wholly under its influence and dominion. And
these men, says Christ, are perfectly incapable of receiving the
teaching of this divine Comforter. Of course there are other
operations of that Great Spirit of which we shall have to hear as we
go on further in this context, in which His work 'convicts the world
of sin and of righteousness and of judgment.' But what our Lord is
speaking of here is the work of that Spirit who comes in response to
His prayer which rises in consequence of our obedience, and who,
coming, brings with Him strength and purity and peace and wisdom; and
that aspect of His operations a heart that is all full and seething
with the world is unfit to receive. It cannot see Him. Embruted
natures are altogether incapacitated for high thoughts, for the
perception of natural beauty, for the appreciation of art; and worldly
men, by the very same law, are incapable of receiving this divine
Spirit. A savage stares at the sunshine and sees nothing but a glare.
And worldly men--that is to say, men whose tastes, inclinations,
desires, hopes, purposes, strivings, are all bound by this visible
diurnal round--lack the organ that enables them to see that divine
Spirit moving round about them. Whether you have put your eyes out by
fleshly lusts, or, as many men in this generation have done, by
intellectual self-sufficiency and conceit, if the world, in its
grosser or in its most refined forms, is your master, you are stone
blind to all the best realities of the universe, and you cannot see
the things that are. If you look out upon the history of the Church,
or upon the present condition of Christendom, and say, 'I see no
divine Spirit working there'; well, then, the only thing that is to be
said to you is, 'Go to an oculist; your sight is bad. Perhaps there is
solid land, as some of us see it, where you see only mist.' This
generation needs the preaching of a supernatural power at work beside
us, and among us, and until we come to believe _that_, we do not
understand the fullness of Christ's gift.

III. Then, lastly, note the recipient disciples.

Observe that the order of clauses is reversed in the last part of the
text. The world cannot receive, because it does not know. The disciple
knows, because he receives. Possession and knowledge reciprocally
interchange places, and may be regarded as cause and effect of one
another. That is to say, at bottom they are one and the same thing.
Knowledge is possession, and possession is the only knowledge. These
disciples knew Christ in a fashion. He had just been telling them that
they did not know Him; but so far as they did dimly grasp Him, they
saw the Spirit--in another form, indeed, than they would hereafter
see--but still truly, though imperfectly. Beholding the Spirit, though
'through a glass darkly,' and cherishing their partial possession of
Him, they will come to more, and steadfastly increase from the
morning's twilight to the midday glory. So He says: 'He dwelleth with
you' now, and 'He shall be _in_ you' hereafter. There is a better form
of possession opening before them, which came at Pentecost, and has
lasted ever since. From thenceforward we have a Spirit that not only
stands by our sides and holds fellowship with us (for the two 'withs'
of our text are two different words, expressing respectively proximity
and communion), but who actually dwells in the central depths of our
natures, and whom we thus possess more perfectly and blessedly than is
possible to even the closest outward proximity, and the sweetest
outward fellowship.

That possession of an abiding and indwelling Spirit is the gift of
Christ to every Christian soul, and is to be found by us all upon the
path so plainly marked out in our text and its connections--'believe,'
'love,' 'obey.' Then the Dove of God will flutter down upon our heads
and nestle in our hearts, and brooding over the solemn and solitary
sea of our chaotic spirits, will bring up from it a new world
glistening in fresh order and beauty, and 'very good' in its Maker's
eyes.




THE ABSENT PRESENT CHRIST

'I will not leave you comfortless; I will come to you. Yet a little
while, and the world seeth Me no more; but ye see Me: because I live,
ye shall live also.'--JOHN xiv. 18,19.

The sweet and gracious comfortings with which Christ had been soothing
the disciples' fears went very deep, but hitherto they had not gone
deep enough. It was much that they should know the purpose of His
going, whither He went, and that they had an interest in His
departure. It was much that they should have before them the prospect
of reunion; much that they should know that all through His absence He
would be working in them, and that they should be assured that,
absent, He would send them a great gift. But reunion, influence from
afar, and gifts from the other side of the gulf were not all that
their hearts needed. And so here our Lord gives yet more, in the
paradoxes that, absent He will be present, unseen visible, and dying
will be for them for ever, living and life-giving. These great
thoughts go to the centre of their needs and of ours; and on them I
now touch briefly.

There are then in the words I have read, though they be but a fragment
of a closely-linked-together context, these three great thoughts: the
absent Christ the present Christ; the unseen Christ the seen Christ;
the Christ who dies the living and life-giving Christ. Let us look at
these as they stand.

I. First, then, the absent Christ is the present Christ.

'I will not leave you comfortless,' or, as the Revised Version has it,
'desolate--I come to you.' Now, most of us know, I suppose, that the
literal meaning of the word rendered 'comfortless,' or 'desolate,' is
'_orphans_.' But that is rather an unusual form in which to represent
the relation between our Lord and His disciples, and so, possibly, our
versions are accurate in giving the general idea of desolation rather
than the specific idea conveyed directly by the word. But still it is
to be remembered that this whole conversation begins with 'Little
children'; and there seems to be no strong reason for suppressing the
literal meaning of the word, if only it be remembered that it is
employed not so much to define Christ's relation to his brethren as to
describe the comfortless and helpless condition of that little group
when left by Him. They would be like fatherless and motherless
children in a cold world. And what is to hinder that? One thing only.
'I come to you.' 'Then, and only then, will you cease to be desolate
and orphans. My presence will change everything and turn winter into
glorious summer.'

Now, what is this 'coming'? It is to be observed that our Lord says,
not 'I will,' as a future, but 'I come,' or 'I am coming,' as an
immediately impending, and, we may almost say, present, thing. There
can be no reference in the word to that final coming to judgment which
lies so far ahead; because, if there were, then there would follow
from the text, that, until that period, all that love Him here upon
earth are to wander about as orphans, desolate and forsaken; and that
certainly can never be. So that we have to recognise here the promise
of a coming which is contemporaneous with His absence, and which is,
in fact, but the reverse side of His bodily absence.

It is true about Him that He 'departs from' His people in bodily form
'for a season, that they may receive Him' in a better form 'for ever.'
This, then, is the heart and centre of the consolation here, that
howsoever the external presence may be withdrawn, and the 'foolish
senses' may have to speak of an absent Christ, we may rejoice in the
certainty that He is with all those that love Him, and all the more
with them because of the very withdrawal of the earthly manifestation
which has served its purpose, and now is laid aside as an impediment
rather than as a help to the full communion. We confound _bodily_ with
_real_. The bodily presence is at an end; the real presence lasts for
ever.

I do not need to insist, I suppose, upon the manifest implication of
absolute divinity which lies in such words as these. 'I come.' 'Being
absent, I am present in all generations. I am present with every
single heart.' That is equivalent to the Omnipresence of deity; that
is equivalent to or implies the undying existence of the divine
nature, and He that says, when He is leaving earth and withdrawing the
sweetness of His visible form from the eyes of men, 'I come,' in the
very act of going, 'and I am with you always, with all of you to the
end of the ages,' can be no less than God, manifest in the flesh for a
time, and present in the Spirit with His children for ever.

I cannot but think that the average Christian life of this day wofully
fails in the simple, conscious realisation of this great truth, and
that we are all far too little living in the calm, happy,
strengthening assurance that we are never alone, but have Jesus Christ
with each of us more closely, more truly, in a more available fashion,
and with more omnipotence of influence, than they had who were nearest
Him during the days that He lived upon earth.

Oh, brethren! if we really believed, not as an article of our creed
which has become so familiar to us that it produces little impression
upon us, but as a vital and ever-present conviction of our souls, that
with us there was ever the real presence of the real Christ, how all
burdens and cares would be lightened, how all perplexities would begin
to smooth themselves out and be straightened, how all the force would
be sucked out of temptations, and how sorrows and joys and all things
would be changed in their aspect by that one conviction intensely
realised and constantly with us! A present Christ is the Strength, the
Righteousness, the Peace, the Joy, and as we shall see, in the most
literal sense, the Life of every Christian soul.

Then, note, further, that this coming of our Lord is identified with
that of His divine Spirit. He has been speaking of sending that 'other
Comforter,' but though He be Another, He is yet so indissolubly united
with Him who sends as that the coming of the Spirit is the coming of
Jesus. He is no gift wafted to us as from the other side of a gulf,
but by reason of the unity of the Godhead and the divinity of the sent
Spirit, Jesus Christ and the Spirit whom He sends are inseparable
though separate, and so indissolubly united that where the Spirit is,
there is Christ, and where Christ is, there is the Spirit. These are
amongst the deep things which the disciples were 'not able to carry'
at that stage of their development, and which waited for a further
explanation. Enough for them and enough for us, to know that we have
Christ in the Spirit and the Spirit in Christ; and to remember 'that
if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His.'

We stand here on the margin of a shoreless and fathomless sea; and for
my part I venture to think that the men who talk about the
incredibilities and the contradictions of the orthodox faith would
show themselves a little wiser if they were more conscious of the
limitation of human faculty, and remembered that to pronounce upon
contradictions in the doctrine of the divine Nature implies that the
pronouncer stands above and goes round about the whole of that nature.
So, for my part, abjuring omniscience and the comprehension of Deity,
I accept the statement that the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit
come together and dwell in the heart.

Then, note, further, that this present Christ is the only Remedy for
the orphanhood of the world. The words had a tender and pathetic
reference to that little, bewildered group of followers, deprived of
their Guide, their Teacher, and their Companion. He who had been as
eyes to their weak vision, and Counsellor and Inspirer and everything
for three blessed years, was going away to leave them unsheltered to
the storm, and we can understand how forlorn and terrified they were,
when they looked forward to fronting the things that must come to
them, without His presence. Therefore He cheers them with the
assurance that they will not be left without Him, but that, present
still, just because He is absent, He will be all that He ever had been
to them.

And the promise was fulfilled. How did that dis-spirited group of
cowardly men ever pluck up courage to hold together at all after the
Crucifixion? Why was it that they did not follow the example of John's
disciples, and dissolve and disappear; and say, 'The game is up. It is
no use holding together any longer'? The process of separation began
on the very day of the Crucifixion. Only one thing could have stopped
it, and that is the Resurrection and the presence with His Church of
the risen Christ in His power and in all the fullness of His gifts. If
it had not been that He came to them, they would have disappeared, and
Christianity would have been one more of the abortive sects forgotten
in Judaism. But, as it is, the whole of the New Testament after
Pentecost is aflame with the consciousness of a present Christ,
working amongst His people. And although it be true that, in one
aspect, we are absent from the Lord when we are present with the body,
in another aspect, and an infinitely higher one, it is true that the
strength of the Christian life of Apostles and martyrs was this, the
assurance that Christ Himself--no mere rhetorical metaphor for His
influence or His example, or His memory lingering in their
imaginations, but the veritable Christ Himself--was present with them,
to strengthen and to bless.

That same conviction you and I must have, if the world is not to be a
desert and a dreary place for us. In a very profound sense it is true
that if you take away Jesus Christ, the elder Brother, who alone
reveals to men the Father, we are all orphans, fatherless children,
who look up into an empty heaven and see nothing there. It is only
Christ who reveals to us the Father and makes our happy hearts feel
that we are of His children. And in the wider sense of the word
'orphans,' is not life a desolation without Him? Hollow joys, fleeting
blessednesses, roses whose thorns last long after the petals have
dropped, real sorrows, shows and shams, bitternesses and
disappointments--are not these our life, in so far as Christ has been
driven out of it? Oh! there is only one thing that saves us from being
as desolate, fatherless children, groping in the dark for the lost
Father's hand, and dying for want of it, and that is that the Christ
Himself shall come to us and be with us.

II. The unseen Christ is a seen Christ.

It is clear that the period referred to in the second clause of our
text is the same as that referred to in the first, that 'yet a little
while' covers the whole space up to His Ascension; and that if there
be any reference at all to the forty days of His earthly life, during
which literally, the work 'saw Him no more,' but the Apostles 'saw
Him,' that reference is only secondary. These transitory appearances
are not of sufficient moment or duration to bear the weight of so
great a promise as this. The vision, which is the consequence of the
coming, has the same extension in time as the coming--that is to say,
it is continuous and permanent. We must read here the great promise of
a perpetual vision of the present Christ.

It is clear, too, that the word 'see' is employed in these two clauses
in two different senses. In the former it refers only to bodily sight,
in the latter to spiritual perception. For a few short hours still,
the ungodly mass of men were to have that outward vision which might
have been so much to them, but which they had used so badly that 'they
seeing saw not.' It was to cease, and they who loved Him would not
miss it when it did; but the withdrawal which hid Him from sense and
sense-bound souls would reveal Him more clearly to His friends. They,
too, had but dimly seen Him while He stood by them; they would gaze on
Him with truer insight when He was present though absent.

So this is what every Christian life may and should be--the continual
sight of a continually-present Christ. It is His part to come. It is
ours to see, to be conscious of Him who does come.

Faith is the sight of the soul, and it is far better than the sight of
the senses. It is more direct. My eye does not touch what I look at.
Gulfs of millions of miles may lie between me and it. But my faith is
not only eye, but hand, and not only beholds, but grasps, and comes
into contact with that to which it is directed. It is far more clear.
Sense may deceive; faith, built upon His Word, cannot deceive. Its
