tree that is in Paradise! Yet this land, glorious with the Holy
Tree, radiant with the Hall of Great Teaching that shineth with the
Seven Jewels, where innumerable souls hastening from all the ends of
the Earth shall be born, is but the temporal Paradise.

34. In awful reverence seek refuge in the purity of Him that
welcometh. For by His Divine Promise was this glorious land, great
beyond human measurement, made to be.

35. Seek refuge in the wisdom inconceivable. For the perfection of
His Virtue--that Virtue availing for all the world, and the perfect
way by which He willeth that man shall take refuge in Him, are past
all human speech or thought.

36. Take refuge in the wisdom that is most truly infinite. For He is
faithful, having promised in His Divine Might, and on his perfect
clear promise that cannot be shaken is the merciful way of salvation
builded.


OF PARADISE

37. Seek refuge in the heavenly harmony.

For the jewel groves and gem trees of Paradise give forth a sweet
and most excellent melody in pure and ordered unison.

38. Seek refuge in the Divine Promise, the Treasury of Merit,

For the seven jewel trees are fragrant in Paradise where the
flowers, the fruits, the branches and the leaves thereof

Cast back their radiance the one to the other.

39. Bring homage to the perfect Righteousness.

As the pure wind blows over the trees glorious with jewels,

It draweth from them a noble music with five-fold strains of
harmony.

40. In all the world is no place hidden from the glory shed by
hundreds of myriad rays from the heart of every flower of Paradise.

41. Like unto a golden mountain reflecting the myriad rays of these
heavenly blossoms, so is the form of the Infinite One.

42. From His Sacred Body, as from a well-spring, floweth this light
over the Ten Regions of the world.

By His Sacred teaching He leadeth all having life into the way of
light.

43. Seek refuge in the Treasury of Righteousness.

For in Paradise is that holy lake, with its waters of eightfold
Virtue, all-glorious with the seven jewels. And all this is the
inconceivable handiwork of Purity.

44. Seek refuge in the All-Honoured.

For when sorrow and sighing are fled away, the Holy Land shall
rejoice with joy and singing. Therefore is it called Paradise.

45. The Buddhas of the Three Ages and the Ten Regions, they in whom
the Dual Wisdom is perfect and their illumination entire, lead all
the worlds marvellously into the way of Salvation, the Truth being
their Vehicle.

46. He that seeketh refuge in the Kingdom of the Infinite One is a
citizen of the Kingdom of every Buddha.

Let him that is set free, with single heart give praises unto One
Buddha, for in so doing he praiseth all.

47. The faithful believer at that moment when he rejoiceth in the
sound of the name of the Infinite One hath revealed unto his very
eyes the Buddha of Light.

48. Let him that hath faith praise the Virtue of the Divine Wisdom.

Let him strive to declare it unto all men that he may offer his
thankfulness for the grace of the Buddha.


CONCERNING THE GREAT SUTRA

49. The Venerable Ananda, rising from his seat, and looking upwards
to the World-Honoured Gautama Buddha, his eyes being opened,
marvelled greatly, seeing the glory of his Lord so transfigured.

50. The Venerable Ananda asked the Cause of that glory, for the
Lord, shining in the Light that was hitherto unseen of the world,
taught openly, for the first time, that Truth for which He came into
the world.

51. In the meditation of the Great Calm the Buddha whose countenance
is glorious, commendeth the most excellent wisdom of Ananda for that
he asked the way of knowledge, desiring to be instructed.

52. That Buddha that was made flesh in India was in this world
manifested that he might preach the Divine Promise of Him who is
Infinite.

Hard is it to see the hidden blossom of the myriad-century-blooming
Lotus, so hard also is it for a man's understanding to receive the
message of that Blessed One.

53. Ten Kalpas of Ages have rolled away since He who is Infinite
attained unto the Wisdom, yet before the myriads of the Kalpas He
_was_.

54. He who is of the Light Ineffable, Holiest Refuge of men,
ordaining that His saving grace should be made manifest, duly
considered all the worlds of the Ten Regions, under the guidance of
the holy Buddha of Loka-is-Vara-Raja.

55. Purity, Rejoicing, Wisdom, these three are the Supernal Essence
of the light of the Infinite One that enlighteneth all things,
communicating good to all the worlds of the Ten Regions.

56. Teaching all that have life in the Ten Regions, that they might,
with sincerity, faith, and hope, be born again into Paradise, He set
forth that promise infinite and divine--the true seed of birth
within the Kingdom of Truth.

57. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith is in unity with them that
return no more to birth and death, for having thus attained, they
pass onward into Nirvana, their lives being ended.

58. In His great compassion the Blessed One accomplished His
infinite wisdom in His divine promise, ordaining that womanhood
shall be raised into manhood.

59. Instructing all that have life in the Ten Regions how they
should through sincerity, effort, and hope be born into the Temporal
Paradise, He faithfully promiseth to manifest Himself unto the eyes
of the dying, opening wide the gate of all righteousness before
them.

60. By the divine promise to the dying of His consoling presence our
Lord instructeth men that they shall make to grow all righteousness
revealed in the Sutra of Meditation upon the Buddha of Infinite
Life.

61. All righteous deeds done of men in true obedience to the holy
Doctrine of Sincerity and right-doing, are but the seed of merit
that shall be born within the Temporal Paradise.

62. Instructing All that have life in the Ten Regions how that they
may through sincerity, merit, and hope be born into the Temporal
Paradise, He promiseth that no man shall lose salvation, for He hath
opened the Gate of Truth.

63. By the Divine Promise of the final salvation hath our Lord
instructed the men of the Single Vehicle to recite His Holy Name
that is the Essence of all the merit revealed in the Lesser Sutra of
the Buddha of Infinite Life.

64. He that reciteth the Holy name by his own effort and in the mind
of meditation or of dispersing, being led by the virtue of the
divine promise of final salvation, turneth naturally in at the Gate
of Truth.

65. He that holds not the True Faith, even though he desire to be
born into the Pure Paradise of Joy, must go unto his own place, and
it shall be in the border of the Outermost Places, for this is the
fruit of doubting the mystery of the Supreme Wisdom.

66. That a man should be a Buddha, made manifest in this world, is a
rare thing and difficult. So difficult is it also to hear the
excellent doctrine of all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. In all the
myriads of Kalpas such a way comes seldom.

67. Difficult is it for men to find a wise Teacher; so is it also
for them to be instructed and to hear the Holy Law. More difficult
still is it to receive the True Faith.

68. More difficult is it for men to receive the Divine Promise made
unto men than to receive all other teachings.

The Lord Buddha teacheth that this is of all hard things most
difficult and yet again more difficult.

69. The true Doctrine teacheth men that they may become Buddhas in
reciting the Holy Name, and so therefore is it that all other faiths
and moralities are but transitory doorways unto the Truth. Man
comprehendeth not that Pure Land of Peace unless he holdeth fast the
true Doctrine, casting aside that which is transitory.

70. Seek refuge in the Sole Vehicle of merciful promise. For the
transitory teachings have let and hindered men in the Way of
Enlightenment so that they must needs pass through the long
weariness of births and deaths.


CONCERNING THE SUTRA OF THE MEDITATION

71. That Lord that was made flesh in India, the Lord of great pity,
showing unto Vaidehi, Queen of Magadha, the golden mirror created by
his marvellous power, commanded her to choose the Land of Pure Joy
among all the worlds therein appearing.

72. Binbisara, he who commanded that an ascetic should be slain
before his pre-ordained time was come, by his own son was imprisoned
in a seven-walled prison as the due recompense of his violence.

73. Ajata-Satru, prince and heir of Magadha, denouncing his mother
as a traitor, with drawn sword ran furiously upon her.

74. Then said Jivaka the minister and another with him: "This act is
worthy only of an outcast. For the fame of our race unworthy art
thou to dwell in the Palace." And earnestly did they counsel him to
change his evil purpose.

75. Laying his hand on his sword-hilt, Jivaka, the minister, drew
backwards a few steps, steadfastly regarding the prince, that he
might avert this great sin. And so it was that the prince laid down
his sword, and secluded his mother in a palace.

76. Certain is it that Ananda with Vaidehi, Devadatta and yet
others, bearing their part in this great sorrow of the royal palace
of Magadha, must needs so suffer that they might know the infinite
pity of the Blessed One, that Lord who in this world made manifest
the true teaching.

77. And all these wise ones having so received instruction revealed
unto us, who are of all evil-doers worst, the true way, the refuge
of His divine promise that absolveth all the sins of men.

78. For when the full time was come that by the will of our Lord and
of Vaidehi the teaching of the Pure Land should be made known here
on Earth, Ajata-Satru, her son, sinned this sin, Varshakara his
minister bearing testimony against it.

79. It is needful that the heart of a man be opened unto the Faith
universal which He who is Blessed hath shown us, forsaking the
belief that his own works shall save him, for in every man the power
to perform righteous deeds is differing.


CONCERNING THE LESSER SUTRA

80. The Eternal Father is called the Buddha of Infinite Light,
because very mightily He holdeth in safety all beings dwelling in
the Ten Regions of the world who, by His merciful enlightenment,
recite His Holy Name.

81. The myriad Buddhas, unnumbered as the sands of Ganges, counsel
all having life to trust in the Supernal Virtue of the Holy Name,
declaring that weighed against this even righteous deeds are the
