
The tendency to evolution inherent in matter is due to the three
_gunas_. They are _sattva_, explained as goodness and happiness;
_rajas_, as passion and movement; and _tamas_, as darkness, heaviness
and ignorance. The word Guna is not easy to translate, for it seems
to mean more than quality or mode and to signify the constituents of
matter. Hence one cannot help feeling that the whole theory is an
attempt to explain the unity and diversity of matter by a phrase, but
all Hinduism is permeated by this phrase and theory. When the three
gunas are in equilibrium then matter--Prakriti--is quiescent,
undifferentiated and unmanifested. But as soon as the equilibrium is
disturbed and one of the gunas becomes preponderant, then the process
of differentiation and manifestation begins. The disturbance of
equilibrium is due to the action of the individual Purushas or souls
on Prakriti, but this action is mechanical and due to proximity not
to the volition of the souls and may be compared to the attraction of
a magnet for iron.[744] Thus at the beginning of the evolutionary
process we have quiescent matter in equilibrium: over against this are
souls innumerable, equally quiescent but exerting on matter a
mechanical force. This upsets the equilibrium and creates a movement
which takes at first the form of development and later of decay and
collapse. Then matter returns to its quiescent state to be again
excited by the Purushas and commence its world-making evolution anew.
The doctrine that evolution, dissolution and quiescence succeed one
another periodically is an integral part of the Sankhya.[745]

The unmodified Prakriti stands first on the list of twenty-five
principles. When evolution begins it produces first Buddhi or
intellect, secondly Ahamkara, which is perhaps best rendered by
individuality, and next the five Tanmatras or subtle elements.
Buddhi, though meaning intellect, is used rather in the sense of
ascertaining or perception. It is the faculty by which we distinguish
objects and perceive what they are. It differs also from our
conception of intellect in being, like Ahamkara and all the
subsequent developments of Prakriti, material, and must not be
confused with the immaterial Purusha or soul. It is in fact the organ
of thought, not in the sense of the brain or anything tangible, but a
subtle substratum of all mental processes. But in what sense is it
possible to say that this Buddhi exists apart from individuals, who
have not come into being at this stage of cosmic evolution? This
difficulty is not met by talking, as some commentators do, of cosmic
as well as individual Buddhi, for even if all Prakriti is illuminated
by Buddhi at this stage it is difficult to see what result can occur.
To make the process of development coherent we must think of it not as
a series of chronologically successive stages but rather as a
logically connected series and an analysis of completely evolved
beings, just as we might say that bones are covered with flesh and
flesh with skin, without affirming that the bones have a separate and
prior existence. Ahamkara, which is, like Buddhi, strictly speaking a
physical organ, means Ego-maker and denotes the sense of personality
and individuality, almost the will. In the language of Indian
philosophy it is the delusion or misconception which makes the soul
imagine itself a personal agent and think, _I_ see, _I_ hear, _I_
slay, _I_ am slain, whereas the soul is really incapable of action and
the acts are those of Prakriti.

The five subtle elements are the essences of sound, touch, colour,
savour and odour conceived as physical principles, imperceptible to
ordinary beings, though gods and Yogis can perceive them. The name
Tanmatra which signifies _that only_ indicates that they are concerned
exclusively with one sense. Thus whereas the gross elements, such as
earth, appeal to more than one sense and can be seen, felt and smelt,
the subtle element of sound is restricted to the sense of hearing. It
exists in all things audible but has nothing to do with their
tangibility or visibility. There remain sixteen further modifications
to make up the full list of twenty-four. They are the five organs of
sense,[746] the five organs of action,[747] Manas or mind, regarded as
a sixth and central sense, and also as the seat of will, and the five
gross elements--earth, water, light, air and ether. The Sankhya
distinguishes between the gross and the subtle body. The latter,
called lingasarira, is defined in more than one way, but it is
expressly stated in the Karikas[748] that it is composed of "Buddhi
and the rest, down to the subtle elements." It practically corresponds
to what we call the soul, though totally distinct from Purusha or soul
in the Sankhya sense. It constitutes the character and essential
being of a person. It is the part which transmigrates from one gross
body to another, and is responsible for the acts committed in each
existence. Its union with a gross body constitutes birth, its
departure death. Except in the case of those who attain emancipation,
its existence and transmigration last for a whole world-period at the
end of which come quiescence and equilibrium. In it are imprinted the
Samskaras,[749] the predispositions which pass on from one existence
to another and are latent in the new-born mind like seeds in a field.

By following the evolution of matter we have now accounted for
intellect, individuality, the senses, the moral character, will, and a
principle which survives death and transmigrates. It might therefore
be supposed that we have exhaustively analysed the constitution of a
human being. But that is not the view of the Sankhya. The evolution
of Buddhi, Ahamkara, the subtle body and the gross body is a physical
process and the result is also physical, though parts of it are of so
fine a substance that ordinary senses cannot perceive them. This
physical organism becomes a living being (which term includes gods and
animals) when it is connected with a soul (purusha) and consciousness
depends on this connection, for neither is matter when isolated
conscious, nor is the soul, at least not in our sense of the word.
Though the soul is neither the life which ends at death (for that is
the gross body) nor yet the life which passes from existence to
existence (for that is the subtle body) yet it is the vitalizing
element which renders life possible.

The Sankhya like Jainism regards souls as innumerable and distinct
from one another. The word Purusha must have originally referred to
the manikin supposed to inhabit the body, and there is some reason to
think that the earliest teachers of the Sankhya held that it was
infinitely small. But in the existing text-books it is described as
infinitely large. It is immaterial and without beginning, end, parts,
dimensions, or qualities, incapable of change, motion, or action.
These definitions may be partly due to the influence of the Vedanta
and, though we know little about the historical development of the
Sankhya, there are traces of a compromise between the old teaching of
a soul held in bondage and struggling for release and later
conceptions of a soul which, being infinite and passionless, hardly
seems capable of submitting to bondage. Though the soul cannot be said
to transmigrate, to act, or to suffer, still through consciousness it
makes the suffering of the world felt and though in its essence it
remains eternally unchanged and unaffected, yet it experiences the
reflection of the suffering which goes on. Just as a crystal (to use
the Indian simile) allows a red flower to be seen through it and
remains unchanged, although it seems to become red, so does the soul
remain unchanged by sorrow or joy, although the illusion that it
suffers or rejoices may be present in the consciousness.

The task of the soul is to free itself from illusion, and thus from
bondage. For strictly speaking the bondage does not exist: it is
caused by want of discrimination. Like the Vedanta, the Sankhya
regards all this troubled life as being, so far as the soul is
concerned, mere illusion. But while the Vedanta bids the soul know its
identity with Brahman, the Sankhya bids it isolate itself and know
that the acts and feelings which seem to be its own have really
nothing to do with it. They are for the soul nothing but a spectacle
or play originating in its connection with Prakriti, and it is
actually said,[750] "Wherefore no soul is bound, or is liberated or
transmigrates. It is Prakriti, which has many bodily forms, which is
bound, liberated and transmigrates." It is in Buddhi or intellect,
which is a manifestation of Prakriti, that the knowledge of the
difference between the soul and Prakriti must arise. Thus though the
Sankhya reposes on a fundamental dualism, it is not the dualism of
good and evil. Soul and matter differ not because the first is good
and the second bad, but because the first is unchangeable and the
second constantly changing. Matter is often personified as a woman.
Her motives are unselfish and she works for the liberation of the
soul. "As a dancer after showing herself on the stage ceases to dance,
so does Prakriti cease when she has made herself manifest to the
soul." That is to say, when a soul once understands that it is
distinct from the material world, that world ceases to exist for that
particular soul, though of course the play continues for others.
"Generous Prakriti, endowed with Gunas, causes by manifold means
without benefit to herself, the benefit of the soul, which is devoid
of Gunas and makes no return."[751] The condition of the liberated
soul, corresponding to the _mokska_ and _nirvana_ of other systems,
is described as Kaivalya, that is, complete separation from the
material world, but, as among Buddhists and Vedantists, he who has
learnt the truth is liberated even before death, and can teach others.
He goes on living, just as the wheel continues to revolve for some
time after the potter has ceased to turn it. After death, complete
liberation without the possibility of rebirth is attained. The
Sankhya manuals do not dwell further on the character of this
liberation: we only know that the eternal soul is then completely
isolated and aloof from all suffering and material things. Liberation
is compared to profound sleep, the difference being that in dreamless
sleep there is a seed, that is, the possibility of return to ordinary
life, whereas when liberation is once attained there is no such
return.

Both in its account of the world process and in its scheme of
salvation the Sankhya ignores theism in the same way as did the
Buddha. Indeed the text-books go beyond this and practically deny the
existence of a personal supreme deity. We are told[752] that the
existence of God cannot be proved, for whatever exists must be either
bound or free and God can be neither. We cannot think of him as bound
and yet he cannot be free like an emancipated soul, for freedom
implies the absence of desire and hence of the impulse to create.
Similarly[753] the consequences of good and evil deeds are due to
Karma and not to the government of God. Such a ruler is inconceivable,
for if he governs the world according to the action of Karma his
existence is superfluous, and if he is affected by selfish motives or
desire, then he cannot be free. It is true that these passages speak
of there being no proof of God's existence and hence commentators both
Indian and European who shrink from atheism represent the Sankhya as
suspending judgment. But if a republican constitution duly describes
the President and other authorities in whom the powers of government
are vested, can we argue that it is not unmonarchical because it does
not expressly say there is no king? In the Sankhya there is no more
place for a deity than for a king in a republican constitution.
Moreover, the Sutras endeavour to prove that the idea of God is
inconceivable and self-contradictory and some commentaries speak
plainly on this subject.[754] Thus the Sankhya-tattva-kaumudi
commenting on Karika 57 argues that the world cannot have been created
by God, whether we suppose him to have been impelled by selfishness or
kindness. For if God is perfect he can have no need to create a world.
And if his motive is kindness, is it reasonable to call into existence
beings who while non-existent had no suffering, simply in order to
show kindness in relieving them from suffering? A benevolent deity
ought to create only happy creatures, not a mixed world like the one
we see.[755]

Arguments like this were not condemned by the Brahmans so strongly as
we should expect, but they did not like them and though they did not
excommunicate the Sankhya in the same way as Buddhism, they greatly
preferred a theistic variety of it called Yoga.

The Yoga and Sankhya are mentioned together in the Svetasvatara
Upanishad,[756] and the Bhagavad-gita[757] says that he sees truly who
sees them as one. The difference lies in treatment rather than in
substance. Whereas the Sankhya is mainly theoretical, the principal
topic of the Yoga is the cultivation of that frame of mind which leads
to emancipation and the methods and exercises proper to this end.
Further, the Yoga recognizes a deity. This distinction may seem of
capital importance but the god of the Yoga (called Isvara or the
Lord) is not its foundation and essence as Brahman is of the
Vedanta.[758] Devotion to God is recognized as one among other methods
for attaining emancipation and if this particular procedure, which is
mentioned in relatively few passages, were omitted, the rest of the
system would be unaffected. It is therefore probable that the theistic
portions of the Yoga are an addition made under Brahmanic influence.
But taking the existing Sutras of the two philosophies, together with
their commentaries, it may be said that the Yoga implies most of the
Sankhya theory and the Sankhya most of the Yoga practice, for though
it does not go into details it prescribes meditation which is to be
perfected by regulating the breathing and by adopting certain
postures. I have already spoken of the methods and discipline
prescribed by the Yoga and need not dwell further on the topic now.

That Buddhism has some connection with the Sankhya and Yoga has often
been noticed.[759] Some of the ideas found in the Sankhya and some of
the practices prescribed by the Yoga are clearly anterior to Gotama
and may have contributed to his mental development, but circumspection
is necessary in the use of words like Yoga, Sankhya and Vedanta. If
we take them to mean the doctrinal systems contained in certain
sutras, they are clearly all later than Buddhism. But if we assume, as
we may safely do, that the doctrine is much older than the manuals in
which we now study it, we must also remember that when we leave the
texts we are not justified in thinking of a system but merely of a
line of thought. In this sense it is clear that many ideas of the
Sankhya appear among the Jains, but the Jains know nothing of the
evolution of matter described by the Sankhya manuals and think of the
relation of the soul to matter in a more materialistic way. The notion
of the separate eternal soul was the object of the Buddha's persistent
polemics and was apparently a popular doctrine when he began
preaching. The ascetic and meditative exercises prescribed by the Yoga
were also known before his time and the Pitakas do not hide the fact
that he received instruction from two Yogis. But though he was
acquainted with the theories and practices which grew into the Yoga
and Sankhya, he did not found his religion on them for he rejected
the idea of a soul which has to be delivered and did not make
salvation dependent on the attainment of trances. If there was in his
time a systematic Sankhya philosophy explaining the nature of
suffering and the way of release, it is strange that the Pitakas
contain no criticism of it, for though to us who see these ancient
sects in perspective the resemblance of Buddhism to the Sankhya is
clear, there can be little doubt that the Buddha would have regarded
it as a most erroneous heresy, because it proposes to attain the same
objects as his own teaching but by different methods.

Sankhya ideas are not found in the oldest Upanishads, but they appear
(though not in a connected form) in those of the second stratum, such
as the Svetasvatara and Katha. It therefore seems probable, though
not proven, that the origin of these ideas is to be sought not in the
early Brahmanic schools but in the intellectual atmosphere
non-theistic, non-sacerdotal, but audaciously speculative which
prevailed in the central and eastern part of northern India in the
sixth century B.C. The Sankhya recognizes no merit in sacrifices or
indeed in good works of any kind, even as a preliminary discipline,
and in many details is un-Brahmanic. Unlike the Vedanta Sutras, it
does not exclude Sudras from higher studies, but states that there are
eight classes of gods and five of animals but only one of men. A
teacher must have himself attained emancipation, but there is no
provision that he must be a Brahman. Perhaps the fables and parables
which form the basis of the fourth book of the Sankhya Sutras point
to some more popular form of instruction similar to the discourses of
the Buddha. We may suppose that this ancient un-Brahmanic school took
shape in several sects, especially Jainism and Buddhism, and used the
Yoga discipline. But the value and efficacy of that discipline were
admitted almost universally and several centuries later it was
formulated in the Sutras which bear the name of Patanjali in a shape
acceptable to Brahmans, not to Buddhists. If, as some scholars think,
the Yoga sutras are not earlier than 450 A.D.[760] it seems probable
that it was Buddhism which stimulated the Brahmans to codify the
principles and practice of Yoga, for the Yogacara school of Buddhism
arose before the fifth century. The Sankhya is perhaps a somewhat
similar brahmanization of the purely speculative ideas which may have
prevailed in Magadha and Kosala.[761] Though these districts were not
strongholds of Brahmanism, yet it is clear from the Pitakas that they
contained a considerable Brahman population who must have been
influenced by the ideas current around them but also must have wished
to keep in touch with other Brahmans. The Sankhya of our manuals
represents such an attempt at conciliation. It is an elaboration in a
different shape of some of the ideas out of which Buddhism sprung but
in its later history it is connected with Brahmanism rather than
Buddhism. When it is set forth in Sutras in a succinct and isolated
form, its divergence from ordinary Brahmanic thought is striking and
in this form it does not seem to have ever been influential and now is
professed by only a few Pandits, but, when combined in a literary and
eclectic spirit with other ideas which may be incompatible with it in
strict logic, it has been a mighty influence in Indian religion,
orthodox as well as unorthodox. Such conceptions as Prakriti and the
Gunas colour most of the post-Vedic religious literature. Their
working may be plainly traced in the Mahabharata, Manu and the
Puranas,[762] and the Tantras identify with Prakriti the goddesses
whose worship they teach. The unethical character of the Sankhya
enabled it to form the strangest alliances with aboriginal beliefs.

Unlike the Sankhya, the Vedanta is seen in its most influential and
perhaps most advantageous aspect when stated in its most abstract
form. We need not enquire into its place of origin for it is clearly
the final intellectual product of the schools which produced the
Upanishads and the literature which preceded them, and though it may
be difficult to say at what point we are justified in applying the
name Vedanta to growing Brahmanic thought, the growth is continuous.
The name means simply End of the Veda. In its ideas the Vedanta shows
great breadth and freedom, yet it respects the prejudices and
proprieties of Brahmanism. It teaches that God is all things, but
interdicts this knowledge to the lower castes: it treats rites as a
merely preliminary discipline, but it does not deny their value for
certain states of life.

The Vedanta is the boldest and the most characteristic form of Indian
thought. For Asia, and perhaps for the world at large, Buddhism is
more important but on Indian soil it has been vanquished by the
Vedanta, especially that form of it known as the Advaita. In all ages
the main idea of this philosophy has been the same and may be summed
up in the formula that the soul is God and that God is everything. If
this formula is not completely accurate[763]--and a sentence which
both translates and epitomizes alien metaphysics can hardly aspire to
complete accuracy--the error lies in the fact to which I have called
attention elsewhere that our words, God and soul, do not cover quite
the same ground as the Indian words which they are used to translate.

Many scholars, both Indian and European, will demur to the high place
here assigned to the Advaita philosophy. I am far from claiming that
the doctrine of Sankara is either primitive or unchallenged. Other
forms of the Vedanta existed before him and became very strong after
him. But so far as a synthesis of opinions which are divergent in
details can be just, he gives a just synthesis and elaboration of the
Upanishads. It is true that his teaching as to the higher and lower
Brahman and as to Maya has affinities to Mahayanist Buddhism, and that
later sects were repelled by the severe and impersonal character of
his philosophy, but the doctrine of which he is the most thorough and
eminent exponent, namely that God or spirit is the only reality and
one with the human soul, asserts itself in almost all Hindu sects,
even though their other doctrines may seem to contradict it.

This line of thought is so persistent and has so many ramifications,
that it is hard to say what is and what is not Vedanta. If we take
literature as our best guide we may distinguish four points of
importance marked by the Upanishads, the Brahma-Sutras, Sankara and
Ramanuja.

I have said something elsewhere of the Upanishads. These works do not
profess to form a systematic whole (though later Hinduism regards
them as such) and when European scholars speak of them collectively,
they generally mean the older members of the collection. These may
justly be regarded as the ancestors of the Vedanta, inasmuch as the
tone of thought prevalent in them is incipient Vedantism. It rejects
dualism and regards the universe as a unity not as plurality, as
something which has issued from Brahman or is pervaded by Brahman and
in any case depends on Brahman for its significance and existence.
Brahman is God in the pantheistic sense, totally disconnected with
mythology and in most passages impersonal. The knowledge of Brahman is
salvation: he who has it, goes to Brahman or becomes Brahman. More
rarely we find statements of absolute identity such as "Being Brahman,
he goes to Brahman."[764] But though the Upanishads say that the soul
goes to or is Brahman, that the world comes from or is Brahman, that
the soul is the whole universe and that a knowledge of these truths is
the one thing of importance, these ideas are not combined into a
system. They are simply the thoughts of the wise, not always agreeing
in detail, and presented as independent utterances, each with its own
value.

One of the most important of these wise men is Yajnavalkya,[765] the
hero of the Brihad Aranyaka Upanishad and a great name, to whom are
ascribed doctrines of which he probably never heard. The Upanishad
represents him as developing and completing the views of Sandilya
and Uddalaka Aruni. The former taught[766] that the Atman or Self
within the heart, smaller than a grain of mustard seed, is also
greater than all worlds. The brief exposition of his doctrine which we
possess starts from and emphasizes the human self. This self is
Brahman. The doctrine of Uddalaka[767] takes the other side of the
equation: he starts with Brahman and then asserts that Brahman is the
soul. But though he teaches that in the beginning there was one only
without a second, yet he seems to regard the subsequent products of
this Being as external to it and permeated by it. But to Yajnavalkya
is ascribed an important modification of these doctrines, namely, that
the Atman is unknowable and transcendental.[768] It is unknowable
because since it is essentially the knowing subject it can be known
only by itself: it can never become the object of knowledge and
language is inadequate to describe it. All that can be said of it is
_neti_, _neti_, that is no, no: it is not anything which we try to
predicate of it. But he who knows that the individual soul is the
Atman, becomes Atman; being it, he knows it and knows all the world:
he perceives that in all the world there is no plurality. Here the
later doctrine of Maya is adumbrated, though not formulated. Any
system which holds that in reality there is no plurality or, like some
forms of Mahayanist Buddhism, that nothing really exists implies the
operation of this Maya or illusion which makes us see the world as it
appears to us. It may be thought of as mere ignorance, as a failure to
see the universe as it really is: but no doubt the later view of Maya
as a creative energy which fashions the world of phenomena is closely
connected with the half-mythological conceptions found in the
Pancaratra and Saiva philosophy which regard this creative illusion as
a female force--a goddess in fact--inseparably associated with the
deity.

The philosophy of the Upanishads, like all religious thought in India,
is avowedly a quest of happiness and this happiness is found in some
form of union with Brahman. He is perfect bliss, and whatever is
distinct from him is full of suffering.[769] But this sense of the
suffering inherent in existence is less marked in the older Upanishads
and in the Vedanta than in Buddhism and the Sankhya. Those systems
make it their basis and first principle: in the Vedanta the
temperament is the same but the emphasis and direction of the thought
are different. The Sankhya looks at the world and says that salvation
lies in escape into something which has nothing in common with it. But
the Vedantist looks towards Brahman, and his pessimism is merely the
feeling that everything which is not wholly and really Brahman is
unsatisfactory. In the later developments of the system, pessimism
almost disappears, for the existence of suffering is not the first
Truth but an illusion: the soul, did it but know it, is Brahman and
Brahman is bliss. So far as the Vedanta has any definite practical
teaching, it does not wholly despise action. Action is indeed inferior
to knowledge and when knowledge is once obtained works are useless
accessories, but the four stages of a Brahman's career, including
household life, are approved in the Vedanta Sutras, though there is a
disposition to say that he who has the necessary religious aptitudes
can adopt the ascetic life at any time. The occupations of this
ascetic life are meditation and absorption or samadhi, the state in
which the meditating soul becomes so completely blended with God on
whom it meditates, that it has no consciousness of its separate
existence.[770]

As indicated above the so-called books of Sruti or Vedic literature
are not consecutive treatises, but rather _responsa prudentium_,
utterances respecting ritual and theology ascribed to poets,
sacrificers and philosophers who were accepted as authorities. When
these works came to be regarded as an orderly revelation, even
orthodoxy could not shut its eyes to their divergences, and a
comprehensive exegesis became necessary to give a conspectus of the
whole body of truth. This investigation of the meaning of the Veda as
a connected whole is called Mimamsa, and is divided into two
branches, the earlier (purva) and the later (uttara). The first is
represented by the Purva-mimamsa-sutras of Jaimini[771] which are
called earlier (purva) not in the chronological sense but because they
deal with rites which come before knowledge, as a preparatory stage.
It is interesting to find that Jaimini was accused of atheism and
defended by Kumarila Bhatta. The defence is probably just, for
Jaimini does not so much deny God as ignore him. But what is truly
extraordinary, though characteristic of much Indian literature about
ritual, is that a work dealing with the general theory of religious
worship should treat the deity as an irrelevant topic. The
Purva-mimamsa discusses ceremonies prescribed by an eternal
self-existing Veda. The reward of sacrifice is not given by God. When
the result of an act does not appear at once, Jaimini teaches that
there is all the same produced a supersensuous principle called
_apurva_, which bears fruit at a later time, and thus a sacrifice
leads the offerer to heaven. This theory is really tantamount to
placing magic on a philosophic basis.

Badarayana's sutras, which represent the other branch of the
Mimamsa, show a type of thought more advanced and profound than
Jaimini's. They consist of 555 aphorisms--less than a fifth of
Jaimini's voluminous work--and represent the outcome of considerable
discussion posterior to the Upanishads, for they cite the opinions of
seven other teachers and also refer to Badarayana himself by name.
Hence they may be a compendium of his teaching made by his pupils.
Their date is unknown but Sankara evidently regards them as ancient
and there were several commentators before him.[772] Like most sutras
these aphorisms are often obscure and are hardly intended to be more
than a mnemotechnic summary of the doctrine, to be supplemented by
oral instruction or a commentary. Hence it is difficult to define the
teaching of Badarayana as distinguished from that of the Upanishads
on the one hand, and that of his commentators on the other, or to say
exactly what stage he marks in the development of thought, except that
it is the stage of attempted synthesis.[773] He teaches that Brahman
is the origin of the world and that with him should all knowledge,
religion and effort be concerned. By meditation on him, the soul is
released and somehow associated with him. But it is not clear that we
have any warrant for finding in the sutras (as does Sankara) the
distinction between the higher and lower Brahman, or the doctrine of
the unreality of the world (Maya) or the absolute identity of the
individual soul with Brahman. We are told that the state of the
