same martyrdom for our salvation. He, too, left His Mother; He
beheld that sinless Virgin standing at the foot of the Cross, her
heart pierced through with a sword of sorrow, and I hope he will
console your own dear mother. . . . I beg Him most earnestly to do
so.

Ah! If the Divine Master would permit those you are about to leave
for His Love but one glimpse of the glory in store, and the vast
retinue of souls that will escort you to Heaven, already they
would be repaid for the great sacrifice that is at hand.


III

February 24, 1896.

Please say this little prayer for me each day; it sums up all my
desires:

"Merciful Father, in the name of Thy sweet Jesus, of the Blessed
Virgin, and all the Saints, I beg Thee to consume my sister with
Thy spirit of love, and to grant her the grace to make Thee
greatly loved."

If Our Lord takes me soon to Himself, I ask you still to continue
this prayer, because my longing will be the same in Heaven as upon
earth: _to love Jesus and to make Him loved._


IV

.   .   .   .   .   .   .

All I desire is God's Holy Will, and if in Heaven I could no
longer work for His glory, I should prefer exile to Home.


V

June 21, 1897

You may well sing of the Mercies of God! They shine forth in you
with splendour. You love St. Augustine and St. Mary Magdalen,
those souls to whom many sins were forgiven because they loved
much. I love them too; I love their sorrow, and especially their
audacious love. When I see Mary Magdalen come forth before all
Simon's guests to wash with her tears her Master's Feet--those
Feet that for the first time she touches--I feel her heart has
fathomed that abyss of love and mercy, the Heart of Jesus; and I
feel, too, that not only was He willing to forgive, but even
liberally to dispense the favours of a Divine and intimate
friendship, and to raise her to the loftiest heights of prayer.

My Brother, since I also have been given to understand the Love of
the Heart of Jesus, I confess that all fear has been driven from
mine. The remembrance of my faults humbles me; and it helps me
never to rely upon my own strength--which is but weakness--but
more than all, it speaks to me of mercy and of love. When a soul
with childlike trust casts her faults into Love's all-devouring
furnace, how shall they escape being utterly consumed?

I know that many Saints have passed their lives in the practice of
amazing penance for the sake of expiating their sins. But what of
that? "In my Father's house there are many mansions."[4] These are
the words of Jesus, and therefore I follow the path He marks out
for me; I try to be nowise concerned about myself and what Jesus
deigns to accomplish in my soul.


VI

1897.

On this earth where everything changes, one thing alone does never
change--our Heavenly King's treatment of His friends. From the day
He raised the standard of the Cross, in its shadow all must fight
and win. "The life of every missionary abounds in crosses," said
Theophane Venard. And again: "True happiness consists in
suffering, and in order to live we must die."

Rejoice, my Brother, that the first efforts of your Apostolate are
stamped with the seal of the Cross. Far more by suffering and by
persecution than by eloquent discourses does Jesus wish to build
up His Kingdom.

You are still--you tell me--a little child who cannot speak.
Neither could Father Mazel, who was ordained with you, and yet he
has already won the palm . . . Far beyond our thoughts are the
thoughts of God! When I learnt that this young missionary had died
before he had set foot on the field of his labours, I felt myself
drawn to invoke him. I seemed to see him amidst the glorious
Martyr choir. No doubt, in the eyes of men he does not merit the
title of Martyr, but in the eyes of God this inglorious death is
no less precious than the sacrifice of him who lays down his life
for the Faith.

Though one must be exceeding pure before appearing in the sight of
the All-Holy God, still I know that He is infinitely just, and
this very Justice which terrifies so many souls is the source of
all my confidence and joy. Justice is not only stern severity
towards the guilty; it takes account of the good intention, and
gives to virtue its reward. Indeed I hope as much from the Justice
of God as from His Mercy. It is because He is just, that "He is
compassionate and merciful, longsuffering, and plenteous in mercy.
For He knoweth our frame, He remembereth that we are dust. As a
father hath compassion on his children, so hath the Lord
compassion on us."[5]

O my Brother, after these beautiful and consoling words of the
Royal Prophet, how can we doubt God's power to open the gates of
His Kingdom to His children who have loved Him unto perfect
sacrifice, who have not only left home and country so as to make
Him known and loved, but even long to lay down their lives for
Him? . . . Jesus said truly there is no greater love than this.
Nor will He be outdone in generosity. How could He cleanse in the
flames of Purgatory souls consumed with the fire of Divine Love?

I have used many words to express my thought, and yet I fear I
have failed. What I wish to convey is, that in my opinion all
missionaries are Martyrs by will and desire, and not even one
should pass through the purifying flames.

This, then, is what I think about the Justice of God; my own way
is all confidence and love, and I cannot understand those souls
who are afraid of so affectionate a Friend. Sometimes, when I read
books in which perfection is put before us with the goal
obstructed by a thousand obstacles, my poor little head is quickly
fatigued. I close the learned treatise, which tires my brain and
dries up my heart, and I turn to the Sacred Scriptures. Then all
becomes clear and lightsome--a single word opens out infinite
vistas, perfection appears easy, and I see that it is enough to
acknowledge our nothingness, and like children surrender ourselves
into the Arms of the Good God. Leaving to great and lofty minds
the beautiful books which I cannot understand, still less put in
practice, I rejoice in my littleness because "only little children
and those who are like them shall be admitted to the Heavenly
banquet."[6] Fortunately--"there are many mansions in my Father's
House":[7] if there were only those--to me--incomprehensible
mansions with their baffling roads, I should certainly never enter
there . . .


VII

July 13, 1897.

Your soul is too great to cling to the consolations of earth, and
even now its abode should be in Heaven, for it is written: "Where
your treasure is, there will your heart be also."[8] Is not Jesus
your only treasure? Now that He is in Heaven, it is there your
heart should dwell. This sweet Saviour has long since forgotten
your infidelities. He sees only your longing after perfection, and
the sight makes glad His Heart.

Stay no longer at His Feet, I beseech you, but follow this first
impulse to throw yourself into His Arms. Your place is there, and
I see clearly--more clearly than in your former letters--that all
other heavenly route is barred to you save the way your little
sister treads.

I hold with you when you say that the Heart of Jesus is more
grieved by the thousand little imperfections of His friends than
by the faults, even grave, which His enemies commit. Yet it seems
to me, dear Brother, it is only when those who are His own are
habitually guilty of want of thought, and neglect to seek His
pardon, that He can say: "These Wounds which you see in the midst
of My Hands, I have received in the house of those who love
Me."[9] But His Heart thrills with you when He had to deal with
all those who truly love, and who after each little fault come to
fling themselves into His Arms imploring forgiveness. He says to
His Angels what the prodigal's father said to his servants: "Put a
ring upon his finger, and let us rejoice."[10] O Brother! Verily
the Divine Heart's Goodness and Merciful Love are little known! It
is true that to enjoy these treasures we must humble ourselves,
must confess our nothingness . . . and here is where many a soul
draws back.


VIII

1897.

What attracts me towards our Heavenly Home is the Master's
call--the hope of loving Him at last to the fulfilling of all my
desire--the thought that I shall be able to win Him the love of a
multitude of souls, who will bless Him through all eternity.

I have never asked God that I might die young--that to me were a
cowardly prayer; but from my childhood He has deigned to inspire
me with a strong conviction that my life would be a short one.

I feel we must tread the same road to Heaven--the road of
suffering and love. When I myself have reached the port, I will
teach you how best to sail the world's tempestuous sea--with the
self-abandonment of a child well aware of a father's love, and of
his vigilance in the hour of danger.

I long so much to make you understand the expectant love of the
Heart of Jesus. Your last letter has made my own heart thrill
sweetly. I learnt how closely your soul is sister to mine, since
God calls that soul to mount to Himself by the _lift of love,_
without climbing the steep stairway of fear. I am not surprised
you find it hard to be familiar with Jesus--one cannot become so
in a day; but this I do know, I shall aid you much more to tread
this beautiful path when I lay aside the burden of this perishable
body. Ere long you will exclaim with St. Augustine: "Love is my
lodestone!"


IX

July 26, 1897.

When you read these few lines I shall perhaps be no more. I know
not the future; yet I can confidently say that my Spouse is at the
door. It would need a miracle to keep me in exile, and I do not
think that Jesus will work that miracle--He does nothing that is
of no avail.

Brother, I am so happy to die! Yes, happy . . . not because I
shall be free from suffering: on the contrary, suffering combined
with love seems the one thing worthy of desire in this vale of
tears; but happy to die because far more than on earth I shall
help the souls I hold dear.

Jesus has always treated me as a spoilt child. . . . It is true
that His Cross has been with me from the cradle, but for that
Cross He has given me a passionate love . . .


X

August 14, 1897.

I am about to go before God, and I understand now more than ever
that one thing only is needful--to work for Him alone, and do
nothing for self or creatures. Jesus wishes to own your heart
completely. Before this can be, you will have much to suffer . . .
but oh! what joy when comes the happy hour of going Home! I shall
not die--I do but enter into Life . . . and whatsoever I cannot
tell you here upon earth I will make you understand from the
heights of Heaven. . . .
_____________________________

[1] Matt. 26:39.

[2] Isa. 9:6.

[3] This letter and the following are addressed to a Seminarist.
[Ed.]

[4] John 14:2.

[5] Ps. 102[103]:8, 14, 13.

[6] Cf. Matt. 19:14.

[7] John 14:2.

[8] Luke 12:34.

[9] Cf. Zach. 13:6.

[10] Cf. Luke 15:22.

_____________________________


PRAYERS OF SOEUR THERESE, THE LITTLE FLOWER OF JESUS

_____________________________


AN ACT OF OBLATION AS A VICTIM OF DIVINE LOVE

_This Prayer was found after the death of Sister Teresa of the
Child Jesus and of the Holy Face in the copy of the Gospels which
she carried night and day close to her heart._

O my God, O Most Blessed Trinity, I desire to love Thee and to
make Thee loved--to labour for the glory of Holy Church by saving
souls here upon earth and by delivering those suffering in
Purgatory. I desire to fulfill perfectly Thy Holy Will, and to
reach the degree of glory Thou hast prepared for me in Thy
Kingdom. In a word, I wish to be holy, but, knowing how helpless I
am, I beseech Thee, my God, to be Thyself my holiness.

Since Thou hast loved me so much as to give me Thy Only-Begotten
Son to be my Saviour and my Spouse, the infinite treasures of His
merits are mine. Gladly do I offer them to Thee, and I beg of Thee
to behold me only through the Eyes of Jesus, and in His Heart
aflame with love. Moreover, I offer Thee all the merits of the
Saints both of Heaven and of earth, together with their acts of
love, and those of the holy Angels. Lastly, I offer Thee, O
Blessed Trinity, the love and the merits of the Blessed Virgin, my
dearest Mother--to her I commit this Oblation, praying her to
present it to Thee.

During the days of His life on earth her Divine Son, my sweet
Spouse, spake these words: "If you ask the Father anything in My
Name, He will give it you."[1] Therefore I am certain Thou wilt
fulfill my longing. O my God, I know that the more Thou wishest to
bestow, the more Thou dost make us desire. In my heart I feel
boundless desires, and I confidently beseech Thee to take
possession of my soul. I cannot receive Thee in Holy Communion as
often as I should wish; but, O Lord, art Thou not all-powerful?
Abide in me as Thou dost in the Tabernacle--never abandon Thy
Little Victim. I long to console Thee for ungrateful sinners, and
I implore Thee to take from me all liberty to sin. If through
weakness I should chance to fall, may a glance from Thine Eyes
straightway cleanse my soul, and consume all my imperfections--as
fire transforms all things into itself.

I thank Thee, O my God, for all the graces Thou hast granted me:
especially for having purified me in the crucible of suffering. At
the Day of Judgment I shall gaze on Thee with joy, as Thou bearest
Thy sceptre of the Cross. And since Thou hast deigned to give me
this precious Cross as my portion, I hope to be like unto Thee in
Paradise and to behold the Sacred Wounds of Thy Passion shine on
my glorified body.

After earth's exile I trust to possess Thee in the Home of our
Father; but I do not seek to lay up treasures in Heaven. I wish to
labour for Thy Love alone--with the sole aim of pleasing Thee, of
consoling Thy Sacred Heart, and of saving souls who will love Thee
through eternity.

When comes the evening of life, I shall stand before Thee with
empty hands, because I do not ask Thee, my God, to take account of
my works. All our works of justice are blemished in Thine Eyes. I
wish therefore to be robed with Thine own Justice, and to receive
from Thy Love the everlasting gift of Thyself. I desire no other
Throne, no other Crown but Thee, O my Beloved!

In Thy sight time is naught--"one day is a thousand years."[2]
Thou canst in a single instant prepare me to appear before Thee.

*   *   *   *   *   *   *

In order that my life may be one Act of perfect Love, I offer
myself as a Victim of Holocaust to Thy Merciful Love, imploring
Thee to consume me unceasingly, and to allow the floods of
infinite tenderness gathered up in Thee to overflow into my soul,
that so I may become a very martyr of Thy Love, O my God! May this
martyrdom, after having prepared me to appear in Thy Presence,
free me from this life at the last, and may my soul take its
flight--without delay--into the eternal embrace of Thy Merciful
Love!

*   *   *   *   *   *   *

O my Beloved, I desire at every beat of my heart to renew this
Oblation an infinite number of times, "till the shadows
retire,"[3] and everlastingly I can tell Thee my love face to face.

MARY FRANCES TERESA OF THE CHILD JESUS AND OF THE HOLY FACE.

The ninth of June, Feast of the Most Blessed Trinity, In the year
of grace, 1895.


A MORNING PRAYER

O my God! I offer Thee all my actions of this day for the
intentions and for the glory of the Sacred Heart of Jesus. I
desire to sanctify every beat of my heart, my every thought, my
simplest works, by uniting them to Its infinite merits; and I wish
to make reparation for my sins by casting them into the furnace of
Its Merciful Love.

O my God! I ask of Thee for myself and for those whom I hold dear,
the grace to fulfil perfectly Thy Holy Will, to accept for love of
Thee the joys and sorrows of this passing life, so that we may one
day be united together in Heaven for all Eternity. Amen.


AN ACT OF CONSECRATION TO THE HOLY FACE

Written for the Novices

O Adorable Face of Jesus, since Thou hast deigned to make special
choice of our souls, in order to give Thyself to them, we come to
consecrate these souls to Thee. We seem, O Jesus, to hear Thee
say: "Open to Me, My Sisters, My Spouses, for My Face is wet with
the dew, and My Locks with the drops of the night."[4] Our souls
understand Thy language of love; we desire to wipe Thy sweet Face,
and to console Thee for the contempt of the wicked. In their eyes
Thou art still "as it were hidden . . . they esteem Thee an object
of reproach."[5]

O Blessed Face, more lovely than the lilies and the roses of the
spring, Thou art not hidden from us. The tears which dim Thine
Eyes are as precious pearls which we delight to gather, and,
through their infinite value, to purchase the souls of our
brethren.

From Thy Adorable Lips we have heard Thy loving plaint: "I
thirst." Since we know that this thirst which consumes Thee is a
thirst for love, to quench it we would wish to possess an infinite
love.

Dear Spouse of our souls, if we could love with the love of all
hearts, that love would be Thine. . . . Give us, O Lord, this
love! Then come to thy Spouses and satisfy Thy Thirst.
