but who lived about the same time, held the same views on the subject of
marriage. Thus, Athenagoras says--"A second marriage is by us esteemed a
specious adultery."--_Apology_, Sec. 33.

[437:3] "Nam idem (Praxeas) tunc Episcopum Romanum, agnoscentem jam
prophetias Montani, Priseae, Maximillae, et ex ea agnitione pacem
ecclesiis Asiae et Phrygiae inferentem, falsa de ipsis prophetis et
ecclesiis eorum adseverando et praecessorum ejus auctoritates defendendo
coegit et litteras pacis revocare jam emissas et a proposito
recipiendorum charismatum concessare."--_Tertullian, Adv. Praxean._, c. i.

[438:1] Euseb. v. 16.

[438:2] It would appear, however, that it maintained a lingering
existence for several centuries. Even Justinian, about A.D. 530, enacts
laws against the Montanists or Tertullianists.

[438:3] Isaiah xlv. 5, 7.

[439:1] Augustin, "Contra Epist. Fundamenti," c. 13.

[439:2] On the ground that their oil is _the food of light_! Schaff's
"History of the Christian Church," p. 249.

[441:1] We find Tertullian, after he became a Montanist, dwelling on the
distinction of venial and mortal sins. See Kaye's "Tertullian," pp. 255,
339.

[441:2] Rom. vi. 23.

[442:1] 1 Thess. v. 22.

[442:2] James i. 15.

[442:3] See Cudworth's "Intellectual System," with Notes by Mosheim,
iii. p. 297. Edition, London, 1845.

[442:4] See Hagenbach's "History of Doctrines," i. p. 218.

[442:5] See Kaye's "Tertullian," p. 348.

[442:6] The doctrine of Purgatory, as now held, was not, however, fully
recognised until the time of Gregory the Great, or the beginning of the
seventh century.

[443:1] See Mosheim's "Institutes," by Soames, i. 166.

[443:2] Marcion, it appears, declined to baptize those who were married.
"Non tinguitur apud illum caro, nisi virgo, nisi vidua, nisi caelebs,
nisi divortio baptisma mercata."--_Tertullian, Adver. Marcionem_, lib.
i. c. 29.

[443:3] See Neander's "General History," ii. 253.

[443:4] In the "Westminster Review" for October 1856, there is an
article on _Buddhism_, written, indeed, in the anti-evangelical spirit
of that periodical, but containing withal much curious and important
information.

[444:1] Col. ii. 23.

[446:1] The most remarkable instance of this is the condemnation of the
word [Greek: homoousios], as applied to our Lord, by the Synod of
Antioch in A.D. 269. It is well known that the very same word was
adopted in A.D. 325, by the Council of Nice as the symbol of orthodoxy;
and yet these two ecclesiastical assemblies held the same views. See
also, as to the application of the word [Greek: hupostauis], Burton's
"Ante-Nicene Testimonies," p. 129.

[446:2] "The inference to be drawn from a comparison of different
passages scattered through Tertullian's writings is, that the Apostle's
Creed in its present form was not known to him as a summary of faith;
but that the various clauses of which it is composed were generally
received as articles of faith by orthodox Christians."--_Kaye's
Tertullian_, p. 324.

[446:3] These may be found in Routh's "Reliquiae." Eusebius has
preserved many of them.

[447:1] "Si quis legat Scripturas.....et erit consummatus discipulus, et
similis patrifamilias, qui de thesauro suo profert nova et
vetera."--_Irenaeus_, iv. c. 26, Sec. i.

[447:2] "Ubi fomenta fidei de scripturarum interjectione?"--_Tertullian,
Ad Uxorem_, lib. ii. c. 6.

[447:3] As in the case of Origen. In the Didascalia we meet with the
following directions--"Teach then your children the word of the
Lord..... Teach them to write, and to read the Holy Scriptures."
--_Ethiopic Didascalia, by Platt_, p. 130.

[447:4] Euseb. viii. c. 13.

[448:1] Clemens Alexandrinus, "Stromata," lib. vii.

[448:2] Homil. xxxix. on Jer. xliv. 22.

[448:3] Period I. sec. ii. chap. i. p. 184.

[448:4] The fathers traced analogies between the four Gospels and the
four cardinal points, the living creatures with four faces, and the four
rivers of Paradise. See Irenaeus, lib. iii. c. xi. Sec. 8; and Cyprian,
Epist. lxxiii., Opera, p. 281.

[449:1] Such as the Epistle of Barnabas and the Shepherd of Hermas.

[449:2] See Westcott on the Canon, pp. 452, 453.

[449:3] "The opinion that falsehood, was allowable, and might even be
necessary to guide the multitude, was," says Neander, "a principle
inbred into the aristocratic spirit of the old world."--_General
History_, ii. p. 72.

[449:4] Such as the numerous works ascribed to Clemens Romanus, and the
Ignatian Epistles.

[450:1] Cyprian, Epist. lxxiv. p. 294.

[450:2] Cyprian, Epist. lxxiv. p. 296.

[450:3] Cyprian, Epist. lxxiv. p. 294.

[450:4] The conflicting traditions relative to the time of keeping the
Paschal feast afford a striking illustration of this fact.

[450:5] See Kaye's "Justin Martyr," p. 75.

[450:6] "Originis vitium." "Malum igitur animae.... ex originis vitio
antecedit."--_De Anima_, c. 41. Cyprian calls it "contagio antiqua."
"Innovati Spiritu Sancto a sordibus contagionis antiquae."--_De Habitu
Virginum_, cap iv.

[450:7] "Per quem (Satanan) homo a primordio circumventus, ut praeceptum
Dei excederet, et propterea in mortem datus exinde totum genus de suo
semine infectum suae etiam damnationis traducem fecit."--_De Testimonio
Animae_, c. iii.

[451:1] "Nothing can be less systematic or less organized than their
notions on this subject; I might say, often even contradictory; such
inconsistency partly, perhaps, arising from the point never having been
canvassed by men with any care, as it eventually was by
controversialists of a later day,... and partly from the embarrassment
of their position; for whilst Scripture and self-experience compelled
them to admit the grievous corruption of our nature, they had
perpetually to contend against a powerful body of heretics, _who made
such corruption the ground for affirming that a world so evil could not
have been created by a good God, but was the work of a Demiurgus_"
--_Blunt's Early Fathers_, pp. 585, 586.

[451:2] "Paedagogue," lib. i.

[451:3] See Kaye's "Clement," p. 432. See also the comments of Neander,
"General History," ii. 388.

[451:4] Pliny's Epistle to Trajan.

[451:5] See various passages in Justin's Dialogue with Trypho, and in
Origen against Celsus.

[452:1] Thus Origen says--"We do not pay the _highest worship to Him who
appeared so lately, as to a person who had no previous existence_, for
we believe Him when He says himself--'Before Abraham was, I
am.'"--_Contra Celsum_, viii. Sec. 12.

[452:1] The origin of this name has been much controverted. It is
probable that it was derived from Ebion, the founder of the sect. See
Period I. sect. ii. chap. iii. p. 206. Among other things the party seem
to have inculcated voluntary poverty.

[452:3] This passage, which is somewhat obscure as it stands in the
original, has been misinterpreted by Unitarian writers from generation
to generation. The rendering which they commonly give of it makes it
quite inconsistent with the context, and with the statements of Justin
elsewhere. See Kaye's "Justin," p. 51.

[453:1] Thus Tertullian says, "The only man without sin is Christ,
because Christ is _also God_."--_De Anima_, cap. xli. Justin Martyr
complains that the Jews had expunged from the Septuagint many passages
"wherein it might be clearly shewn that He who was crucified was _both
God and man_."--_Dialogue with Trypho_, Sec. 71.

[453:2] Euseb. v. 28.

[454:1] Euseb. v. 27, 30. Epiphanius, "Haer." 65, 1.

[454:2] The superscription of this epistle is a sufficient refutation of
much of the reasoning of Mr Shepherd against the genuineness of the
Cyprianic correspondence, as here the names of a crowd of bishops are
given without any mention whatever of their sees.

[454:3] Euseb. vii. 30.

[454:4] [Greek: trias] or trinitas.

[454:5] This is, however, by no means clear, as there is nothing in his
works to indicate that he held such a position.

[454:6] "Ad Autolycum," ii. c. 15. [Greek: tupoi eisin tes Triados].

[455:1] Thus Irenaeus says--"There is ever present with Him (the Father)
the Word and _Wisdom_, the Son and _Spirit_."--_Contra Haereses_, iv.
20, Sec. 1. It may here be proper to add that the early Christians
worshipped the third Person of the Trinity. Thus, Hippolytus
says--"Through Him (the Incarnate Word) we form a conception of the
Father; we believe in the Son; _we worship the Holy Ghost_."--_Contra
Noetum_, c. 12.

[455:2] "Legat. pro. Christianis," c. 10.

[455:3] "Legat. pro. Christ." c. 12.

[456:1] "Monarchiam, inquiunt, tenemus."--_Tertullian, Adv. Praxean_, c.
3.

[456:2] "Athanas de Synodis," c. 7.

[456:3] Hippolytus, "Philosophumena," book ix.

[456:4] He flourished about A.D. 220, and was contemporary with
Hippolytus. See Bunsen, i. 131.

[457:1] Hermias speaks of the Trinity of Plato as "God, and matter, and
example."--Sec. 5.

[457:2] "Doleo bona fide Platonem omnium haereticorum condimentarium
factum. ... Cum igitur hujusmodi argumento illa insinuentur a Platone
quae haeretici mutuantur, satis haereticos repercutiam, si argumentum
Platonis elidam."--_De Anima_, c. 23.

[457:3] "Adversus Praxeam," c. 2, 3.

[458:1] "Paedagogue," book i. c. 5, 6, 11.

[458:2] Opera, p. 74.

[458:3] "Paedagogue," book i. c. 1.

[458:4] "Stromata," book ii.

[458:5] Justin, Opera, p. 500.

[459:1] See Kaye's "Clement," pp. 431, 435.

[459:2] Epist. i. ad Donatum, Opera, p. 3.

[459:3] The philosophers, according to Justin, maintained a general, but
denied a particular providence. Dial, with Trypho, Opera, p. 218. Some
who call themselves Christians adopt this portion of the pagan theology.

[460:1] "Non facti solum, verum et voluntatis delicta vitanda, et
poenitentia purganda esse."--_Tertullian, De Paenitentia_, c. iii.

[460:2] "Hoc enim pretio Dominus veniam addicere instituit."--_Tert. De
Paenit_. c. vi.

[460:3] Clemens Alexandrinus, "Strom." book vi.

[460:4] "Sufficiat martyri propria delicta purgasse."--_Tertullian, De
Pudicitia_, c. 22.

[460:5] See Kaye's "Tertullian," p. 431. Origen speaks of the baptism of
blood (martyrdom) rendering us purer than the baptism of water. Opera,
ii. p. 473.

[460:6] Epist. lxxvi. Opera, p. 322.

[460:7] Epist. lv. p. 181.

[461:1] Ps. cxix 18, 19.

[463:1] See the Apology of Athenagoras, secs. 3, 10; and Minucius Felix,
c. 10.

[463:2] "Nostrae columbae etiam domus simplex, in editis semper et
apertis, et ad lucem."--_Tertullian, Advers. Valent._ c. 3.

[463:3] Life of Alexander Severus, by Lampridius, c. 49.

[464:1] See Kennett's "Antiquities of Rome," p. 41.

[464:2] Bingham has proved, by a variety of testimonies, that such was
the order of the ancient service. See his "Origines," iv. 383, 400, 417.
The early Christians thus literally obeyed the commandment--"Come before
his presence with singing;" "_Enter into his gates_ with thanksgiving,
and into his courts with praise."--(Ps. c. 2, 4.).

[464:3] See 1 Cor. xiv. 26. See also Euseb. v. 28.

[464:4] At the end of his "Paedagogue." This hymn to the Saviour was
composed by Clement himself.

[465:1] Euseb. vii. 30.

[465:2] See Bingham, i. p. 383. Edit. London, 1840.

[465:3] Chrysostom in Psalm cxlix. See Bingham, ii. 485.

[466:1] [Greek: hose dunamis.] See Origen, "Contra Celsum," iii. 1 and
57; Opera, i. 447, 485.

[466:2] "Apol." ii. p. 98.

[466:3] "Suspicientes Christiani manibus expansis denique sine monitore,
quia de pectore oramus."--_Apol._ c. 30. The omission of a single word,
when repeating the heathen liturgy, was considered a great misfortune.
Chevallier says, speaking of this expression _sine monitore_--"There is
probably an allusion to the persons who were appointed, at the
sacrifices of the Romans, _to prompt the magistrates_, lest they should
incidentally omit _a single word_ in the appropriate formulae, which
would have vitiated the whole proceedings."--_Translation of the
Epistles of Clement_, &c., p. 411, note.

[466:4] Opera, i. 267.

[466:5] See Minucius Felix.

[466:6] Tertullian, "De Oratione," c. 14.

[466:7] See Bingham, iv. 324. In prayer the Christians soon began to
turn the face to the east. See Tertullian, "Apol." c. 16. This custom
appears to have been borrowed from the Eastern nations who worshipped
the sun. See Kaye's "Tertullian," p. 408.

[467:1] Thus Prideaux mentions how the Persian priests, long before the
commencement of our era, approached the sacred fire "to read _the daily
offices of their Liturgy_ before it."--_Connections_, part i., book iv.,
vol. i. p. 218. This liturgy was composed by Zoroaster nearly five
hundred years before Christ's birth.

[467:2] See Clarkson on "Liturgies," and Hartung, "Religion der Romer."
It is remarkable that the old pagan Roman liturgy, in consequence of the
change in the language from the time of its original establishment,
began at length to be almost unintelligible to the people. It thus
resembles the present Romish Liturgy. The pagans believed that their
prayers were more successful when offered up in a barbarous and unknown
language. See Potter's "Antiquities of Greece," i. 288. Edit. Edinburgh,
1818. The Lacedaemonians had a form of prayer from which they never
varied either in public or private. Potter i. 281.

[467:3] "In the persecutions under Diocletian and his associates, though
a strict inquiry was made after the books of Scripture, and other things
belonging to the Church, which were often delivered up by the
_Traditores_ to be burnt, yet we never read of any ritual books, or
books of divine service, delivered up among them."--_Bingham_, iv. 187.

[467:4] It is worthy of note that, in modern times, when there is any
great revival of religion, forms of prayer fall into comparative
desuetude even among those by whom they were formerly used.

[468:1] See Tertullian, "De Oratione," c. 9; and Origen, "De Oratione."

[468:2] 1 Tim. ii. 2.

[468:3] Tertullian, "Apol." c. 39.

[468:4] See Tertullian, "De Praescrip." c. 41.

[468:5] See Guerike's "Manual of the Antiquities of the Church," by
Morrison, p. 214.

[468:6] Guerike's "Manual," p. 213.

[469:1] There is reference to this in the "Apostolic Constitutions,"
lib. ii. c. 57. Cotelerius, i. 266.

[469:2] Euseb. vii. 30.

[470:1] See Bingham, ii. 212.

[470:2] Letter from Pius of Rome to Justus of Vienne.

[470:3] Bingham, ii. 451.

[470:4] See Period II. sec. i. chap. iii. p. 320.

[472:1] See the "Epistle of the Church of Smyrna," giving an account of
his martyrdom, Sec. 9.

[472:2] The Latin version of his words, as given by Jacobson,
is--"Octogesimum jam et sextum _annum aetatis_ ingredior."--_Pat.
Apost._ ii. 565. See also the "Chronicum Alexandrinum" as quoted by
Cotelerius, ii. 194; and Gregory of Tours, "Hist." i. 28.

[472:3] He is represented as _standing_, when offering up a prayer of
about two hours' length (Sec. 7), and as _running_ with great speed (Sec. 8).
Such strength at such an age was extraordinary. The Apostle John is said
to have lived to the age of one hundred; but, towards the close of his
life, he appears to have lost his wonted energy.

[472:4] "Apol." ii. Opera, p. 62. See Dr Wilson's observations on this
passage in his "Infant Baptism," pp. 447, 448.

[473:1] Dialogue with Trypho. Opera, p. 261.

[473:2] There may here be a reference to 1 Cor. vii. 14.

[473:3] Book ii. c. xxii. Sec. 4.

[473:4] Thus he says--"Giving to His disciples the power of
_regeneration unto God_, He said to them--Go and teach all nations,
_baptizing_ them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost."--Book iii. c. xvii. Sec. 1. Thus, too, he speaks of the
heretics using certain rites "to the rejection of _baptism, which is
regeneration unto God_."--Book i. c. xxi. Sec. 1. Irenaeus here apparently
means that baptism _typically_ is regeneration, in the same way as the
bread and wine in the Eucharist are _typically_ the body and blood of
Christ.

[474:1] That infant baptism was now practised at Alexandria is apparent
also from the testimony of Clemens Alexandrinus, who, in allusion to
this rite, speaks of "the children that are _drawn up out of the
water_."--Paedag. iii. c. 11.

[474:2] Hom. xiv. in "Lucam." Opera, iii. 948. See also Opera, ii. 230.
Hom. viii. in "Leviticum."

[474:3] Comment. in "Epist. ad Roman," lib. v. Opera, iv. 565.

[475:1] "De Baptismo," c. 18.

[475:2] Acts ii. 41.

[475:3] Acts viii. 37, 38; xvi. 31-33.

[476:1] "_Parents_ were commonly _sponsors for their own children_ ...
and the extraordinary cases in which they were presented by others, were
commonly such cases, where the parent could not, or would not, do that
kind office for them; as when slaves were presented to baptism by their
masters, or children whose parents were dead, were brought, by the
charity of any who would shew mercy on them; or children exposed by
their parents, which were sometimes taken up by the holy virgins of the
Church, and by them presented unto baptism. These are _the only cases_
mentioned by St Austin in which children seem to have had other
sponsors."--_Bingham_, iii. 552.

[476:2] Mark x. 14.

[476:3] Compare Mark x. 13-16 with Luke xviii. 15, 16.

[477:1] See Acts xvi. 15.

[477:2] "De Baptismo," c. viii. xvi.

[477:3] "It would be thought by many a cruelty to place a person
_without his own consent_, and in unconscious infancy, in a situation,
so far, much more disadvantageous than that of those brought up pagans,
that if he did ever--suppose at the age of fifteen or twenty--fall into
any sin, he must remain for the rest of his life--perhaps for above half
a century--deprived of all hope, or at least of all confident hope, of
restoration to the divine favour; shut out from all that cheering
prospect which, if his baptism in infancy _had been omitted_, might have
lain before him."--_Archbishop Whately's Scripture Doctrine concerning
the Sacraments_, p. 11, note.

[478:1] Acts ii. 38, 39.

[478:2] Gen. xvii. 12; Lev. xii. 3.

[479:1] Epist. lix. pp. 211, 212.

[479:2] Laurentius, a Roman deacon, who flourished about the middle of
the third century, is represented as baptizing one Romanus, a soldier,
in a pitcher of water, and another individual, named Lucillus, by
pouring water upon his head. See Bingham, iii. 599.

[480:1] Here the validity of the ordinance is made to depend upon the
personal character of the administrator.

[480:2] Epist. lxxvi. p. 321.

[480:3] Epist. lxxiv. p. 295.

[480:4] Epist. lxxvi. p. 317. In like manner Clement of Alexandria
says--"Our transgressions are remitted by one sovereign medicine, the
baptism according to the Word." See Kaye's "Clement," p. 437.

[480:5] Epist. lxx. p. 269.

[480:6] Tertullian, "De Baptismo," c. 1.

[480:7] Cyprian, "Con. Carthag." pp. 600, 602.

[480:8] See Kaye's "Clement of Alexandria," p. 441, and Tertullian, "De
Corona," c. 3.

[480:9] Tertullian, "De Baptismo," c. 7.

[480:10] Tertullian, "De Baptismo," c. 8.

[481:1] "De Resurrectione Carnis," c. 8.

[481:2] "In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost."--Matt, xxviii. 19.

[481:3] Bingham, iii. 377.

[483:1] Rev. xxii. 18, 19.

[484:1] "Apol." ii. Opera, pp. 97, 98.

[485:1] In an article on the Roman Catacombs, in the "Edinburgh Review"
for January 1859, the writer observes--"It is apparent from all the
paintings of Christian feasts, whether of the Agapae, or the burial
feasts of the dead, or the Communion of the Holy Sacrament, that they
were celebrated by the early Christians _sitting round a table_."

[485:2] This calumny created much prejudice against them in the second
century. See Justin Martyr's "Dialogue with Trypho," Sec. 10; and the
"Apology of Athenagoras," Sec. 3. If Pliny refers to the Eucharist when he
speaks of the early Christians as partaking of food together, it is
obvious that they must then have communicated sitting, or in the posture
in which they partook of their ordinary meals.

[485:3] Tertullian, "De Oratione," c. 14.

[485:4] See Euseb. vii. 9.

[485:5] Justin Martyr, "Apol." ii. 98; and Tertullian's "Apol." c. 39.

[486:1] Epist. lxiii. "To Caecilius," Opera, p. 229.

[486:2] Larroque's "History of the Eucharist," p. 35. London, 1684.

[486:3] Cyprian, "De Lapsis," Opera, pp. 375, 381. This was probably the
result of carrying to excess a protest against the Montanist opposition
to infant baptism. Such a reaction often occurs. It was now maintained
that the Lord's Supper, as well as Baptism, should be administered to
infants.

[486:4] At an earlier period it was dispensed in presence of the
catechumens. See Bingham, iii. p. 380.

[486:5] "De Oratione Dominica," Opera, p. 421.

[487:1] See Kaye's "Tertullian," p. 357.

[487:2] See Gieseler's "Text Book of Ecclesiastical History," by
Cunningham ii. 331, note 3.

[487:3] "Dialogue with Trypho," Opera, pp. 296, 297.

[487:4] See Kaye's "Clement of Alexandria," p. 445.

[487:5] [Greek: akeraioteron], Opera, in. p. 498.

[488:1] In Mat. tom. xi. Opera, iii. 499, 500.

[488:2] Epist. lxiii. "To Caecilius," Opera, p. 225.

[488:3] Epist. lxiii. Opera, 228.

[488:4] Matt, xviii. 20.

[489:1] Irenaeus, "Contra Haereses," v. c. 2, Sec. 3. Clement of Alexandria
says that "to drink the blood of Jesus is to partake of the incorruption
of the Lord."--_Paedagogue_, book ii.

[489:2] "Contra Haereses," iv. c. 18, Sec. 5.

[489:3] This feeling prevailed in the time of Tertullian. "Calicis aut
panis etiam nostri aliquid decuti in terram auxie patimur."--_De
Corona_, c. 3.

[489:4] Hom. xiii. in "Exod." Opera, ii. 176.

[489:5] Ps. xii. 6.

[490:1] See Kaye's "Justin Martyr," p. 94. Irenaeus, iv. o. 17, Sec. 5.
Tertullian, "De Oratione," c. 14.

[490:2] "Nonne solemnior erit statio tua, si et ad aram Dei steteris?"
Tertullian, "De Oratione," c. 14, or, according to Oehler, c. 19.

[491:1] Matt. iii. 5, 6.

[491:2] Acts xix. 17, 18.

[493:1] Acts xvi. 33.

[493:2] "Apol." ii. Opera, p. 93, 94.

[493:1] "De Paenitentia," c. ix.

[493:2] Joshua vii. 6; Esther iv. 1; Isaiah lviii. 5; Ezek. xxvii. 30.

[494:1] See a "Memorial concerning Personal and Family Fasting," by the
pious Thomas Boston. Edinburgh, 1849.

[494:2] Matt. ix. 15.

[494:3] Lev. xxiii. 27.

[494:4] The text Matt. ix. 15 was urged in support of this observance.
See Tertullian, "De Jejun." c. ii.

[494:5] "Wednesday being selected because on that day the Jews took
counsel to destroy Christ, and Friday because that was the day of His
crucifixion."--_Kaye's Tertullian_, p. 418. As Wednesday was dedicated
to Mercury and Friday to Venus, this fasting, according to Clement,
signified to the more advanced disciple, that he was to renounce the
love of gain and the love of pleasure. Kaye's "Clement," p. 454.

[495:1] These Xerophagiae, or Dry Food Days, were even now objected to
by some of the more enlightened Christians on the ground that they were
an import from heathenism. Tertullian, "De Jejun." c. ii.

[495:2] Col. ii. 23.

[495:3] Thus Cyprian, Epist. liii. p. 169, speaks of a penance of three
years' duration.

[496:1] Socrates, v. c. 19.

[497:1] See canon xi. of the Council of Nice.

[497:2] See Cyprian, Epist. xl., p. 53, and "ad Demetrianum," p. 442.

[497:3] See p. 419, note Sec..

[497:4] See p. 460.

[498:1] Rom. iii. 28.

[498:2] Matt. iii. 8.

[498:3] Isa. lviii. 6-8.

[499:1] Period II. sec. iii. chap. i. pp. 465, 466.

[499:2] 1 Tim. v. 17.

[500:1] Apost. Constit. ii. c. 17.

[500:2] Phil. iv. 3.

[500:3] No less than five persons are mentioned as having preceded
Polycarp in the see of Smyrna, viz., Aristo, Strataeas, another Aristo,
Apelles, and Bucolus. See Jacobson's "Patres Apostolici," ii. 564, 565,
note. It is not at all probable that he became the senior presbyter long
before the middle of the second century. Irenaeus, indeed, tells us that
he was constituted bishop of Smyrna _by the apostles_ (lib. iii. c. 3, Sec.
4)--a statement which implies that _at least two_ of the inspired
heralds of the gospel were concerned in his designation to the ministry;
but as he was still only a boy of nineteen when the last survivor of the
twelve died in extreme old age, the words cannot mean that he was
actually ordained by those to whom our Lord originally entrusted the
organization of the Church. The language was probably designed simply to
import that John and perhaps Philip had announced his future eminence
when he was yet a child, and that thus, like Timothy, he was invested
with the pastoral commission "according to the prophecies" which they
had previously delivered. See 1 Tim. i. 18; iv. 14.

[501:1] Sec. 74.

[502:1] Sec. 54.

[502:2] Sec. 44.

[502:3] Sec. 44. All these quotations attest the late date of the
Epistle. Tillemont places it in A.D. 97. Eusebius had evidently no doubt
as to its late date. See his "History," iii. 16.

[502:4] Sec. 57.

[502:5] For many centuries it was considered lost. At length in the
reign of Charles I. a copy of it was discovered appended to a very
ancient manuscript containing the Septuagint and Greek Testament--the
manuscript now known as the Codex Alexandrinus.

[502:6] Euseb. iii. 16; iv. 23.

[503:1] See the Romish Breviary under the 23d of November, where a
number of absurd stories are told concerning him.

[503:2] Sec. 42.

[503:3] They continued to be so used when the Peshito version of the New
Testament was made. That version is assigned by the best authorities to
the former half of the second century. See p. 421, note.

[503:4] It is probably of nearly the same date as the first Apology of
Justin Martyr.

[504:1] [Greek: hoi sun autoi presbuteroi]--evidently equivalent to
[Greek: sumpresbuteroi]. See 1 Pet. v. i.

[504:2] Phil. i. 1.

[504:3] Sec. 5.

[504:4] Sec. 6.

[504:5] Jerome, "Comment. in Tit."

[504:6] 1 Cor. xiv. 40.

[505:1] As in Acts xiv. 23.

[505:2] I make no apology for employing a word which, even the
Benedictine Editor of Origen has adopted. Thus he speaks of the
"senatores et _moderatores_ ecclesiae Dei."--_Contra Celsum._ iii. 30,
Opera, i. 466.

[505:3] Such as Acts xxi. 18; Gal. ii. 12.

[506:1] "At Antioch some, as Origen and Eusebius, make Ignatius to
succeed Peter. Jerome makes him the third bishop, and placeth Evodius
before him. Others, therefore, to solve that, make them contemporary
bishops; the one, of the Church of the Jews; the other, of the
Gentiles.... Come we to Rome, and here the succession is as muddy as the
Tiber itself; for here Tertullian, Rufinus, and several others, place
Clement next to Peter. Irenaeus and Eusebius set Anacletus before him;
Epiphanius and Optatus both Anacletus and Cletus; Augustinus and
Damasus, with others, make Anacletus, Cletus, and Linus all to precede
him. What way shall we find to extricate ourselves out of this
labyrinth?"--_Stillingfleet's Irenicum_, part ii. ch. 7. p. 321.

[506:2] "Polycarp, and the elders who are with him, to the Church of God
which is at Philippi."

[506:3] A Roman deacon of the fourth century. His works are commonly
appended to those of Ambrose.

[507:1] "Primum presbyteri episcopi appellabantur, ut, recedente uno,
sequens ei succederet."--_Comment. in Eph._ iv.

[507:2] "Ut omnis episcopus presbyter sit, non omnis presbyter
episcopus; hic enim episcopus est, qui inter presbyteros primus
est."--_Comment. in 1 Tim_. iii. According to a learned writer this
arrangement extended farther. "Ita, uti videtur, comparatum fuit, ut
defuncto presbytero, primus ordine diaconus locum occuparet ultimum
presbyterorum, novusque in locum novissimum substitueretur diaconus;
decedente vero episcopo, primus ordine presbyter in ejus locum
sufficeretur, et primus in ordine diaconorum novissimam presbyterii
sedem capesseret."--_Thomae Brunonis Judicium de auctore Can. et Const.
quae apost. dicuntur_. Cotelerius, ii. Ap. p. 179.

[507:3] 1 Pet. v. 5. It is a curious and striking fact, arguing strongly
in favour of the antiquity of their Church polity, that among the
Vaudois Barbs of old the claims of seniority were distinctly
acknowledged. The following rule of discipline is taken from one of
their ancient MSS. "He that is received the last (into the ministry by
imposition of hands) ought to do nothing without the permission of him
that was received before him."--_Moreland, History of the Evang. Ch. of
the Valleys of Piedmont_, p. 74.

[507:4] He is speaking immediately before of presbyters. See 1 Pet.
v. 1-4.

[507:5] Matt. x. 2, "_The first_, Simon, who is called Peter." Mark iii.
16; Luke vi. 14; Acts i. 13.

[507:6] Jerome in "Jovin," i. 14.

[508:1] Savigny's "History of the Roman Law," by Cathcart, i. pp. 62,
63, 75.

[508:2] Euseb. iii. 23. [Greek: ho presbutes].

[508:3] In Africa the senior bishop or metropolitan was called _father_.
See Bingham, i. 200. In the second century we find the name given to the
Roman bishop. See Routh's "Reliquiae," i. 287. According to Eutychius,
his predecessor in the see of Alexandria in the early part of the third
century was called "Baba (Papa), that is, grandfather."

[509:1] Euseb. v. 1.

[509:2] He was one hundred and sixteen years of age in A.D. 212 (Euseb.
vi. 11), so that in A.D. 196, or about the time of the Palestinian Synod
at which he presided (Euseb. v. 23), he was a century old.

[509:3] Etheridge's "Syrian Churches," pp. 9, 10.

[509:4] See 1 Tim. iv. 12.

[509:5] That is, Anacletus, Evaristus, Alexander, Sixtus, Telesphorus,
and Hyginus; but some consider Anacletus the same as Cletus, who is
supposed to have died before Clement.

[510:1] Pearson has noticed this fact, and has endeavoured to erect upon
it an argument against the current chronology. See his "Minor Works,"
ii. 527. It would appear that the names of the three bishops of Smyrna
next after Polycarp were Thraseas, Papirius, and Camerius. At least two
of these had passed away a considerable time before the Paschal
controversy. See Greswell's "Dissertations," iv. part ii. p. 600, note.

[510:2] Hist. iv. 5.

[510:3] According to Eusebius his appointment took place _after_ the
destruction of Jerusalem, or about A.D. 71. He was, therefore, at the
head of the Church forty-five years, as his martyrdom occurred in A.D.
116. According to this reckoning he was in his seventy-fifth year when
made president.

[510:4] This explanation of the matter approximates to that given by
Tillemont. "Cela peut etre venu de ce qu'on les choisissoit entre les
plus agez du Clerge pour les faire Evesques: car on ne voit pas qu'ils
ayent este plus persecutez que d'autres."--_Mem. pour servir a
l'Histoire Ecclesiastique_, tom. ii. part ii. p. 40. It would appear
from Eusebius (iii. 32), that at the time of the death of Simeon there
were still living a number of very old persons who were relatives of our
Lord. Some of these were, probably, elders in the Church of Jerusalem.

[511:1] He is said in the "Chronicon" of Eusebius to have presided
sixteen years.

[511:2] Euseb. v. 12.

[512:1] In the tenth century, the darkest and most revolting period in
the history of the Popedom, there were _twenty-four_ bishops of Rome.
Some of these reigned only a few days; at least one of them was
strangled; several of them died in prison; and several others were
driven from the see or deposed. There have been only twenty-four Popes
in the last two hundred and fifty years.

[512:2] There have been only twenty-eight Archbishops of Canterbury
since 1454.

[512:3] In the middle of the third century we find Firmilian appealing
to it as a witness against the Church of Home. Cyprian, Epist. lxxv.
Opera, p. 303.

[512:4] "Hist." vi. 20.

[513:1] "Hist." iv. 5; v. 12.

[513:2] Such as, after the death of the aged Simeon, when Justus, at the
age of fivescore and ten, was advanced to the presidential chair.

[514:1] Irenaeus, iii. 2. Tertullian, "De Praescrip. Haeret." Sec. 25.

[514:2] "Ad eam iterum traditionem, quae est ab apostolis, quae _per
successiones presbyterorum_ in ecclesiis custoditur, provocamus
eos."--Irenaeus, iii. 2.

[514:3] Irenaeus here speaks in the language of his own times, and
refers to the presidents, or senior ministers, of the presbyteries. In
like manner Hilary says that the change in the mode of appointing the
