which is called the New Law: and in the first place we must consider
it in itself; secondly, in comparison with the Old Law; thirdly, we
shall treat of those things that are contained in the New Law. Under
the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) What kind of law is it? i.e. Is it a written law or is it
instilled in the heart?

(2) Of its efficacy, i.e. does it justify?

(3) Of its beginning: should it have been given at the beginning of
the world?

(4) Of its end: i.e. whether it will last until the end, or will
another law take its place?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 106, Art. 1]

Whether the New Law Is a Written Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law is a written law. For the
New Law is just the same as the Gospel. But the Gospel is set forth
in writing, according to John 20:31: "But these are written that you
may believe." Therefore the New Law is a written law.

Obj. 2: Further, the law that is instilled in the heart is the
natural law, according to Rom. 2:14, 15: "(The Gentiles) do by nature
those things that are of the law . . . who have [Vulg.: 'show'] the
work of the law written in their hearts." If therefore the law of the
Gospel were instilled in our hearts, it would not be distinct from
the law of nature.

Obj. 3: Further, the law of the Gospel is proper to those who are in
the state of the New Testament. But the law that is instilled in the
heart is common to those who are in the New Testament and to those
who are in the Old Testament: for it is written (Wis. 7:27) that
Divine Wisdom "through nations conveyeth herself into holy souls, she
maketh the friends of God and prophets." Therefore the New Law is not
instilled in our hearts.

_On the contrary,_ The New Law is the law of the New Testament. But
the law of the New Testament is instilled in our hearts. For the
Apostle, quoting the authority of Jeremiah 31:31, 33: "Behold the
days shall come, saith the Lord; and I will perfect unto the house of
Israel, and unto the house of Judah, a new testament," says,
explaining what this statement is (Heb. 8:8, 10): "For this is the
testament which I will make to the house of Israel . . . by giving
[Vulg.: 'I will give'] My laws into their mind, and in their heart
will I write them." Therefore the New Law is instilled in our hearts.

_I answer that,_ "Each thing appears to be that which preponderates
in it," as the Philosopher states (Ethic. ix, 8). Now that which is
preponderant in the law of the New Testament, and whereon all its
efficacy is based, is the grace of the Holy Ghost, which is given
through faith in Christ. Consequently the New Law is chiefly the
grace itself of the Holy Ghost, which is given to those who believe
in Christ. This is manifestly stated by the Apostle who says (Rom.
3:27): "Where is . . . thy boasting? It is excluded. By what law? Of
works? No, but by the law of faith": for he calls the grace itself of
faith "a law." And still more clearly it is written (Rom. 8:2): "The
law of the spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, hath delivered me from
the law of sin and of death." Hence Augustine says (De Spir. et Lit.
xxiv) that "as the law of deeds was written on tables of stone, so is
the law of faith inscribed on the hearts of the faithful": and
elsewhere, in the same book (xxi): "What else are the Divine laws
written by God Himself on our hearts, but the very presence of His
Holy Spirit?"

Nevertheless the New Law contains certain things that dispose us to
receive the grace of the Holy Ghost, and pertaining to the use of
that grace: such things are of secondary importance, so to speak, in
the New Law; and the faithful need to be instructed concerning them,
both by word and writing, both as to what they should believe and as
to what they should do. Consequently we must say that the New Law is
in the first place a law that is inscribed on our hearts, but that
secondarily it is a written law.

Reply Obj. 1: The Gospel writings contain only such things as pertain
to the grace of the Holy Ghost, either by disposing us thereto, or by
directing us to the use thereof. Thus with regard to the intellect,
the Gospel contains certain matters pertaining to the manifestation
of Christ's Godhead or humanity, which dispose us by means of faith
through which we receive the grace of the Holy Ghost: and with regard
to the affections, it contains matters touching the contempt of the
world, whereby man is rendered fit to receive the grace of the Holy
Ghost: for "the world," i.e. worldly men, "cannot receive" the Holy
Ghost (John 14:17). As to the use of spiritual grace, this consists
in works of virtue to which the writings of the New Testament exhort
men in divers ways.

Reply Obj. 2: There are two ways in which a thing may be instilled
into man. First, through being part of his nature, and thus the
natural law is instilled into man. Secondly, a thing is instilled
into man by being, as it were, added on to his nature by a gift of
grace. In this way the New Law is instilled into man, not only by
indicating to him what he should do, but also by helping him to
accomplish it.

Reply Obj. 3: No man ever had the grace of the Holy Ghost except
through faith in Christ either explicit or implicit: and by faith in
Christ man belongs to the New Testament. Consequently whoever had the
law of grace instilled into them belonged to the New Testament.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 106, Art. 2]

Whether the New Law Justifies?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law does not justify. For no
man is justified unless he obeys God's law, according to Heb. 5:9:
"He," i.e. Christ, "became to all that obey Him the cause of eternal
salvation." But the Gospel does not always cause men to believe in
it: for it is written (Rom. 10:16): "All do not obey the Gospel."
Therefore the New Law does not justify.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle proves in his epistle to the Romans that
the Old Law did not justify, because transgression increased at its
advent: for it is stated (Rom. 4:15): "The Law worketh wrath: for
where there is no law, neither is there transgression." But much more
did the New Law increase transgression: since he who sins after the
giving of the New Law deserves greater punishment, according to Heb.
10:28, 29: "A man making void the Law of Moses dieth without any
mercy under two or three witnesses. How much more, do you think, he
deserveth worse punishments, who hath trodden underfoot the Son of
God," etc.? Therefore the New Law, like the Old Law, does not justify.

Obj. 3: Further, justification is an effect proper to God, according
to Rom. 8:33: "God that justifieth." But the Old Law was from God
just as the New Law. Therefore the New Law does not justify any more
than the Old Law.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 1:16): "I am not ashamed of
the Gospel: for it is the power of God unto salvation to everyone
that believeth." But there is no salvation but to those who are
justified. Therefore the Law of the Gospel justifies.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), there is a twofold element
in the Law of the Gospel. There is the chief element, viz. the grace
of the Holy Ghost bestowed inwardly. And as to this, the New Law
justifies. Hence Augustine says (De Spir. et Lit. xvii): "There,"
i.e. in the Old Testament, "the Law was set forth in an outward
fashion, that the ungodly might be afraid"; "here," i.e. in the New
Testament, "it is given in an inward manner, that they may be
justified." The other element of the Evangelical Law is secondary:
namely, the teachings of faith, and those commandments which direct
human affections and human actions. And as to this, the New Law does
not justify. Hence the Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:6) "The letter killeth,
but the spirit quickeneth": and Augustine explains this (De Spir. et
Lit. xiv, xvii) by saying that the letter denotes any writing
external to man, even that of the moral precepts such as are
contained in the Gospel. Wherefore the letter, even of the Gospel
would kill, unless there were the inward presence of the healing
grace of faith.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument holds true of the New Law, not as to its
principal, but as to its secondary element: i.e. as to the dogmas and
precepts outwardly put before man either in words or in writing.

Reply Obj. 2: Although the grace of the New Testament helps man to
avoid sin, yet it does not so confirm man in good that he cannot sin:
for this belongs to the state of glory. Hence if a man sin after
receiving the grace of the New Testament, he deserves greater
punishment, as being ungrateful for greater benefits, and as not
using the help given to him. And this is why the New Law is not said
to "work wrath": because as far as it is concerned it gives man
sufficient help to avoid sin.

Reply Obj. 3: The same God gave both the New and the Old Law, but in
different ways. For He gave the Old Law written on tables of stone:
whereas He gave the New Law written "in the fleshly tables of the
heart," as the Apostle expresses it (2 Cor. 3:3). Wherefore, as
Augustine says (De Spir. et Lit. xviii), "the Apostle calls this
letter which is written outside man, a ministration of death and a
ministration of condemnation: whereas he calls the other letter, i.e.
the Law of the New Testament, the ministration of the spirit and the
ministration of justice: because through the gift of the Spirit we
work justice, and are delivered from the condemnation due to
transgression."
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 106, Art. 3]

Whether the New Law Should Have Been Given from the Beginning of the
World?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law should have been given
from the beginning of the world. "For there is no respect of persons
with God" (Rom. 2:11). But "all" men "have sinned and do need the
glory of God" (Rom. 3:23). Therefore the Law of the Gospel should
have been given from the beginning of the world, in order that it
might bring succor to all.

Obj. 2: Further, as men dwell in various places, so do they live in
various times. But God, "Who will have all men to be saved" (1 Tim.
2:4), commanded the Gospel to be preached in all places, as may be
seen in the last chapters of Matthew and Mark. Therefore the Law of
the Gospel should have been at hand for all times, so as to be given
from the beginning of the world.

Obj. 3: Further, man needs to save his soul, which is for all
eternity, more than to save his body, which is a temporal matter. But
God provided man from the beginning of the world with things that are
necessary for the health of his body, by subjecting to his power
whatever was created for the sake of man (Gen. 1:26-29). Therefore
the New Law also, which is very necessary for the health of the soul,
should have been given to man from the beginning of the world.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 15:46): "That was not
first which is spiritual, but that which is natural." But the New Law
is highly spiritual. Therefore it was not fitting for it to be given
from the beginning of the world.

_I answer that,_ Three reasons may be assigned why it was not fitting
for the New Law to be given from the beginning of the world. The
first is because the New Law, as stated above (A. 1), consists
chiefly in the grace of the Holy Ghost: which it behoved not to be
given abundantly until sin, which is an obstacle to grace, had been
cast out of man through the accomplishment of his redemption by
Christ: wherefore it is written (John 7:39): "As yet the Spirit was
not given, because Jesus was not yet glorified." This reason the
Apostle states clearly (Rom. 8:2, seqq.) where, after speaking of
"the Law of the Spirit of life," he adds: "God sending His own Son,
in the likeness of sinful flesh, of sin* hath condemned sin in the
flesh, that the justification of the Law might be fulfilled in us."
[*St. Thomas, quoting perhaps from memory, omits the "et" (and),
after "sinful flesh." The text quoted should read thus: "in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and a sin offering (_peri hamartias_),
hath," etc.]

A second reason may be taken from the perfection of the New Law.
Because a thing is not brought to perfection at once from the outset,
but through an orderly succession of time; thus one is at first a
boy, and then a man. And this reason is stated by the Apostle (Gal.
3:24, 25): "The Law was our pedagogue in Christ that we might be
justified by faith. But after the faith is come, we are no longer
under a pedagogue."

The third reason is found in the fact that the New Law is the law of
grace: wherefore it behoved man first of all to be left to himself
under the state of the Old Law, so that through falling into sin, he
might realize his weakness, and acknowledge his need of grace. This
reason is set down by the Apostle (Rom. 5:20): "The Law entered in,
that sin might abound: and when sin abounded grace did more abound."

Reply Obj. 1: Mankind on account of the sin of our first parents
deserved to be deprived of the aid of grace: and so "from whom it is
withheld it is justly withheld, and to whom it is given, it is
mercifully given," as Augustine states (De Perfect. Justit. iv) [*Cf.
Ep. ccvii; De Pecc. Mer. et Rem. ii, 19]. Consequently it does not
follow that there is respect of persons with God, from the fact that
He did not offer the Law of grace to all from the beginning of the
world, which Law was to be published in due course of time, as stated
above.

Reply Obj. 2: The state of mankind does not vary according to
diversity of place, but according to succession of time. Hence the
New Law avails for all places, but not for all times: although at all
times there have been some persons belonging to the New Testament, as
stated above (A. 1, ad 3).

Reply Obj. 3: Things pertaining to the health of the body are of
service to man as regards his nature, which sin does not destroy:
whereas things pertaining to the health of the soul are ordained to
grace, which is forfeit through sin. Consequently the comparison will
not hold.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 106, Art. 4]

Whether the New Law Will Last Till the End of the World?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law will not last until the
end of the world. Because, as the Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:10), "when
that which is perfect is come, that which is in part shall be done
away." But the New Law is "in part," since the Apostle says (1 Cor.
13:9): "We know in part and we prophesy in part." Therefore the New
Law is to be done away, and will be succeeded by a more perfect state.

Obj. 2: Further, Our Lord (John 16:13) promised His disciples the
knowledge of all truth when the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, should
come. But the Church knows not yet all truth in the state of the New
Testament. Therefore we must look forward to another state, wherein
all truth will be revealed by the Holy Ghost.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the Father is distinct from the Son and the
Son from the Father, so is the Holy Ghost distinct from the Father
and the Son. But there was a state corresponding with the Person of
the Father, viz. the state of the Old Law, wherein men were intent on
begetting children: and likewise there is a state corresponding to
the Person of the Son: viz. the state of the New Law, wherein the
clergy who are intent on wisdom (which is appropriated to the Son)
hold a prominent place. Therefore there will be a third state
corresponding to the Holy Ghost, wherein spiritual men will hold the
first place.

Obj. 4: Further, Our Lord said (Matt. 24:14): "This Gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached in the whole world . . . and then shall the
consummation come." But the Gospel of Christ is already preached
throughout the whole world: and yet the consummation has not yet
come. Therefore the Gospel of Christ is not the Gospel of the
kingdom, but another Gospel, that of the Holy Ghost, is to come yet,
like unto another Law.

_On the contrary,_ Our Lord said (Matt. 24:34): "I say to you that
this generation shall not pass till all (these) things be done":
which passage Chrysostom (Hom. lxxvii) explains as referring to "the
generation of those that believe in Christ." Therefore the state of
those who believe in Christ will last until the consummation of the
world.

_I answer that,_ The state of the world may change in two ways. In
one way, according to a change of law: and thus no other state will
succeed this state of the New Law. Because the state of the New Law
succeeded the state of the Old Law, as a more perfect law a less
perfect one. Now no state of the present life can be more perfect
that the state of the New Law: since nothing can approach nearer to
the last end than that which is the immediate cause of our being
brought to the last end. But the New Law does this: wherefore the
Apostle says (Heb. 10:19-22): "Having therefore, brethren, a
confidence in the entering into the Holies by the blood of Christ, a
new . . . way which He hath dedicated for us . . . let us draw near."
Therefore no state of the present life can be more perfect than that
of the New Law, since the nearer a thing is to the last end the more
perfect it is.

In another way the state of mankind may change according as man
stands in relation to one and the same law more or less perfectly.
And thus the state of the Old Law underwent frequent changes, since
at times the laws were very well kept, and at other times were
altogether unheeded. Thus, too, the state of the New Law is subject
to change with regard to various places, times, and persons,
according as the grace of the Holy Ghost dwells in man more or less
perfectly. Nevertheless we are not to look forward to a state wherein
man is to possess the grace of the Holy Ghost more perfectly than he
has possessed it hitherto, especially the apostles who "received the
firstfruits of the Spirit, i.e. sooner and more abundantly than
others," as a gloss expounds on Rom. 8:23.

Reply Obj. 1: As Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. v), there is a threefold
state of mankind; the first was under the Old Law; the second is that
of the New Law; the third will take place not in this life, but in
heaven. But as the first state is figurative and imperfect in
comparison with the state of the Gospel; so is the present state
figurative and imperfect in comparison with the heavenly state, with
the advent of which the present state will be done away as expressed
in that very passage (1 Cor. 13:12): "We see now through a glass in a
dark manner; but then face to face."

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix, 31), Montanus and
Priscilla pretended that Our Lord's promise to give the Holy Ghost
was fulfilled, not in the apostles, but in themselves. In like manner
the Manicheans maintained that it was fulfilled in Manes whom they
held to be the Paraclete. Hence none of the above received the Acts
of the Apostles, where it is clearly shown that the aforesaid promise
was fulfilled in the apostles: just as Our Lord promised them a
second time (Acts 1:5): "You shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost,
not many days hence": which we read as having been fulfilled in Acts
2. However, these foolish notions are refuted by the statement (John
7:39) that "as yet the Spirit was not given, because Jesus was not
yet glorified"; from which we gather that the Holy Ghost was given as
soon as Christ was glorified in His Resurrection and Ascension.
Moreover, this puts out of court the senseless idea that the Holy
Ghost is to be expected to come at some other time.

Now the Holy Ghost taught the apostles all truth in respect of
matters necessary for salvation; those things, to wit, that we are
bound to believe and to do. But He did not teach them about all
future events: for this did not regard them according to Acts 1:7:
"It is not for you to know the times or moments which the Father hath
put in His own power."

Reply Obj. 3: The Old Law corresponded not only to the Father, but
also to the Son: because Christ was foreshadowed in the Old Law.
Hence Our Lord said (John 5:46): "If you did believe Moses, you would
perhaps believe me also; for he wrote of Me." In like manner the New
Law corresponds not only to Christ, but also to the Holy Ghost;
according to Rom. 8:2: "The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ
Jesus," etc. Hence we are not to look forward to another law
corresponding to the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 4: Since Christ said at the very outset of the preaching
of the Gospel: "The kingdom of heaven is at hand" (Matt. 4:17), it is
most absurd to say that the Gospel of Christ is not the Gospel of the
kingdom. But the preaching of the Gospel of Christ may be understood
in two ways. First, as denoting the spreading abroad of the knowledge
of Christ: and thus the Gospel was preached throughout the world even
at the time of the apostles, as Chrysostom states (Hom. lxxv in
Matth.). And in this sense the words that follow--"and then shall the
consummation come," refer to the destruction of Jerusalem, of which
He was speaking literally. Secondly, the preaching of the Gospel may
be understood as extending throughout the world and producing its
full effect, so that, to wit, the Church would be founded in every
nation. And in these sense, as Augustine writes to Hesychius (Epist.
cxcix), the Gospel is not preached to the whole world yet, but, when
it is, the consummation of the world will come.
________________________

QUESTION 107

OF THE NEW LAW AS COMPARED WITH THE OLD
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the New Law as compared with the Old: under
which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the New Law is distinct from the Old Law?

(2) Whether the New Law fulfils the Old?

(3) Whether the New Law is contained in the Old?

(4) Which is the more burdensome, the New or the Old Law?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 107, Art. 1]

Whether the New Law Is Distinct from the Old Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law is not distinct from the
Old. Because both these laws were given to those who believe in God:
since "without faith it is impossible to please God," according to
Heb. 11:6. But the faith of olden times and of nowadays is the same,
as the gloss says on Matt. 21:9. Therefore the law is the same also.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (Contra Adamant. Manich. discip.
xvii) that "there is little difference between the Law and Gospel"
[*The 'little difference' refers to the Latin words 'timor' and
'amor']--"fear and love." But the New and Old Laws cannot be
differentiated in respect of these two things: since even the Old Law
comprised precepts of charity: "Thou shalt love thy neighbor" (Lev.
19:18), and: "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God" (Deut. 6:5). In like
manner neither can they differ according to the other difference
which Augustine assigns (Contra Faust. iv, 2), viz. that "the Old
Testament contained temporal promises, whereas the New Testament
contains spiritual and eternal promises": since even the New
Testament contains temporal promises, according to Mk. 10:30: He
shall receive "a hundred times as much . . . in this time, houses and
brethren," etc.: while in the Old Testament they hoped in promises
spiritual and eternal, according to Heb. 11:16: "But now they desire
a better, that is to say, a heavenly country," which is said of the
patriarchs. Therefore it seems that the New Law is not distinct from
the Old.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle seems to distinguish both laws by
calling the Old Law "a law of works," and the New Law "a law of
faith" (Rom. 3:27). But the Old Law was also a law of faith,
according to Heb. 11:39: "All were [Vulg.: 'All these being']
approved by the testimony of faith," which he says of the fathers of
the Old Testament. In like manner the New Law is a law of works:
since it is written (Matt. 5:44): "Do good to them that hate you";
and (Luke 22:19): "Do this for a commemoration of Me." Therefore the
New Law is not distinct from the Old.

_On the contrary,_ the Apostle says (Heb. 7:12): "The priesthood
being translated it is necessary that a translation also be made of
the Law." But the priesthood of the New Testament is distinct from
that of the Old, as the Apostle shows in the same place. Therefore
the Law is also distinct.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 90, A. 2; Q. 91, A. 4), every
law ordains human conduct to some end. Now things ordained to an end
may be divided in two ways, considered from the point of view of the
end. First, through being ordained to different ends: and this
difference will be specific, especially if such ends are proximate.
Secondly, by reason of being closely or remotely connected with the
end. Thus it is clear that movements differ in species through being
directed to different terms: while according as one part of a
movement is nearer to the term than another part, the difference of
perfect and imperfect movement is assessed.

Accordingly then two laws may be distinguished from one another in
two ways. First, through being altogether diverse, from the fact that
they are ordained to diverse ends: thus a state-law ordained to
democratic government, would differ specifically from a law ordained
to government by the aristocracy. Secondly, two laws may be
distinguished from one another, through one of them being more
closely connected with the end, and the other more remotely: thus in
one and the same state there is one law enjoined on men of mature
age, who can forthwith accomplish that which pertains to the common
good; and another law regulating the education of children who need
to be taught how they are to achieve manly deeds later on.

We must therefore say that, according to the first way, the New Law
is not distinct from the Old Law: because they both have the same
end, namely, man's subjection to God; and there is but one God of the
New and of the Old Testament, according to Rom. 3:30: "It is one God
that justifieth circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision through
faith." According to the second way, the New Law is distinct from the
Old Law: because the Old Law is like a pedagogue of children, as the
Apostle says (Gal. 3:24), whereas the New Law is the law of
perfection, since it is the law of charity, of which the Apostle says
(Col. 3:14) that it is "the bond of perfection."

Reply Obj. 1: The unity of faith under both Testaments witnesses to
the unity of end: for it has been stated above (Q. 62, A. 2) that the
object of the theological virtues, among which is faith, is the last
end. Yet faith had a different state in the Old and in the New Law:
since what they believed as future, we believe as fact.

Reply Obj. 2: All the differences assigned between the Old and New
Laws are gathered from their relative perfection and imperfection.
For the precepts of every law prescribe acts of virtue. Now the
imperfect, who as yet are not possessed of a virtuous habit, are
directed in one way to perform virtuous acts, while those who are
perfected by the possession of virtuous habits are directed in
another way. For those who as yet are not endowed with virtuous
habits, are directed to the performance of virtuous acts by reason of
some outward cause: for instance, by the threat of punishment, or the
promise of some extrinsic rewards, such as honor, riches, or the
like. Hence the Old Law, which was given to men who were imperfect,
that is, who had not yet received spiritual grace, was called the
"law of fear," inasmuch as it induced men to observe its commandments
by threatening them with penalties; and is spoken of as containing
temporal promises. On the other hand, those who are possessed of
virtue, are inclined to do virtuous deeds through love of virtue, not
on account of some extrinsic punishment or reward. Hence the New Law
which derives its pre-eminence from the spiritual grace instilled
into our hearts, is called the "Law of love": and it is described as
containing spiritual and eternal promises, which are objects of the
virtues, chiefly of charity. Accordingly such persons are inclined of
themselves to those objects, not as to something foreign but as to
something of their own. For this reason, too, the Old Law is
described as "restraining the hand, not the will" [*Peter Lombard,
Sent. iii, D, 40]; since when a man refrains from some sins through
fear of being punished, his will does not shrink simply from sin, as
does the will of a man who refrains from sin through love of
righteousness: and hence the New Law, which is the Law of love, is
said to restrain the will.

Nevertheless there were some in the state of the Old Testament who,
having charity and the grace of the Holy Ghost, looked chiefly to
spiritual and eternal promises: and in this respect they belonged to
the New Law. In like manner in the New Testament there are some
carnal men who have not yet attained to the perfection of the New
Law; and these it was necessary, even under the New Testament, to
lead to virtuous action by the fear of punishment and by temporal
promises.

But although the Old Law contained precepts of charity, nevertheless
it did not confer the Holy Ghost by Whom "charity . . . is spread
abroad in our hearts" (Rom. 5:5).

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 106, AA. 1, 2), the New Law is
called the law of faith, in so far as its pre-eminence is derived
from that very grace which is given inwardly to believers, and for
this reason is called the grace of faith. Nevertheless it consists
secondarily in certain deeds, moral and sacramental: but the New Law
does not consist chiefly in these latter things, as did the Old Law.
As to those under the Old Testament who through faith were acceptable
to God, in this respect they belonged to the New Testament: for they
were not justified except through faith in Christ, Who is the Author
of the New Testament. Hence of Moses the Apostle says (Heb. 11:26)
that he esteemed "the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasure of the Egyptians."
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 107, Art. 2]

Whether the New Law Fulfils the Old?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law does not fulfil the Old.
Because to fulfil and to void are contrary. But the New Law voids or
excludes the observances of the Old Law: for the Apostle says (Gal.
5:2): "If you be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing."
Therefore the New Law is not a fulfilment of the Old.

Obj. 2: Further, one contrary is not the fulfilment of another. But
Our Lord propounded in the New Law precepts that were contrary to
precepts of the Old Law. For we read (Matt. 5:27-32): "You have heard
that it was said to them of old: . . . 'Whosoever shall put away his
wife, let him give her a bill of divorce. But I say to you that
whosoever shall put away his wife . . . maketh her to commit
adultery.'" Furthermore, the same evidently applies to the
prohibition against swearing, against retaliation, and against hating
one's enemies. In like manner Our Lord seems to have done away with
the precepts of the Old Law relating to the different kinds of foods
(Matt. 15:11): "Not that which goeth into the mouth defileth the man:
but what cometh out of the mouth, this defileth a man." Therefore the
New Law is not a fulfilment of the Old.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever acts against a law does not fulfil the law.
But Christ in certain cases acted against the Law. For He touched the
leper (Matt. 8:3), which was contrary to the Law. Likewise He seems
to have frequently broken the sabbath; since the Jews used to say of
Him (John 9:16): "This man is not of God, who keepeth not the
sabbath." Therefore Christ did not fulfil the Law: and so the New Law
given by Christ is not a fulfilment of the Old.

Obj. 4: Further, the Old Law contained precepts, moral, ceremonial,
and judicial, as stated above (Q. 99, A. 4). But Our Lord (Matt. 5)
fulfilled the Law in some respects, but without mentioning the
judicial and ceremonial precepts. Therefore it seems that the New Law
is not a complete fulfilment of the Old.

_On the contrary,_ Our Lord said (Matt. 5:17): "I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfil": and went on to say (Matt. 5:18): "One jot or
one tittle shall not pass of the Law till all be fulfilled."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), the New Law is compared to
the Old as the perfect to the imperfect. Now everything perfect
fulfils that which is lacking in the imperfect. And accordingly the
New Law fulfils the Old by supplying that which was lacking in the
Old Law.

Now two things in the Old Law offer themselves to our consideration:
viz., the end, and the precepts contained in the Law.

Now the end of every law is to make men righteous and virtuous, as
was stated above (Q. 92, A. 1): and consequently the end of the Old
Law was the justification of men. The Law, however, could not
accomplish this: but foreshadowed it by certain ceremonial actions,
and promised it in words. And in this respect, the New Law fulfils
the Old by justifying men through the power of Christ's Passion. This
is what the Apostle says (Rom. 8:3, 4): "What the Law could not do
. . . God sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh . . .
hath condemned sin in the flesh, that the justification of the Law
might be fulfilled in us." And in this respect, the New Law gives
what the Old Law promised, according to 2 Cor. 1:20: "Whatever are
the promises of God, in Him," i.e. in Christ, "they are 'Yea'." [*The
Douay version reads thus: "All the promises of God are in Him, 'It
is'."] Again, in this respect, it also fulfils what the Old Law
foreshadowed. Hence it is written (Col. 2:17) concerning the
ceremonial precepts that they were "a shadow of things to come, but
the body is of Christ"; in other words, the reality is found in
Christ. Wherefore the New Law is called the law of reality; whereas
the Old Law is called the law of shadow or of figure.

Now Christ fulfilled the precepts of the Old Law both in His works
and in His doctrine. In His works, because He was willing to be
circumcised and to fulfil the other legal observances, which were
binding for the time being; according to Gal. 4:4: "Made under the
Law." In His doctrine He fulfilled the precepts of the Law in three
ways. First, by explaining the true sense of the Law. This is clear
in the case of murder and adultery, the prohibition of which the
Scribes and Pharisees thought to refer only to the exterior act:
wherefore Our Lord fulfilled the Law by showing that the prohibition
extended also to the interior acts of sins. Secondly, Our Lord
fulfilled the precepts of the Law by prescribing the safest way of
complying with the statutes of the Old Law. Thus the Old Law forbade
perjury: and this is more safely avoided, by abstaining altogether
from swearing, save in cases of urgency. Thirdly, Our Lord fulfilled
the precepts of the Law, by adding some counsels of perfection: this
is clearly seen in Matt. 19:21, where Our Lord said to the man who
affirmed that he had kept all the precepts of the Old Law: "One thing
is wanting to thee: If thou wilt be perfect, go, sell whatsoever thou
hast," etc. [*St. Thomas combines Matt. 19:21 with Mk. 10:21].

Reply Obj. 1: The New Law does not void observance of the Old Law
except in the point of ceremonial precepts, as stated above (Q. 103,
AA. 3, 4). Now the latter were figurative of something to come.
Wherefore from the very fact that the ceremonial precepts were
fulfilled when those things were accomplished which they
foreshadowed, it follows that they are no longer to be observed: for
if they were to be observed, this would mean that something is still
to be accomplished and is not yet fulfilled. Thus the promise of a
future gift holds no longer when it has been fulfilled by the
presentation of the gift. In this way the legal ceremonies are
abolished by being fulfilled.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (Contra Faust. xix, 26), those
precepts of Our Lord are not contrary to the precepts of the Old Law.
For what Our Lord commanded about a man not putting away his wife, is
not contrary to what the Law prescribed. "For the Law did not say:
'Let him that wills, put his wife away': the contrary of which would
be not to put her away. _On the contrary,_ the Law was unwilling that
a man should put away his wife, since it prescribed a delay, so that
excessive eagerness for divorce might cease through being weakened
during the writing of the bill. Hence Our Lord, in order to impress
the fact that a wife ought not easily to be put away, allowed no
exception save in the case of fornication." The same applies to the
prohibition about swearing, as stated above. The same is also clear
with respect to the prohibition of retaliation. For the Law fixed a
limit to revenge, by forbidding men to seek vengeance unreasonably:
whereas Our Lord deprived them of vengeance more completely by
commanding them to abstain from it altogether. With regard to the
hatred of one's enemies, He dispelled the false interpretation of the
Pharisees, by admonishing us to hate, not the person, but his sin. As
to discriminating between various foods, which was a ceremonial
matter, Our Lord did not forbid this to be observed: but He showed
that no foods are naturally unclean, but only in token of something
else, as stated above (Q. 102, A. 6, ad 1).

Reply Obj. 3: It was forbidden by the Law to touch a leper; because
by doing so, man incurred a certain uncleanness of irregularity, as
also by touching the dead, as stated above (Q. 102, A. 5, ad 4). But
Our Lord, Who healed the leper, could not contract an uncleanness. By
those things which He did on the sabbath, He did not break the
sabbath in reality, as the Master Himself shows in the Gospel: both
because He worked miracles by His Divine power, which is ever active
among things; and because His works were concerned with the salvation
of man, while the Pharisees were concerned for the well-being of
animals even on the sabbath; and again because on account of urgency
He excused His disciples for gathering the ears of corn on the
sabbath. But He did seem to break the sabbath according to the
superstitious interpretation of the Pharisees, who thought that man
ought to abstain from doing even works of kindness on the sabbath;
which was contrary to the intention of the Law.

Reply Obj. 4: The reason why the ceremonial precepts of the Law are
not mentioned in Matt. 5 is because, as stated above (ad 1), their
observance was abolished by their fulfilment. But of the judicial
precepts He mentioned that of retaliation: so that what He said about
it should refer to all the others. With regard to this precept, He
taught that the intention of the Law was that retaliation should be
sought out of love of justice, and not as a punishment out of
revengeful spite, which He forbade, admonishing man to be ready to
suffer yet greater insults; and this remains still in the New Law.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 107, Art. 3]

Whether the New Law Is Contained in the Old?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law is not contained in the
Old. Because the New Law consists chiefly in faith: wherefore it is
called the "law of faith" (Rom. 3:27). But many points of faith are
set forth in the New Law, which are not contained in the Old.
Therefore the New Law is not contained in the Old.

Obj. 2: Further, a gloss says on Matt. 5:19, "He that shall break one
of these least commandments," that the lesser commandments are those
of the Law, and the greater commandments, those contained in the
Gospel. Now the greater cannot be contained in the lesser. Therefore
the New Law is not contained in the Old.

Obj. 3: Further, who holds the container holds the contents. If,
therefore, the New Law is contained in the Old, it follows that
whoever had the Old Law had the New: so that it was superfluous to
give men a New Law when once they had the Old. Therefore the New Law
is not contained in the Old.

_On the contrary,_ As expressed in Ezech. 1:16, there was "a wheel in
the midst of a wheel," i.e. "the New Testament within the Old,"
according to Gregory's exposition.

_I answer that,_ One thing may be contained in another in two ways.
First, actually; as a located thing is in a place. Secondly,
virtually; as an effect in its cause, or as the complement in that
which is incomplete; thus a genus contains its species, and a seed
contains the whole tree, virtually. It is in this way that the New
Law is contained in the Old: for it has been stated (A. 1) that the
New Law is compared to the Old as perfect to imperfect. Hence
Chrysostom, expounding Mk. 4:28, "The earth of itself bringeth forth
fruit, first the blade, then the ear, afterwards the full corn in the
ear," expresses himself as follows: "He brought forth first the
blade, i.e. the Law of Nature; then the ear, i.e. the Law of Moses;
lastly, the full corn, i.e. the Law of the Gospel." Hence then the
New Law is in the Old as the corn in the ear.

Reply Obj. 1: Whatsoever is set down in the New Testament explicitly
and openly as a point of faith, is contained in the Old Testament as
a matter of belief, but implicitly, under a figure. And accordingly,
even as to those things which we are bound to believe, the New Law is
contained in the Old.

Reply Obj. 2: The precepts of the New Law are said to be greater than
those of the Old Law, in the point of their being set forth
explicitly. But as to the substance itself of the precepts of the New
Testament, they are all contained in the Old. Hence Augustine says
(Contra Faust. xix, 23, 28) that "nearly all Our Lord's admonitions
or precepts, where He expressed Himself by saying: 'But I say unto
you,' are to be found also in those ancient books. Yet, since they
thought that murder was only the slaying of the human body, Our Lord
declared to them that every wicked impulse to hurt our brother is to
be looked on as a kind of murder." And it is in the point of
declarations of this kind that the precepts of the New Law are said
to be greater than those of the Old. Nothing, however, prevents the
greater from being contained in the lesser virtually; just as a tree
is contained in the seed.

Reply Obj. 3: What is set forth implicitly needs to be declared
explicitly. Hence after the publishing of the Old Law, a New Law also
had to be given.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 107, Art. 4]

Whether the New Law Is More Burdensome Than the Old?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law is more burdensome than
the Old. For Chrysostom (Opus Imp. in Matth., Hom. x [*The work of an
unknown author]) say: "The commandments given to Moses are easy to
obey: Thou shalt not kill; Thou shalt not commit adultery: but the
commandments of Christ are difficult to accomplish, for instance:
Thou shalt not give way to anger, or to lust." Therefore the New Law
is more burdensome than the Old.

Obj. 2: Further, it is easier to make use of earthly prosperity than
to suffer tribulations. But in the Old Testament observance of the
Law was followed by temporal prosperity, as may be gathered from
Deut. 28:1-14; whereas many kinds of trouble ensue to those who
observe the New Law, as stated in 2 Cor. 6:4-10: "Let us exhibit
ourselves as the ministers of God, in much patience, in tribulation,
in necessities, in distresses," etc. Therefore the New Law is more
burdensome than the Old.

Obj. 3: The more one has to do, the more difficult it is. But the New
Law is something added to the Old. For the Old Law forbade perjury,
while the New Law proscribed even swearing: the Old Law forbade a man
to cast off his wife without a bill of divorce, while the New Law
forbade divorce altogether; as is clearly stated in Matt. 5:31,
seqq., according to Augustine's expounding. Therefore the New Law is
more burdensome than the Old.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 11:28): "Come to Me, all you
that labor and are burdened": which words are expounded by Hilary
thus: "He calls to Himself all those that labor under the difficulty
of observing the Law, and are burdened with the sins of this world."
And further on He says of the yoke of the Gospel: "For My yoke is
sweet and My burden light." Therefore the New Law is a lighter burden
than the Old.

_I answer that,_ A twofold difficulty may attach to works of virtue
with which the precepts of the Law are concerned. One is on the part
of the outward works, which of themselves are, in a way, difficult
and burdensome. And in this respect the Old Law is a much heavier
burden than the New: since the Old Law by its numerous ceremonies
prescribed many more outward acts than the New Law, which, in the
teaching of Christ and the apostles, added very few precepts to those
of the natural law; although afterwards some were added, through
being instituted by the holy Fathers. Even in these Augustine says
that moderation should be observed, lest good conduct should become a
burden to the faithful. For he says in reply to the queries of
Januarius (Ep. lv) that, "whereas God in His mercy wished religion to
be a free service rendered by the public solemnization of a small
number of most manifest sacraments, certain persons make it a slave's
burden; so much so that the state of the Jews who were subject to the
sacraments of the Law, and not to the presumptuous devices of man,
was more tolerable."

The other difficulty attaches to works of virtue as to interior acts:
for instance, that a virtuous deed be done with promptitude and
pleasure. It is this difficulty that virtue solves: because to act
thus is difficult for a man without virtue: but through virtue it
becomes easy for him. In this respect the precepts of the New Law are
more burdensome than those of the Old; because the New Law prohibits
certain interior movements of the soul, which were not expressly
forbidden in the Old Law in all cases, although they were forbidden
in some, without, however, any punishment being attached to the
prohibition. Now this is very difficult to a man without virtue: thus
even the Philosopher states (Ethic. v, 9) that it is easy to do what
a righteous man does; but that to do it in the same way, viz. with
pleasure and promptitude, is difficult to a man who is not righteous.
Accordingly we read also (1 John 5:3) that "His commandments are not
heavy": which words Augustine expounds by saying that "they are not
heavy to the man that loveth; whereas they are a burden to him that
loveth not."

Reply Obj. 1: The passage quoted speaks expressly of the difficulty
of the New Law as to the deliberate curbing of interior movements.

Reply Obj. 2: The tribulations suffered by those who observe the New
Law are not imposed by the Law itself. Moreover they are easily
borne, on account of the love in which the same Law consists: since,
as Augustine says (De Verb. Dom., Serm. lxx), "love makes light and
nothing of things that seem arduous and beyond our power."

Reply Obj. 3: The object of these additions to the precepts of the
Old Law was to render it easier to do what it prescribed, as
Augustine states [*De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 17, 21; xix, 23, 26].
Accordingly this does not prove that the New Law is more burdensome,
but rather that it is a lighter burden.
________________________

QUESTION 108

OF THOSE THINGS THAT ARE CONTAINED IN THE NEW LAW
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider those things that are contained in the New Law:
under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the New Law ought to prescribe or to forbid any outward
works?

(2) Whether the New Law makes sufficient provision in prescribing
and forbidding external acts?

(3) Whether in the matter of internal acts it directs man
sufficiently?

(4) Whether it fittingly adds counsels to precepts?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 108, Art. 1]

Whether the New Law Ought to Prescribe or Prohibit Any External Acts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law should not prescribe or
prohibit any external acts. For the New Law is the Gospel of the
kingdom, according to Matt. 24:14: "This Gospel of the kingdom shall
be preached in the whole world." But the kingdom of God consists not
in exterior, but only in interior acts, according to Luke 17:21: "The
kingdom of God is within you"; and Rom. 14:17: "The kingdom of God is
not meat and drink; but justice and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost."
Therefore the New Law should not prescribe or forbid any external
acts.

Obj. 2: Further, the New Law is "the law of the Spirit" (Rom. 8:2).
But "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty" (2 Cor.
3:17). Now there is no liberty when man is bound to do or avoid
certain external acts. Therefore the New Law does not prescribe or
forbid any external acts.

Obj. 3: Further, all external acts are understood as referable to the
hand, just as interior acts belong to the mind. But this is assigned
as the difference between the New and Old Laws that the "Old Law
restrains the hand, whereas the New Law curbs the will" [*Peter
Lombard, Sent. iii, D, 40]. Therefore the New Law should not contain
prohibitions and commands about exterior deeds, but only about
interior acts.

_On the contrary,_ Through the New Law, men are made "children of
light": wherefore it is written (John 12:36): "Believe in the light
that you may be the children of light." Now it is becoming that
children of the light should do deeds of light and cast aside deeds
of darkness, according to Eph. 5:8: "You were heretofore darkness,
but now light in the Lord. Walk . . . as children of the light."
Therefore the New Law had to forbid certain external acts and
prescribe others.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 106, AA. 1, 2), the New Law
consists chiefly in the grace of the Holy Ghost, which is shown forth
by faith that worketh through love. Now men become receivers of this
grace through God's Son made man, Whose humanity grace filled first,
and thence flowed forth to us. Hence it is written (John 1:14): "The
Word was made flesh," and afterwards: "full of grace and truth"; and
further on: "Of His fulness we all have received, and grace for
grace." Hence it is added that "grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ." Consequently it was becoming that the grace which flows from
the incarnate Word should be given to us by means of certain external
sensible objects; and that from this inward grace, whereby the flesh
is subjected to the Spirit, certain external works should ensue.

Accordingly external acts may have a twofold connection with grace.
In the first place, as leading in some way to grace. Such are the
sacramental acts which are instituted in the New Law, e.g. Baptism,
the Eucharist, and the like.

In the second place there are those external acts which ensue from
the promptings of grace: and herein we must observe a difference. For
there are some which are necessarily in keeping with, or in
opposition to inward grace consisting in faith that worketh through
love. Such external works are prescribed or forbidden in the New Law;
thus confession of faith is prescribed, and denial of faith is
forbidden; for it is written (Matt. 10:32, 33) "(Every one) that
shall confess Me before men, I will also confess him before My Father
. . . But he that shall deny Me before men, I will also deny him
before My Father." On the other hand, there are works which are not
necessarily opposed to, or in keeping with faith that worketh through
love. Such works are not prescribed or forbidden in the New Law, by
virtue of its primitive institution; but have been left by the
Lawgiver, i.e. Christ, to the discretion of each individual. And so
to each one it is free to decide what he should do or avoid; and to
each superior, to direct his subjects in such matters as regards what
they must do or avoid. Wherefore also in this respect the Gospel is
called the "law of liberty" [*Cf. Reply Obj. 2]: since the Old Law
decided many points and left few to man to decide as he chose.

Reply Obj. 1: The kingdom of God consists chiefly in internal acts:
but as a consequence all things that are essential to internal acts
belong also to the kingdom of God. Thus if the kingdom of God is
internal righteousness, peace, and spiritual joy, all external acts
that are incompatible with righteousness, peace, and spiritual joy,
are in opposition to the kingdom of God; and consequently should be
forbidden in the Gospel of the kingdom. On the other hand, those
things that are indifferent as regards the aforesaid, for instance,
to eat of this or that food, are not part of the kingdom of God;
wherefore the Apostle says before the words quoted: "The kingdom of
God is not meat and drink."

Reply Obj. 2: According to the Philosopher (Metaph. i, 2), what is
"free is cause of itself." Therefore he acts freely, who acts of his
own accord. Now man does of his own accord that which he does from a
habit that is suitable to his nature: since a habit inclines one as a
second nature. If, however, a habit be in opposition to nature, man
would not act according to his nature, but according to some
corruption affecting that nature. Since then the grace of the Holy
Ghost is like an interior habit bestowed on us and inclining us to
act aright, it makes us do freely those things that are becoming to
grace, and shun what is opposed to it.

Accordingly the New Law is called the law of liberty in two respects.
First, because it does not bind us to do or avoid certain things,
except such as are of themselves necessary or opposed to salvation,
and come under the prescription or prohibition of the law. Secondly,
because it also makes us comply freely with these precepts and
prohibitions, inasmuch as we do so through the promptings of grace.
It is for these two reasons that the New Law is called "the law of
perfect liberty" (James 1:25).

Reply Obj. 3: The New Law, by restraining the mind from inordinate
movements, must needs also restrain the hand from inordinate acts,
which ensue from inward movements.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 108, Art. 2]

Whether the New Law Made Sufficient Ordinations About External Acts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law made insufficient
ordinations about external acts. Because faith that worketh through
charity seems chiefly to belong to the New Law, according to Gal.
5:6: "In Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth anything, nor
uncircumcision: but faith that worketh through charity." But the New
Law declared explicitly certain points of faith which were not set
forth explicitly in the Old Law; for instance, belief in the Trinity.
Therefore it should also have added certain outward moral deeds,
which were not fixed in the Old Law.

Obj. 2: Further, in the Old Law not only were sacraments instituted,
but also certain sacred things, as stated above (Q. 101, A. 4; Q.
102, A. 4). But in the New Law, although certain sacraments are
instituted by Our Lord; for instance, pertaining either to the
sanctification of a temple or of the vessels, or to the celebration
of some particular feast. Therefore the New Law made insufficient
ordinations about external matters.

Obj. 3: Further, in the Old Law, just as there were certain
observances pertaining to God's ministers, so also were there certain
observances pertaining to the people: as was stated above when we
were treating of the ceremonial of the Old Law (Q. 101, A. 4; Q. 102,
A. 6). Now in the New Law certain observances seem to have been
prescribed to the ministers of God; as may be gathered from Matt.
10:9: "Do not possess gold, nor silver, nor money in your purses,"
nor other things which are mentioned here and Luke 9, 10. Therefore
certain observances pertaining to the faithful should also have been
instituted in the New Law.

Obj. 4: Further, in the Old Law, besides moral and ceremonial
precepts, there were certain judicial precepts. But in the New Law
there are no judicial precepts. Therefore the New Law made
insufficient ordinations about external works.

_On the contrary,_ Our Lord said (Matt. 7:24): "Every one . . . that
heareth these My words, and doth them, shall be likened to a wise man
that built his house upon a rock." But a wise builder leaves out
nothing that is necessary to the building. Therefore Christ's words
contain all things necessary for man's salvation.

_I answer that,_ as stated above (A. 1), the New Law had to make such
prescriptions or prohibitions alone as are essential for the
reception or right use of grace. And since we cannot of ourselves
obtain grace, but through Christ alone, hence Christ of Himself
instituted the sacraments whereby we obtain grace: viz. Baptism,
Eucharist, Orders of the ministers of the New Law, by the institution
of the apostles and seventy-two disciples, Penance, and indissoluble
Matrimony. He promised Confirmation through the sending of the Holy
Ghost: and we read that by His institution the apostles healed the
sick by anointing them with oil (Mk. 6:13). These are the sacraments
of the New Law.

The right use of grace is by means of works of charity. These, in so
far as they are essential to virtue, pertain to the moral precepts,
which also formed part of the Old Law. Hence, in this respect, the
New Law had nothing to add as regards external action. The
determination of these works in their relation to the divine worship,
belongs to the ceremonial precepts of the Law; and, in relation to
our neighbor, to the judicial precepts, as stated above (Q. 99, A.
4). And therefore, since these determinations are not in themselves
necessarily connected with inward grace wherein the Law consists,
they do not come under a precept of the New Law, but are left to the
decision of man; some relating to inferiors--as when a precept is
given to an individual; others, relating to superiors, temporal or
spiritual, referring, namely, to the common good.

Accordingly the New Law had no other external works to determine, by
prescribing or forbidding, except the sacraments, and those moral
precepts which have a necessary connection with virtue, for instance,
that one must not kill, or steal, and so forth.

Reply Obj. 1: Matters of faith are above human reason, and so we
cannot attain to them except through grace. Consequently, when grace
came to be bestowed more abundantly, the result was an increase in
the number of explicit points of faith. On the other hand, it is
through human reason that we are directed to works of virtue, for it
is the rule of human action, as stated above (Q. 19, A. 3; Q. 63, A.
2). Wherefore in such matters as these there was no need for any
precepts to be given besides the moral precepts of the Law, which
proceed from the dictate of reason.

Reply Obj. 2: In the sacraments of the New Law grace is bestowed,
which cannot be received except through Christ: consequently they had
to be instituted by Him. But in the sacred things no grace is given:
for instance, in the consecration of a temple, an altar or the like,
or, again, in the celebration of feasts. Wherefore Our Lord left the
institution of such things to the discretion of the faithful, since
they have not of themselves any necessary connection with inward
grace.

Reply Obj. 3: Our Lord gave the apostles those precepts not as
ceremonial observances, but as moral statutes: and they can be
understood in two ways. First, following Augustine (De Consensu
Evang. 30), as being not commands but permissions. For He permitted
them to set forth to preach without scrip or stick, and so on, since
they were empowered to accept their livelihood from those to whom
they preached: wherefore He goes on to say: "For the laborer is
worthy of his hire." Nor is it a sin, but a work of supererogation
for a preacher to take means of livelihood with him, without
accepting supplies from those to whom he preaches; as Paul did (1
Cor. 9:4, seqq.).

Secondly, according to the explanation of other holy men, they may be
considered as temporal commands laid upon the apostles for the time
during which they were sent to preach in Judea before Christ's
Passion. For the disciples, being yet as little children under
Christ's care, needed to receive some special commands from Christ,
such as all subjects receive from their superiors: and especially so,
since they were to be accustomed little by little to renounce the
care of temporalities, so as to become fitted for the preaching of
the Gospel throughout the whole world. Nor must we wonder if He
established certain fixed modes of life, as long as the state of the
Old Law endured and the people had not as yet achieved the perfect
liberty of the Spirit. These statutes He abolished shortly before His
Passion, as though the disciples had by their means become
sufficiently practiced. Hence He said (Luke 22:35, 36) "When I sent
you without purse and scrip and shoes, did you want anything? But
they said: Nothing. Then said He unto them: But now, he that hath a
purse, let him take it, and likewise a scrip." Because the time of
perfect liberty was already at hand, when they would be left entirely
to their own judgment in matters not necessarily connected with
virtue.

Reply Obj. 4: Judicial precepts also, are not essential to virtue in
respect of any particular determination, but only in regard to the
common notion of justice. Consequently Our Lord left the judicial
precepts to the discretion of those who were to have spiritual or
temporal charge of others. But as regards the judicial precepts of
the Old Law, some of them He explained, because they were
misunderstood by the Pharisees, as we shall state later on (A. 3, ad
2).
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 108, Art. 3]

Whether the New Law Directed Man Sufficiently As Regards Interior
Actions?

Objection 1: It would seem that the New Law directed man
insufficiently as regards interior actions. For there are ten
commandments of the decalogue directing man to God and his neighbor.
But Our Lord partly fulfilled only three of them: as regards, namely,
the prohibition of murder, of adultery, and of perjury. Therefore it
seems that, by omitting to fulfil the other precepts, He directed man
insufficiently.

Obj. 2: Further, as regards the judicial precepts, Our Lord ordained
nothing in the Gospel, except in the matter of divorcing a wife, of
punishment by retaliation, and of persecuting one's enemies. But
there are many other judicial precepts of the Old Law, as stated
above (Q. 104, A. 4; Q. 105). Therefore, in this respect, He directed
human life insufficiently.

Obj. 3: Further, in the Old Law, besides moral and judicial, there
were ceremonial precepts about which Our Lord made no ordination.
Therefore it seems that He ordained insufficiently.

Obj. 4: Further, in order that the mind be inwardly well disposed,
man should do no good deed for any temporal end whatever. But there
are many other temporal goods besides the favor of man: and there are
many other good works besides fasting, alms-deeds, and prayer.
Therefore Our Lord unbecomingly taught that only in respect of these
three works, and of no other earthly goods ought we to shun the glory
of human favor.

Obj. 5: Further, solicitude for the necessary means of livelihood is
by nature instilled into man, and this solicitude even other animals
share with man: wherefore it is written (Prov. 6:6, 8): "Go to the
ant, O sluggard, and consider her ways . . . she provideth her meat
for herself in the summer, and gathereth her food in the harvest."
But every command issued against the inclination of nature is an
unjust command, forasmuch as it is contrary to the law of nature.
Therefore it seems that Our Lord unbecomingly forbade solicitude
about food and raiment.

Obj. 6: Further, no act of virtue should be the subject of a
prohibition. Now judgment is an act of justice, according to Ps.
18:15: "Until justice be turned into judgment." Therefore it seems
that Our Lord unbecomingly forbade judgment: and consequently that
the New Law directed man insufficiently in the matter of interior
acts.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 1): We
should take note that, when He said: "'He that heareth these My
words,' He indicates clearly that this sermon of the Lord is replete
with all the precepts whereby a Christian's life is formed."

_I answer that,_ As is evident from Augustine's words just quoted,
the sermon, which Our Lord delivered on the mountain, contains the
whole process of forming the life of a Christian. Therein man's
interior movements are ordered. Because after declaring that his end
is Beatitude; and after commending the authority of the apostles,
through whom the teaching of the Gospel was to be promulgated, He
orders man's interior movements, first in regard to man himself,
secondly in regard to his neighbor.

This he does in regard to man himself, in two ways, corresponding to
man's two interior movements in respect of any prospective action,
viz. volition of what has to be done, and intention of the end.
Wherefore, in the first place, He directs man's will in respect of
the various precepts of the Law: by prescribing that man should
refrain not merely from those external works that are evil in
themselves, but also from internal acts, and from the occasions of
evil deeds. In the second place He directs man's intention, by
teaching that in our good works, we should seek neither human praise,
nor worldly riches, which is to lay up treasures on earth.

Afterwards He directs man's interior movement in respect of his
neighbor, by forbidding us, on the one hand, to judge him rashly,
unjustly, or presumptuously; and, on the other, to entrust him too
readily with sacred things if he be unworthy.

Lastly, He teaches us how to fulfil the teaching of the Gospel; viz.
by imploring the help of God; by striving to enter by the narrow door
of perfect virtue; and by being wary lest we be led astray by evil
influences. Moreover, He declares that we must observe His
commandments, and that it is not enough to make profession of faith,
or to work miracles, or merely to hear His words.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord explained the manner of fulfilling those
precepts which the Scribes and Pharisees did not rightly understand:
and this affected chiefly those precepts of the decalogue. For they
thought that the prohibition of adultery and murder covered the
external act only, and not the internal desire. And they held this
opinion about murder and adultery rather than about theft and false
witness, because the movement of anger tending to murder, and the
movement of desire tending to adultery, seem to be in us from nature
somewhat, but not the desire of stealing or bearing false witness.
They held a false opinion about perjury, for they thought that
perjury indeed was a sin; but that oaths were of themselves to be
desired and to be taken frequently, since they seem to proceed from
reverence to God. Hence Our Lord shows that an oath is not desirable
as a good thing; and that it is better to speak without oaths, unless
necessity forces us to have recourse to them.

Reply Obj. 2: The Scribes and Pharisees erred about the judicial
precepts in two ways. First, because they considered certain matters
contained in the Law of Moses by way of permission, to be right in
themselves: namely, divorce of a wife, and the taking of usury from
strangers. Wherefore Our Lord forbade a man to divorce his wife
(Matt. 5:32); and to receive usury (Luke 6:35), when He said: "Lend,
hoping for nothing thereby."

In another way they erred by thinking that certain things which the
Old Law commanded to be done for justice's sake, should be done out
of desire for revenge, or out of lust for temporal goods, or out of
hatred of one's enemies; and this in respect of three precepts. For
they thought that desire for revenge was lawful, on account of the
precept concerning punishment by retaliation: whereas this precept
was given that justice might be safeguarded, not that man might seek
revenge. Wherefore, in order to do away with this, Our Lord teaches
that man should be prepared in his mind to suffer yet more if
necessary. They thought that movements of covetousness were lawful on
account of those judicial precepts which prescribed restitution of
what had been purloined, together with something added thereto, as
stated above (Q. 105, A. 2, ad 9); whereas the Law commanded this to
be done in order to safeguard justice, not to encourage covetousness.
Wherefore Our Lord teaches that we should not demand our goods from
motives of cupidity, and that we should be ready to give yet more if
necessary. They thought that the movement of hatred was lawful, on
account of the commandments of the Law about the slaying of one's
enemies: whereas the Law ordered this for the fulfilment of justice,
as stated above (Q. 105, A. 3, ad 4), not to satisfy hatred.
Wherefore Our Lord teaches us that we ought to love our enemies, and
to be ready to do good to them if necessary. For these precepts are
to be taken as binding "the mind to be prepared to fulfil them," as
Augustine says (De Serm. Dom. in Monte i, 19).

Reply Obj. 3: The moral precepts necessarily retained their force
under the New Law, because they are of themselves essential to
virtue: whereas the judicial precepts did not necessarily continue to
bind in exactly the same way as had been fixed by the Law: this was
left to man to decide in one way or another. Hence Our Lord directed
us becomingly with regard to these two kinds of precepts. On the
other hand, the observance of the ceremonial precepts was totally
abolished by the advent of the reality; wherefore in regard to these
precepts He commanded nothing on this occasion when He was giving the
general points of His doctrine. Elsewhere, however, He makes it clear
that the entire bodily worship which was fixed by the Law, was to be
changed into spiritual worship: as is evident from John 4:21, 23,
where He says: "The hour cometh when you shall neither on this
mountain, nor in Jerusalem adore the Father . . . but . . . the true
adorers shall adore the Father in spirit and in truth."

Reply Obj. 4: All worldly goods may be reduced to three--honors,
riches, and pleasures; according to 1 John 2:16: "All that is in the
world is the concupiscence of the flesh," which refers to pleasures
of the flesh, "and the concupiscence of the eyes," which refers to
riches, "and the pride of life," which refers to ambition for renown
and honor. Now the Law did not promise an abundance of carnal
pleasures; on the contrary, it forbade them. But it did promise
exalted honors and abundant riches; for it is written in reference to
the former (Deut. 28:1): "If thou wilt hear the voice of the Lord thy
God . . . He will make thee higher than all the nations"; and in
reference to the latter, we read a little further on (Deut. 28:11):
"He will make thee abound with all goods." But the Jews so distorted
the true meaning of these promises, as to think that we ought to
serve God, with these things as the end in view. Wherefore Our Lord
set this aside by teaching, first of all, that works of virtue should
not be done for human glory. And He mentions three works, to which
all others may be reduced: since whatever a man does in order to curb
his desires, comes under the head of fasting; and whatever a man does
for the love of his neighbor, comes under the head of alms-deeds; and
whatever a man does for the worship of God, comes under the head of
prayer. And He mentions these three specifically, as they hold the
principal place, and are most often used by men in order to gain
glory. In the second place He taught us that we must not place our
end in riches, when He said: "Lay not up to yourselves treasures on
earth" (Matt. 6:19).

Reply Obj. 5: Our Lord forbade, not necessary, but inordinate
solicitude. Now there is a fourfold solicitude to be avoided in
temporal matters. First, we must not place our end in them, nor serve
God for the sake of the necessities of food and raiment. Wherefore He
says: "Lay not up for yourselves," etc. Secondly, we must not be so
anxious about temporal things, as to despair of God's help: wherefore
Our Lord says (Matt. 6:32): "Your Father knoweth that you have need
of all these things." Thirdly, we must not add presumption to our
solicitude; in other words, we must not be confident of getting the
necessaries of life by our own efforts without God's help: such
solicitude Our Lord sets aside by saying that a man cannot add
anything to his stature (Matt. 6:27). We must not anticipate the time
for anxiety; namely, by being solicitous now, for the needs, not of
the present, but of a future time: wherefore He says (Matt. 6:34):
"Be not . . . solicitous for tomorrow."

Reply Obj. 6: Our Lord did not forbid the judgment of justice,
without which holy things could not be withdrawn from the unworthy.
But he forbade inordinate judgment, as stated above.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 108, Art. 4]

Whether Certain Definite Counsels Are Fittingly Proposed in the New
Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that certain definite counsels are not
fittingly proposed in the New Law. For counsels are given about that
which is expedient for an end, as we stated above, when treating of
counsel (Q. 14, A. 2). But the same things are not expedient for all.
Therefore certain definite counsels should not be proposed to all.

Obj. 2: Further, counsels regard a greater good. But there are no
definite degrees to the greater good. Therefore definite counsels
should not be given.

Obj. 3: Further, counsels pertain to the life of perfection. But
obedience pertains to the life of perfection. Therefore it was
unfitting that no counsel of obedience should be contained in the
Gospel.

Obj. 4: Further, many matters pertaining to the life of perfection
are found among the commandments, as, for instance, "Love your
enemies" (Matt. 5:44), and those precepts which Our Lord gave His
apostles (Matt. 10). Therefore the counsels are unfittingly given in
the New Law: both because they are not all mentioned; and because
they are not distinguished from the commandments.

_On the contrary,_ The counsels of a wise friend are of great use,
according to Prov. (27:9): "Ointment and perfumes rejoice the heart:
and the good counsels of a friend rejoice the soul." But Christ is
our wisest and greatest friend. Therefore His counsels are supremely
useful and becoming.

_I answer that,_ The difference between a counsel and a commandment
is that a commandment implies obligation, whereas a counsel is left
to the option of the one to whom it is given. Consequently in the New
Law, which is the law of liberty, counsels are added to the
commandments, and not in the Old Law, which is the law of bondage. We
must therefore understand the commandments of the New Law to have
been given about matters that are necessary to gain the end of
eternal bliss, to which end the New Law brings us forthwith: but that
the counsels are about matters that render the gaining of this end
more assured and expeditious.

Now man is placed between the things of this world, and spiritual
goods wherein eternal happiness consists: so that the more he cleaves
to the one, the more he withdraws from the other, and conversely.
Wherefore he that cleaves wholly to the things of this world, so as
to make them his end, and to look upon them as the reason and rule of
all he does, falls away altogether from spiritual goods. Hence this
disorder is removed by the commandments. Nevertheless, for man to
gain the end aforesaid, he does not need to renounce the things of
the world altogether: since he can, while using the things of this
world, attain to eternal happiness, provided he does not place his
end in them: but he will attain more speedily thereto by giving up
the goods of this world entirely: wherefore the evangelical counsels
are given for this purpose.

Now the goods of this world which come into use in human life,
consist in three things: viz. in external wealth pertaining to the
"concupiscence of the eyes"; carnal pleasures pertaining to the
"concupiscence of the flesh"; and honors, which pertain to the "pride
of life," according to 1 John 2:16: and it is in renouncing these
altogether, as far as possible, that the evangelical counsels
consist. Moreover, every form of the religious life that professes
the state of perfection is based on these three: since riches are
renounced by poverty; carnal pleasures by perpetual chastity; and the
pride of life by the bondage of obedience.

Now if a man observe these absolutely, this is in accordance with the
counsels as they stand. But if a man observe any one of them in a
particular case, this is taking that counsel in a restricted sense,
namely, as applying to that particular case. For instance, when
anyone gives an alms to a poor man, not being bound so to do, he
follows the counsels in that particular case. In like manner, when a
man for some fixed time refrains from carnal pleasures that he may
give himself to prayer, he follows the counsel for that particular
time. And again, when a man follows not his will as to some deed
which he might do lawfully, he follows the counsel in that particular
case: for instance, if he do good to his enemies when he is not bound
to, or if he forgive an injury of which he might justly seek to be
avenged. In this way, too, all particular counsels may be reduced to
these three general and perfect counsels.

Reply Obj. 1: The aforesaid counsels, considered in themselves, are
expedient to all; but owing to some people being ill-disposed, it
happens that some of them are inexpedient, because their disposition
is not inclined to such things. Hence Our Lord, in proposing the
evangelical counsels, always makes mention of man's fitness for
observing the counsels. For in giving the counsel of perpetual
poverty (Matt. 19:21), He begins with the words: "If thou wilt be
perfect," and then He adds: "Go, sell all [Vulg.: 'what'] thou hast."
In like manner when He gave the counsel of perpetual chastity, saying
(Matt. 19:12): "There are eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs
for the kingdom of heaven," He adds straightway: "He that can take,
let him take it." And again, the Apostle (1 Cor. 7:35), after giving
the counsel of virginity, says: "And this I speak for your profit;
not to cast a snare upon you."

Reply Obj. 2: The greater goods are not definitely fixed in the
individual; but those which are simply and absolutely the greater
good in general are fixed: and to these all the above particular
goods may be reduced, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Even the counsel of obedience is understood to have
been given by Our Lord in the words: "And [let him] follow Me." For
we follow Him not only by imitating His works, but also by obeying
His commandments, according to John 10:27: "My sheep hear My voice
. . . and they follow Me."

Reply Obj. 4: Those things which Our Lord prescribed about the true
love of our enemies, and other similar sayings (Matt. 5; Luke 6), may
be referred to the preparation of the mind, and then they are
necessary for salvation; for instance, that man be prepared to do
good to his enemies, and other similar actions, when there is need.
Hence these things are placed among the precepts. But that anyone
should actually and promptly behave thus towards an enemy when there
is no special need, is to be referred to the particular counsels, as
stated above. As to those matters which are set down in Matt. 10 and
Luke 9 and 10, they were either disciplinary commands for that
particular time, or concessions, as stated above (A. 2, ad 3). Hence
they are not set down among the counsels.
________________________

TREATISE ON GRACE (QQ. 109-114)
________________________

QUESTION 109

OF THE NECESSITY OF GRACE
(In Ten Articles)

We must now consider the exterior principle of human acts, i.e. God,
in so far as, through grace, we are helped by Him to do right: and,
first, we must consider the grace of God; secondly, its cause;
thirdly, its effects.

The first point of consideration will be threefold: for we shall
consider (1) The necessity of grace; (2) grace itself, as to its
essence; (3) its division.

Under the first head there are ten points of inquiry:

(1) Whether without grace man can know anything?

(2) Whether without God's grace man can do or wish any good?

(3) Whether without grace man can love God above all things?

(4) Whether without grace man can keep the commandments of the Law?

(5) Whether without grace he can merit eternal life?

(6) Whether without grace man can prepare himself for grace?

(7) Whether without grace he can rise from sin?

(8) Whether without grace man can avoid sin?

(9) Whether man having received grace can do good and avoid sin
without any further Divine help?

(10) Whether he can of himself persevere in good?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 109, Art. 1]

Whether Without Grace Man Can Know Any Truth?

Objection 1: It would seem that without grace man can know no truth.
For, on 1 Cor. 12:3: "No man can say, the Lord Jesus, but by the Holy
Ghost," a gloss says: "Every truth, by whomsoever spoken is from the
Holy Ghost." Now the Holy Ghost dwells in us by grace. Therefore we
cannot know truth without grace.

Obj. 2: Further, Augustine says (Solil. i, 6) that "the most certain
sciences are like things lit up by the sun so as to be seen. Now God
Himself is He Who sheds the light. And reason is in the mind as sight
is in the eye. And the eyes of the mind are the senses of the soul."
Now the bodily senses, however pure, cannot see any visible object,
without the sun's light. Therefore the human mind, however perfect,
cannot, by reasoning, know any truth without Divine light: and this
pertains to the aid of grace.

Obj. 3: Further, the human mind can only understand truth by
thinking, as is clear from Augustine (De Trin. xiv, 7). But the
Apostle says (2 Cor. 3:5): "Not that we are sufficient to think
anything of ourselves, as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is from
God." Therefore man cannot, of himself, know truth without the help
of grace.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Retract. i, 4): "I do not approve
having said in the prayer, O God, Who dost wish the sinless alone to
know the truth; for it may be answered that many who are not sinless
know many truths." Now man is cleansed from sin by grace, according
to Ps. 50:12: "Create a clean heart in me, O God, and renew a right
spirit within my bowels." Therefore without grace man of himself can
know truth.

_I answer that,_ To know truth is a use or act of intellectual light,
since, according to the Apostle (Eph. 5:13): "All that is made
manifest is light." Now every use implies movement, taking movement
broadly, so as to call thinking and willing movements, as is clear
from the Philosopher (De Anima iii, 4). Now in corporeal things we
see that for movement there is required not merely the form which is
the principle of the movement or action, but there is also required
the motion of the first mover. Now the first mover in the order of
corporeal things is the heavenly body. Hence no matter how perfectly
fire has heat, it would not bring about alteration, except by the
motion of the heavenly body. But it is clear that as all corporeal
movements are reduced to the motion of the heavenly body as to the
first corporeal mover, so all movements, both corporeal and
spiritual, are reduced to the simple First Mover, Who is God. And
hence no matter how perfect a corporeal or spiritual nature is
supposed to be, it cannot proceed to its act unless it be moved by
God; but this motion is according to the plan of His providence, and
not by necessity of nature, as the motion of the heavenly body. Now
not only is every motion from God as from the First Mover, but all
formal perfection is from Him as from the First Act. And thus the act
of the intellect or of any created being whatsoever depends upon God
in two ways: first, inasmuch as it is from Him that it has the form
whereby it acts; secondly, inasmuch as it is moved by Him to act.

Now every form bestowed on created things by God has power for a
determined act, which it can bring about in proportion to its own
proper endowment; and beyond which it is powerless, except by a
superadded form, as water can only heat when heated by the fire. And
thus the human understanding has a form, viz. intelligible light,
which of itself is sufficient for knowing certain intelligible
things, viz. those we can come to know through the senses. Higher
intelligible things the human intellect cannot know, unless it be
perfected by a stronger light, viz. the light of faith or prophecy
which is called the "light of grace," inasmuch as it is added to
nature.

Hence we must say that for the knowledge of any truth whatsoever man
needs Divine help, that the intellect may be moved by God to its act.
But he does not need a new light added to his natural light, in order
to know the truth in all things, but only in some that surpass his
natural knowledge. And yet at times God miraculously instructs some
by His grace in things that can be known by natural reason, even as
He sometimes brings about miraculously what nature can do.

Reply Obj. 1: Every truth by whomsoever spoken is from the Holy Ghost
as bestowing the natural light, and moving us to understand and speak
the truth, but not as dwelling in us by sanctifying grace, or as
bestowing any habitual gift superadded to nature. For this only takes
place with regard to certain truths that are known and spoken, and
especially in regard to such as pertain to faith, of which the
Apostle speaks.

Reply Obj. 2: The material sun sheds its light outside us; but the
intelligible Sun, Who is God, shines within us. Hence the natural
light bestowed upon the soul is God's enlightenment, whereby we are
enlightened to see what pertains to natural knowledge; and for this
there is required no further knowledge, but only for such things as
surpass natural knowledge.

Reply Obj. 3: We always need God's help for every thought, inasmuch
as He moves the understanding to act; for actually to understand
anything is to think, as is clear from Augustine (De Trin. xiv, 7).
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 109, Art. 2]

Whether Man Can Wish or Do Any Good Without Grace?

Objection 1: It would seem that man can wish and do good without
grace. For that is in man's power, whereof he is master. Now man is
master of his acts, and especially of his willing, as stated above
(Q. 1, A. 1; Q. 13, A. 6). Hence man, of himself, can wish and do
good without the help of grace.

Obj. 2: Further, man has more power over what is according to his
nature than over what is beyond his nature. Now sin is against his
nature, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii, 30); whereas deeds of
virtue are according to his nature, as stated above (Q. 71, A. 1).
Therefore since man can sin of himself he can wish and do good.

Obj. 3: Further, the understanding's good is truth, as the
Philosopher says (Ethic. vi, 2). Now the intellect can of itself know
truth, even as every other thing can work its own operation of
itself. Therefore, much more can man, of himself, do and wish good.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 9:16): "It is not of him
that willeth," namely, to will, "nor of him that runneth," namely to
run, "but of God that showeth mercy." And Augustine says (De Corrept.
et Gratia ii) that "without grace men do nothing good when they
either think or wish or love or act."

_I answer that,_ Man's nature may be looked at in two ways: first, in
its integrity, as it was in our first parent before sin; secondly, as
it is corrupted in us after the sin of our first parent. Now in both
states human nature needs the help of God as First Mover, to do or
wish any good whatsoever, as stated above (A. 1). But in the state of
integrity, as regards the sufficiency of the operative power, man by
his natural endowments could wish and do the good proportionate to
his nature, such as the good of acquired virtue; but not surpassing
good, as the good of infused virtue. But in the state of corrupt
nature, man falls short of what he could do by his nature, so that he
is unable to fulfil it by his own natural powers. Yet because human
nature is not altogether corrupted by sin, so as to be shorn of every
natural good, even in the state of corrupted nature it can, by virtue
of its natural endowments, work some particular good, as to build
dwellings, plant vineyards, and the like; yet it cannot do all the
good natural to it, so as to fall short in nothing; just as a sick
man can of himself make some movements, yet he cannot be perfectly
moved with the movements of one in health, unless by the help of
medicine he be cured.

And thus in the state of perfect nature man needs a gratuitous
strength superadded to natural strength for one reason, viz. in order
to do and wish supernatural good; but for two reasons, in the state
of corrupt nature, viz. in order to be healed, and furthermore in
order to carry out works of supernatural virtue, which are
meritorious. Beyond this, in both states man needs the Divine help,
that he may be moved to act well.

Reply Obj. 1: Man is master of his acts and of his willing or not
willing, because of his deliberate reason, which can be bent to one
side or another. And although he is master of his deliberating or not
deliberating, yet this can only be by a previous deliberation; and
since it cannot go on to infinity, we must come at length to this,
that man's free-will is moved by an extrinsic principle, which is
above the human mind, to wit by God, as the Philosopher proves in the
chapter "On Good Fortune" (Ethic. Eudem. vii). Hence the mind of man
still unweakened is not so much master of its act that it does not
need to be moved by God; and much more the free-will of man weakened
by sin, whereby it is hindered from good by the corruption of the
nature.

Reply Obj. 2: To sin is nothing else than to fail in the good which
belongs to any being according to its nature. Now as every created
thing has its being from another, and, considered in itself, is
nothing, so does it need to be preserved by another in the good which
pertains to its nature. For it can of itself fail in good, even as of
itself it can fall into non-existence, unless it is upheld by God.

Reply Obj. 3: Man cannot even know truth without Divine help, as
stated above (A. 1). And yet human nature is more corrupt by sin in
regard to the desire for good, than in regard to the knowledge of
truth.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 109, Art. 3]

Whether by His Own Natural Powers and Without Grace Man Can Love God
Above All Things?

Objection 1: It would seem that without grace man cannot love God
above all things by his own natural powers. For to love God above all
things is the proper and principal act of charity. Now man cannot of
himself possess charity, since the "charity of God is poured forth in
our hearts by the Holy Ghost Who is given to us," as is said Rom.
5:5. Therefore man by his natural powers alone cannot love God above
all things.

Obj. 2: Further, no nature can rise above itself. But to love God
above all things is to tend above oneself. Therefore without the help
of grace no created nature can love God above itself.

Obj. 3: Further, to God, Who is the Highest Good, is due the best
love, which is that He be loved above all things. Now without grace
man is not capable of giving God the best love, which is His due;
otherwise it would be useless to add grace. Hence man, without grace
and with his natural powers alone, cannot love God above all things.

_On the contrary,_ As some maintain, man was first made with only
natural endowments; and in this state it is manifest that he loved
God to some extent. But he did not love God equally with himself, or
less than himself, otherwise he would have sinned. Therefore he loved
God above himself. Therefore man, by his natural powers alone, can
love God more than himself and above all things.

_I answer that,_ As was said above (I, Q. 60, A. 5), where the
various opinions concerning the natural love of the angels were set
forth, man in a state of perfect nature, could by his natural power,
do the good natural to him without the addition of any gratuitous
gift, though not without the help of God moving him. Now to love God
above all things is natural to man and to every nature, not only
rational but irrational, and even to inanimate nature according to
the manner of love which can belong to each creature. And the reason
of this is that it is natural to all to seek and love things
according as they are naturally fit (to be sought and loved) since
"all things act according as they are naturally fit" as stated in
_Phys._ ii, 8. Now it is manifest that the good of the part is for
the good of the whole; hence everything, by its natural appetite and
love, loves its own proper good on account of the common good of the
whole universe, which is God. Hence Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iv)
that "God leads everything to love of Himself." Hence in the state of
perfect nature man referred the love of himself and of all other
things to the love of God as to its end; and thus he loved God more
than himself and above all things. But in the state of corrupt nature
man falls short of this in the appetite of his rational will, which,
unless it is cured by God's grace, follows its private good, on
account of the corruption of nature. And hence we must say that in
the state of perfect nature man did not need the gift of grace added
to his natural endowments, in order to love God above all things
naturally, although he needed God's help to move him to it; but in
the state of corrupt nature man needs, even for this, the help of
grace to heal his nature.

Reply Obj. 1: Charity loves God above all things in a higher way than
nature does. For nature loves God above all things inasmuch as He is
the beginning and the end of natural good; whereas charity loves Him,
as He is the object of beatitude, and inasmuch as man has a spiritual
fellowship with God. Moreover charity adds to natural love of God a
certain quickness and joy, in the same way that every habit of virtue
adds to the good act which is done merely by the natural reason of a
man who has not the habit of virtue.

Reply Obj. 2: When it is said that nature cannot rise above itself,
we must not understand this as if it could not be drawn to any object
above itself, for it is clear that our intellect by its natural
knowledge can know things above itself, as is shown in our natural
knowledge of God. But we are to understand that nature cannot rise to
an act exceeding the proportion of its strength. Now to love God
above all things is not such an act; for it is natural to every
creature, as was said above.

Reply Obj. 3: Love is said to be best, both with respect to degree of
love, and with regard to the motive of loving, and the mode of love.
And thus the highest degree of love is that whereby charity loves God
as the giver of beatitude, as was said above.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 109, Art. 4]

Whether Man Without Grace and by His Own Natural Powers Can Fulfil
the Commandments of the Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that man without grace, and by his own
natural powers, can fulfil the commandments of the Law. For the
Apostle says (Rom. 2:14) that "the Gentiles who have not the law, do
by nature those things that are of the Law." Now what a man does
naturally he can do of himself without grace. Hence a man can fulfil
the commandments of the Law without grace.

Obj. 2: Further, Jerome says (Expos. Cathol. Fide [*Symboli
Explanatio ad Damasum, among the supposititious works of St. Jerome:
now ascribed to Pelagius]) that "they are anathema who say God has
laid impossibilities upon man." Now what a man cannot fulfil by
himself is impossible to him. Therefore a man can fulfil all the
commandments of himself.

Obj. 3: Further, of all the commandments of the Law, the greatest is
this, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart" (Matt.
27:37). Now man with his natural endowments can fulfil this command
by loving God above all things, as stated above (A. 3). Therefore man
can fulfil all the commandments of the Law without grace.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Haeres. lxxxviii) that it is
part of the Pelagian heresy that "they believe that without grace man
can fulfil all the Divine commandments."

_I answer that,_ There are two ways of fulfilling the commandments of
the Law. The first regards the substance of the works, as when a man
does works of justice, fortitude, and of other virtues. And in this
way man in the state of perfect nature could fulfil all the
commandments of the Law; otherwise he would have been unable to sin
in that state, since to sin is nothing else than to transgress the
Divine commandments. But in the state of corrupted nature man cannot
fulfil all the Divine commandments without healing grace. Secondly,
the commandments of the law can be fulfilled, not merely as regards
the substance of the act, but also as regards the mode of acting,
i.e. their being done out of charity. And in this way, neither in the
state of perfect nature, nor in the state of corrupt nature can man
fulfil the commandments of the law without grace. Hence, Augustine
(De Corrept. et Grat. ii) having stated that "without grace men can
do no good whatever," adds: "Not only do they know by its light what
to do, but by its help they do lovingly what they know." Beyond this,
in both states they need the help of God's motion in order to fulfil
the commandments, as stated above (AA. 2, 3).

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says (De Spir. et Lit. xxvii), "do not be
disturbed at his saying that they do by nature those things that are
of the Law; for the Spirit of grace works this, in order to restore
in us the image of God, after which we were naturally made."

Reply Obj. 2: What we can do with the Divine assistance is not
altogether impossible to us; according to the Philosopher (Ethic.
iii, 3): "What we can do through our friends, we can do, in some
sense, by ourselves." Hence Jerome [*Symboli Explanatio ad Damasum,
among the supposititious works of St. Jerome: now ascribed to
Pelagius] concedes that "our will is in such a way free that we must
confess we still require God's help."

Reply Obj. 3: Man cannot, with his purely natural endowments, fulfil
the precept of the love of God, as stated above (A. 3).
