then, a perfection and a power which does not exist in the Second and in
the Third person. Thus these two Persons, lacking a perfection and a
power which is found in the First one, they are consequently not equal
with Him. If, on the contrary, they say that this power to beget a son
is no perfection, they should not attribute it, then, to the First
person any more than to the other two; for we should attribute
perfections only to an absolutely perfect being. Besides, they would not
dare to say that the power to beget a Divine person is not a perfection;
and if they claim that this First person could have begotten several
sons and daughters, but that He desired but this only Son, and that the
two other persons did not desire to beget any others, we could ask them,
firstly, from whence they know this, for we do not see in their
pretended Holy Scriptures that any One of these Divine personages
reveals any such assertions; how, then, can our Christ-worshipers know
anything about it? They speak but according to their ideas and to their
hollow imaginations. Secondly, we could not avoid saying, that if these
pretended Divine personages had the power of begetting several children,
and did not wish to make use of it, the consequence would be that this
Divine power was ineffectual. It would be entirely without effect in the
Third person, who did not beget or produce any, and would be almost
without effect in the two others, because they limited it. Then this
power of begetting or producing an unlimited number of children would
remain idle and useless; it would be inconsistent to suppose this of
Divine Personages, One of whom had already produced a Son.

Our Christ-worshipers blame and condemn the Pagans because they
attribute Divinity to mortal men, and worship them as Gods after their
death; they are right in doing this. But these Pagans did only what our
Christ-worshipers still do in attributing Divinity to their Christ;
doing which, they condemn themselves also, because they are in the same
error as these Pagans, in that they worship a man who was mortal, and so
very mortal that He died shamefully upon a cross.

It would be of no use for our Christ-worshipers to say that there was a
great difference between their Jesus Christ and the Pagan Gods, under
the pretense that their Christ was, as they claim, really God and man at
the same time, while the Divinity was incarnated in Him, by means of
which, the Divine nature found itself united personally, as they say,
with human nature; these two natures would have made of Jesus Christ a
true God and a true man; this is what never happened, they claim, in the
Pagan Gods.

But it is easy to show the weakness of this reply; for, on the one hand,
was it not as easy to the Pagans as to the Christians, to say that the
Divinity was incarnated in the men whom they worshiped as Gods? On the
other hand, if the Divinity wanted to incarnate and unite in the human
nature of their Jesus Christ, how did they know that this Divinity would
not wish to also incarnate and unite Himself personally to the human
nature of those great men and those admirable women, who, by their
virtue, by their good qualities, or by their noble actions, have
excelled the generality of people, and made themselves worshiped as Gods
and Goddesses? And if our Christ-worshipers do not wish to believe that
Divinity ever incarnated in these great personages, why do they wish to
persuade us that He was incarnated in their Jesus? Where is the proof?
Their faith and their belief; but as the Pagans rely on the same proof,
we conclude both to be equally in error.

But what is more ridiculous in Christianity than in Paganism, is that
the Pagans have generally attributed Divinity but to great men, authors
of arts and sciences, and who excelled in virtues useful to their
country. But to whom do our God-Christ-worshipers attribute Divinity? To
a nobody, to a vile and contemptible man, who had neither talent,
science, nor ability; born of poor parents, and who, while He figured in
the world, passed but for a monomaniac and a seditious fool, who was
disdained, ridiculed, persecuted, whipped, and, finally, was hanged like
most of those who desired to act the same part, when they had neither
the courage nor skill. About that time there were several other
impostors who claimed to be the true promised Messiah; amongst others a
certain Judas, a Galilean, a Theodorus, a Barcon, and others who, under
this vain pretext, abused the people, and tried to excite them, in order
to win them, but they all perished.

Let us pass now to His discourses and to some of His actions, which are
the most singular of this kind: "Repent," said He to the people, "for
the kingdom of Heaven is at hand; believe these good tidings." And He
went all over Galilee preaching this pretended approach of the kingdom
of Heaven. As no one has seen the arrival of this kingdom of Heaven, it
is evident that it was but imaginary. But let us see other predictions,
the praise, and the description of this beautiful kingdom.

Behold what He said to the people:

The kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a man who sowed good seed in his
field. But while he slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the
wheat, and went his way. Again, the kingdom of Heaven is like unto
treasure hidden in a field, the which, when a man has found, he hideth
again, and for joy thereof goes and sells all that he has, and buys that
field. Again, the kingdom of Heaven is like unto a merchantman seeking
goodly pearls, who, when he had found one pearl of great price, went and
sold all he had, and bought it. Again, the kingdom of Heaven is like
unto a net that was cast into the sea, and gathered of every kind;
which, when it was full, they drew to shore, and sat down and gathered
the good into vessels, but cast the bad away. It is like a grain of
mustard-seed, which a man took and sowed in his field which, indeed, is
the least of all seeds, but when it is grown it is the greatest among
herbs, etc.

Is this a language worthy of a God? We will pass the same judgment upon
Him if we examine His actions more closely. Because, firstly, He is
represented as running all over a country preaching the approach of a
pretended kingdom; Secondly, as having been transported by the Devil
upon a high mountain, from which He believed He saw all the kingdoms of
the world; this could only happen to a visionist; for it is certain,
there is no mountain upon the earth from which He could see even one
entire kingdom, unless it was the little kingdom of Yvetot, which is in
France; thus it was only in imagination that He saw all these kingdoms,
and was transported upon this mountain, as well as upon the pinnacle of
the temple. Thirdly, when He cured the deaf-mute, spoken of in St. Mark,
it is said that He placed His fingers in the ears, spit, and touched his
tongue, then casting His eyes up to Heaven, He sighed deeply, and said
unto him: "Ephphatha!" Finally, let us read all that is related of Him,
and we can judge whether there is anything in the world more ridiculous.

Having considered some of the silly things attributed to God by our
Christ-worshipers, let us look a little further into their mysteries.
They worship one God in three persons, or three persons in one God, and
they attribute to themselves the power of forming Gods out of dough, and
of making as many as they want. For, according to their principles, they
have only to say four words over a certain quantity of wine or over
these little images of paste, to make as many Gods of them as they
desire. What folly! With all the pretended power of their Christ, they
would not be able to make the smallest fly, and yet they claim the
ability to produce millions of Gods. One must be struck by a strange
blindness to maintain such pitiable things, and that upon such vain
foundation as the equivocal words of a fanatic. Do not these blind
theologians see that it means opening a wide door to all sorts of
idolatries, to adore these paste images under the pretext that the
priests have the power of consecrating them and changing them into Gods?

Can not the priests of the idols boast of having a similar ability?

Do they not see, also, that the same reasoning which demonstrates the
vanity of the gods or idols of wood, of stone, etc., which the Pagans
worshiped, shows exactly the same vanity of the Gods and idols of paste
or of flour which our Christ-worshipers adore? By what right do they
deride the falseness of the Pagan Gods? Is it not because they are but
the work of human hands, mute and insensible images? And what kind of
Gods are those which we preserve in boxes for fear of the mice?

What are these boasted resources of the Christ-worshipers? Their
morality? It is the same as in all religions, but their cruel dogmas
produced and taught persecution and trouble. Their miracles? But what
people has not its own, and what wise men do not disdain these fables?
Their prophecies? Have we not shown their falsity? Their morals? Are
they not often infamous? The establishment of their religion? but did
not fanaticism begin, and has not intrigue visibly sustained this
edifice? The doctrine? but is it not the height of absurdity?

End Of The Abstract By Voltaire.




PUBLISHER'S PREFACE.

By translating into both the English and German languages Le Bon Sens,
containing the Last Will and Testament of the French curate JEAN
MESLIER, Miss Anna Knoop has performed a most useful and meritorious
task, and in issuing a new edition of this work, it is but justice to
her memory [Miss Knoop died Jan. 11, 1889.] to state that her
translation has received the endorsement of our most competent critics.

In a letter dated Newburyport, Mass., Sep. 23, 1878, Mr. James Parton,
the celebrated author, commends Miss Knoop for "translating Meslier's
book so well," and says that:

"This work of the honest pastor is the most curious and the most
powerful thing of the kind which the last century produced. . . . .
Paine and Voltaire had reserves, but Jean Meslier had none. He keeps
nothing back; and yet, after all, the wonder is not that there should
have been one priest who left that testimony at his death, but that all
priests do not. True, there is a great deal more to be said about
religion, which I believe to be an eternal necessity of human nature,
but no man has uttered the negative side of the matter with so much
candor and completeness as Jean Meslier."

The value of the testimony of a catholic priest, who in his last moments
recanted the errors of his faith and asked God's pardon for having
taught the catholic religion, was fully appreciated by Voltaire, who
highly commended this grand work of Meslier. He voluntarily made every
effort to increase its circulation, and even complained to D' Alembert
"that there were not as many copies in all Paris as he himself had
dispersed throughout the mountains of Switzerland." [See Letter 504,
Voltaire to D'Alembert] He earnestly entreats his associates to print
and distribute in Paris an edition of at least four or five thousand
copies, and at the suggestion of D'Alembert, made an abstract or
abridgment of The Testament "so small as to cost no more than five
pence, and thus to be fitted for the pocket and reading of every
workman." [Letter 146, from D'Alembert.]

The Abbe Barruel claims in his Memoirs [See History of Jacobinism by the
Abbe Barruel, 4 vols. 8 VO, translated by the Hon. Robert Clifford, F.
R. S., and printed in London in 1798. The learned Abbe defines
Jacobinism as "the error of every man who, judging of all things by the
standard of his own reason, rejects in religious matters every authority
that is not derived from the light of nature. It is the error of every
man who denies the possibility of any mystery beyond the limits of his
reason, of every one who, discarding revelation in defence of the
pretended rights of Reason, Equality, and Liberty, seeks to subvert the
whole fabric of the Christian religion." B. 4.] to detect in the
writings of Voltaire and of the leading Encyclopedists, a conspiracy not
only against the Altar but also against the Throne. He severely
denounces the "Last Will of Jean Meslier,--that famous Curate of
Etrepigni,--whose  apostasy and blasphemies made so strong an impression
on the minds of the populace," and he styles the plan of D'Alembert for
circulating a few thousand copies of the Abstract of the Will, as a "base
project against the doctrines of the Gospel." [Ibid, page 145] He even
asserts his belief that:

"The Jacobins will one day declare that all men are free, that all men
are equal; and as a consequence of this Equality and Liberty they will
conclude that every man must be left to the light of reason. That every
religion subjecting man's reason to mysteries, or to the authority of
any revelation speaking in God's name, is a religion of constraint and
slavery; that as such it should be annihilated in order to reestablish
the indefeasible rights of Equality and Liberty as to the belief or
disbelief of all that the reason of man approves or disapproves: and
they will call this Equality and Liberty the reign of Reason and the
empire of Philosophy." [History of Jacobinism, page 51.]

The results which the Abbe Barruel so clearly foresaw have at length
been realized. The labors of the Jacobins have not been in vain, and the
Revolution they incited has restored France to the government of the
people!

"With ardent hope for the future," says President Carnot in his
centennial address, May 5, 1889, "I greet in the palace of the monarchy
the representatives of a nation that is now in complete possession of
herself, that is mistress of her destinies, and that is in the full
splendor and strength of liberty. The first thoughts on this solemn
meeting turn to our fathers. The immortal generation  of 1789, by dint
of courage and many sacrifices, secured for us benefits which we must
bequeath to our sons as a most precious inheritance. Never can our
gratitude equal the grandeur of the services rendered by our fathers to
France and to the human race. . . . The Revolution was based upon the
rights of man. It created a new era in history and founded modern
society."

This is literally true. The freethinkers of France have taught mankind
the doctrines of Liberty, Equality, and Fraternity. They have taught the
dignity of human reason, and the sacredness of human rights. They have
broken the bondage of the altar, and severed the shackles of the throne;
and it is to be regretted that at the centennial celebration held in
this city on April 30th, 1889, the appointed orator [See the Centennial
Address of the Hon. Chauncey M. Depew.] did not realize the grandeur of
the occasion, and did not, like Carnot, pay a just tribute to our
allies, the reformers of Europe, as well as to the fathers of the
republic. But the people of America will remember what the politician
has forgotten. They will remember the names and deeds of their foreign
benefactors as well as of the American patriots of '76. When they recall
the illustrious Europeans who fought for our liberties they will
remember the name of Lafayette; when they think of the Declaration of
Independence they will not forget the name of Thomas Jefferson; and when
they speak of "the times that tried men's souls" they will recall with
gratitude the name of Thomas Paine.

Although the ecclesiastical conclave at Rome claims the power of working
miracles in defiance of Nature's laws, yet with or without miracles,
they have never answered the simple arguments advanced by Jean Meslier;
although they claim to hold the keys of Paradise, and bind on earth the
souls that are to be bound in heaven, yet year by year their waning
power refutes their senseless boast; although they boldly assert the
dogma of popish infallibility, yet the loss of the temporal power once
wielded by Rome, and the death of each succeeding pontiff, attest both
the Pope's fallibility and the Pope's mortality. Indeed, the successor
of St. Peter is but human--the sacred college at Rome is but mortal; and
faith and dogma cannot forever resist the influence of light and
knowledge. The power of Catholicism is surely declining throughout
Europe; and if it has become aggressive in our American cities, is it
not because the friends of freedom have forgotten the well-known axiom
that "eternal vigilance is the price of liberty"?

PETER ECKLER.

New York, May 21, 1889.




PREFATORY NOTE BY THE TRANSLATOR

Some years ago a copy of John Meslier fell into my hands. I was struck
with the simple truthfulness of his arguments, and the thought never
left me of the happy change that would be produced all over the world
when the religious prejudices should be dispelled, and when all the
different nations and sects would unite and lend each other a friendly
hand.

Since I had the opportunity of hearing the speeches and lectures of
liberal men, it has seemed to me that the time has come for this work of
John Meslier to be appreciated, and I concluded to translate it into the
language of my adopted country, presuming that many would be happy to
study it.

In this faith I offer it now to the public, and I hope that the name of
John Meslier will be honored as one of the greatest benefactors of
humanity.

ANNA KNOOP.



