capable of being cleansed. Only when we think of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ as being, first and foremost, the redemption of the world by the
great act of incarnation and sacrifice, do we come to be in a position
in any measure to estimate its superlative worth.

And, for my part, I believe that almost all the mistakes and errors and
evaporations of Christianity into a mere dead nothing which have
characterised the various ages of the Church come mainly from this, that
men fail to see how deep and how fatal are the wounds of sin, and so
fail to apprehend the Gospel as being mainly and primarily a system of
redemption. There are many other most beautiful aspects about it, much
else in it, that is lovely and of good report, and fitted to draw men's
hearts and admiration; but all is rooted in this, the life and death of
Jesus Christ, the sacrifice by whom we are forgiven, and in whom we are
healed. And if you strike that out, you have a dead nothing left--an
eviscerated Gospel.

I believe that we all need to be reminded of that to-day, as we always
do, but mainly to-day, when we hear from so many lips estimates,
favourable or unfavourable to Christianity and its mission in the world,
which leave out of sight, or minimise into undue insignificance, or
shove into a backward place, its essential characteristic, that it is
the power of God through Christ, His Son Incarnate, dying and rising
again for the salvation of individual souls from the penalty, the guilt,
the habit, and the love of their sins, and only secondarily is it a
morality, a philosophy, a social lever. I take for mine the quaint
saying of one of the old Puritans, 'When so many brethren are preaching
to the times, it may be allowed one poor brother to preach for
eternity.'

'This is a faithful saying, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners.'

II. Now, secondly, note the reliableness of this condensed Gospel.

When a man in the middle of some slight plank, thrown across a stream,
tests it with a stamp of his foot, and calls to his comrades, 'It is
quite firm,' there is reason for their venturing upon it too. That is
exactly what Paul is doing here. How does he know that it is 'a faithful
saying'? Because he has proved it in his own experience, and found that
in his case the salvation which Jesus Christ was said to effect has been
effected. Now there are many other grounds of certitude besides this,
but, after all, it is worth men's while to consider how many millions
there have been from the beginning who would be ready to join chorus
with the Apostle here, and to say, 'One thing I know, that whereas I
was blind, now I see.' My experience cannot be your certitude; but if
you and I are suffering from precisely the same disease, and I have
tested a cure, my experiences should have some weight with you. And so,
brethren, I point you to all the thousands who are ready to say, 'This
poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him.' Are there any
who give counter-evidence; that say, 'We have tried it. It is all a sham
and imagination. We have asked this Christ of yours to forgive us, and
He has not. We have asked Him to cleanse us, and He has not. We have
tried Him, and He is an impostor, and we will have no more to do with
Him.' There are people, alas! who have gone back to their wallowing in
the mire, but it was not because Christ had failed in His promises, but
because they did not care to have them fulfilled any more. Jesus Christ
does not promise that His salvation shall work against the will of men
who submit themselves to it.

But it is not only because of that consentient chorus of many
voices--the testimony of which wise men will not reject--that the word
is 'a faithful saying.' This is no place or time to enter upon anything
like a condensation of the Christian evidence; but, in lieu of
everything else, I point to one proof. There is no fact in the history
of the world better attested, and the unbelief of which is more
unreasonable, than the Resurrection of Jesus Christ. And if Christ rose
from the dead--and you cannot understand the history of the world unless
He did, nor the existence of the Church either--if Jesus Christ rose
from the dead, it seems to me that almost all the rest follows of
necessity: the influx of the supernatural, the unique character of His
career, the correspondence of the end with the beginning, the broad seal
of the divine confirmation stamped upon His claims to be the Son of God
and the Redeemer of the world. All these things seem to me to come
necessarily from that fact. And I say, given the consentient witness of
nineteen centuries, given the existence of the Church, given the effects
of Christianity in the world, given that upon which they repose--the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead--the conclusion is sound,
'This is a faithful saying . . . that He came into the world to save
sinners.'

Men talk, nowadays, very often as if the progress of science and new
views as to the evolution of creatures or of mankind had effected the
certitude of the Gospel. It does not seem to me that they have in the
smallest degree. 'The foundation of God standeth sure,' whatever may
become of some of the superstructures which men have built upon it. They
may very probably be blown away. So much the better if we get the rock
to build upon once more. A great deal is going, but not the Gospel. Do
not let us be afraid, or suppose that it will suffer. Do not let us
dread every new speculation as if it was going to finish Christianity,
but recognise this--that the fact of man's sin and, blessed be God! the
fact of man's redemption stands untouched by them all; and to-day, as of
old, Jesus Christ is, and is firmly manifested to be, the world's
Saviour. Whatsoever refuge may be swept away by any storms, 'Behold, I
lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried corner-stone, a sure
foundation: He that believeth shall not be confounded.'

III. Lastly, notice the consequent wisdom and duty of acceptance.

'Worthy of all acceptation,' says Paul. Yes, of course, if it is
reliable. That word of the Lord which is 'sure, making wise the simple,'
deserves to be received. Now this phrase, 'all acceptation,' may mean
either of two things: it may either mean worthy of being welcomed by all
men, or by the whole of each man.

This Gospel deserves to be welcomed by every man, for it is fitted for
every man, since it deals with the primary human characteristic of
transgression. Brethren! we need different kinds of intellectual
nutriment, according to education and culture. We need different kinds
of treatment, according to condition and circumstance. The morality of
one age is not the morality of another. Much, even of right and wrong,
is local and temporary; but black man and white, savage and civilised,
philosopher and fool, king and clown, all need the same air to breathe,
the same water to drink, the same sun for light and warmth, and all need
the same Christ for redemption from the same sin, for safety from the
same danger, for snatching from the same death. This Gospel is a Gospel
for the world, and for every man in it. Have you taken it for yours? If
it is 'worthy of all acceptation,' it is worthy of _your_ acceptation.
If you have not, you are treating Him and it with indignity, as if it
was a worthless letter left in the post-office for you, which you knew
was there, but which you did not think valuable enough to take the
trouble to go for. The gift lies at your side. It is less than truth to
say that it is '_worthy_ of being accepted.' Oh! it is infinitely more
than that.

It is, also, 'worthy of all acceptation' in the sense of worthy of being
accepted into all a man's nature, because it will fit it all and bless
it all. Some of us give it a half welcome. We take it into our heads,
and then we put a partition between them and our hearts, and keep our
religion on the other side, so that it does not influence us at all. It
is worthy of being received by the understanding, to which it will bring
truth absolute; of being received by the will, to which it will bring
the freedom of submission; of being received by the conscience, to which
it will bring quickening; of being received by the affections, to which
it will bring pure and perfect love. For hope, it will bring a certainty
to gaze upon; for passions, a curb; for effort, a spur and a power; for
desires, satisfaction; for the whole man, healing and light.

Brother! take it. And, if you do, begin where it begins, with your sins;
and be contented to be saved as a sinner in danger and sickness, who can
neither defend nor heal yourself. And thus coming, you will test the
rope and find it hold; you will take the medicine and know that it
cures; and, by your own experience, you will be able to say, 'This _is_
a faithful saying, Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners.'




THE CHIEF OF SINNERS

          'Of whom I am chief.'--1 TIM. i. 15.


The less teachers of religion talk about themselves the better; and yet
there is a kind of personal reference, far removed from egotism and
offensiveness. Few such men have ever spoken more of themselves than
Paul did, and yet none have been truer to his motto: 'We preach not
ourselves, but Christ Jesus.' For the scope of almost all his personal
references is the depreciation of self, and the magnifying of the
wonderful mercy which drew him to Jesus Christ. Whenever he speaks of
his conversion it is with deep emotion and with burning cheeks. Here,
for instance, he adduces himself as the typical example of God's
long-suffering. If _he_ were saved none need despair.

I take it that this saying of the Apostle's, 'Of whom I am chief,'
paradoxical and exaggerated as it seems to many men, is in spirit that
which all who know themselves ought to re-echo; and without which there
is little strength in Christian life.

I. And so I ask you to note, first, what this man thinks of himself.

'Of whom I am chief.' Now, if we set what we know of the character of
Saul of Tarsus before he was a Christian by the side of that of many who
have won a bad supremacy in wickedness, the words seem entirely strange
and exaggerated. But, as I have often had to say, the principle of the
Apostle's estimate is to be found in his belief that, not the outward
manifestation of evil in specific acts of immorality, or flagrant
breaches of commandment, but the inward principle from which the deeds
flowed, is the measure of a man's criminality, and that, according to
the uniform teaching of Scripture, the very root of sin, and that which
is common to all the things that the world's conscience and ordinary
morality designate as wrong, is to be found here, that self has become
the centre, the aim, and the law instead of God. 'This is the
condemnation,' said Paul's Master--_not_ that men have done so-and-so
and so-and-so, but--'that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness.' That is the root of evil. 'When the Comforter is come,' said
Paul's Master, 'He will convince the world of sin.' Because they have
broken the commandments? Because they have been lustful, ambitious,
passionate, murderous, profligate, and so on? No! 'Because they believe
not in Me.'

The common root of all sin is alienation of heart and will from God. And
it is by the root, and not by the black clusters of poisonous berries
that have come from it, that men are to be judged. Here is the
mother-tincture. You may colour it in different ways, and you may
flavour it with different essences, and you will get a whole
_pharmacopoeia_ of poisons out of it. But the mother-poison of them
all is this, that men turn away from the light, which is God; and for
you and me is God in Christ.

So this man, looking back from the to-day of his present devotion and
love to the yesterdays of his hostility, avails himself indeed of the
palliation, 'I did it ignorantly, in unbelief,' but yet is smitten with
the consciousness that whilst as touching the righteousness that is of
the law he was blameless, his attitude to that incarnate love was such
as now, he thinks, stamps him as the worst of men.

Brethren, _there_ is the standard by which we have to try ourselves. If
we get down below the mere surface of acts, and think, not of what we
do, but of what we are, we shall then, at any rate, have in our hands
the means by which we can truly estimate ourselves.

But what have we to say about that word 'chief'? Is not that
exaggeration? Well, yes and no. For every man ought to know the weak and
evil places of his own heart better than he does those of any besides.
And if he does so know them, he will understand that the ordinary
classification of sin, according to the apparent blackness of the deed,
is very superficial and misleading. Obviously, the worst of acts need
not be done by the worst of men, and it does not at all follow that the
man who does the awful deed stands out from his fellows in the same bad
pre-eminence in which his deed stands out from theirs.

Take a concrete case. Go into the slums of Manchester, and take some of
the people there, battered almost out of the semblance of humanity, and
all crusted over and leprous with foul-smelling evils that you and I
never come within a thousand miles of thinking it possible that we
should do. Did you ever think that it is quite possible that the worst
harlot, thief, drunkard, profligate in your back streets may be more
innocent in their profligacy than you are in your respectability; and
that we may even come to this paradox, that the worse the act, as a
rule, the less guilty the doer? It is not such a paradox as it looks,
because, on the one hand, the presence of temptation, and, on the other
hand, the absence of light, make all the difference. And these people,
who could not have been anything else, are innocent in degradation as
compared with you, with all your education and culture, and
opportunities of going straight, and knowledge of Christ and His love.
The little transgressions that you do are far greater than the gross
ones that they do. 'But for the grace of God, there goes John Bradford,'
said the old preacher, when he saw a man going to the scaffold. And you
and I, if we know ourselves, will not think that we have an instance of
exaggeration, but only of the object nearest seeming the largest, when
Paul said 'Of whom I am chief.'

Only go and look for your sin in the way they look for Guy Fawkes at the
House of Commons before the session. Take a dark lantern, and go down
into the cellars. And If you do not find something there that will take
all the conceit out of you, it must be because you are very
short-sighted, or phenomenally self-complacent.

What does it matter though there be vineyards on the slopes of Vesuvius,
and bright houses nestling at its base, and beauty lying all around like
the dream of a god, if, when a man cranes his neck over the top of the
crater, he sees that that cone, so graceful on the outside, is seething
with fire and sulphur? Let us look down into the crater of our own
hearts, and what we see there may well make us feel as Paul did when he
said, 'Of whom I am chief.'

Now, such an estimate is perfectly consistent with a clear recognition
of any good that may be in the character and manifest in life. For the
same Paul who says, 'Of whom I am chief,' says, in the almost
contemporaneous letter sent to the same person, 'I have fought a good
fight; I have finished my course; I have kept the faith'; and he is the
same man who asserted, 'In nothing am I behind the very chiefest
apostles, though I be nothing.' The true Christian estimate of one's own
evil and sin does not in the least interfere with the recognition of
what God strengthens one to do, or of the progress which, by God's
grace, may have been made in holiness and righteousness. The two things
may lie side by side with perfect harmony, and ought to do so, in every
Christian heart.

But notice one more point. The Apostle does not say 'I _was_,' but 'I
_am_ chief.' What! A man who could say, in another connection, 'If any
man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new creature; old things are passed
away'--the man who could say, in another connection, 'I live, yet not
I, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh I
live by the faith of the Son of God'--does he also say, 'I _am_ chief'?
Is he speaking about his present? Are old sins bound round a man's neck
for evermore? If they be, what is the meaning of the Gospel that Jesus
Christ redeems us from our sins? Well, he means this. No lapse of time,
nor any gift of divine pardon, nor any subsequent advancement in
holiness and righteousness, can alter the fact that I, the very same I
that am now rejoicing in God's salvation, am the man that did all these
things; and, in a very profound sense, they remain mine through all
eternity. I may be a forgiven sinner, and a cleansed sinner, and a
sanctified sinner, but I _am_ a sinner--not I _was_. The imperishable
connection between a man and his past, which may be so tragical, and,
thank God, may be so blessed, even in the case of remembered and
confessed sin, is solemnly hinted at in the words before us. We carry
with us ever the fact of past transgression, and no forgiveness, nor any
future 'perfecting of holiness in the fear' and by the grace 'of the
Lord' can alter that fact. Therefore, let us beware lest we bring upon
our souls any more of the stains which, though they be in a blessed and
sufficient sense blotted out, do yet leave the marks where they have
fallen for ever.

II. Note how this man comes to such an estimate of himself.

He did not think so deeply and penitently of his past at the beginning
of his career, true and deep as his repentance, and valid and genuine as
his conversion were. But as he advanced in the love of Jesus Christ, his
former active hostility became more monstrous to him, and the higher he
rose, the clearer was his vision of the depth from which he had
struggled; for growth in Christian holiness deepens the conviction of
prior imperfection.

If God has forgiven my sin the more need for me to remember it. 'Thou
shalt be ashamed and confounded, and never open thy mouth any more
because of thy transgressions, when I am pacified towards thee for all
that thou hast done.' If you, my brother, have any real and genuine hold
of God's pardoning mercy, it will bow you down the more completely on
your knees in the recognition of your own sin. The man who, as soon as
the pressure of guilt and danger which is laid upon him seems to him to
be lifted off, springs up like some elastic figure of indiarubber, and
goes on his way in jaunty forgetfulness of his past evil, needs to ask
himself whether he has ever passed from death unto life. Not to remember
the old sin is to be blind. The surest sign that we are pardoned is the
depth of our habitual penitence. Try yourselves, you Christian people
who are so sure of your forgiveness, try yourselves by that test, and if
you find that you are thinking less of your past evil, be doubtful
whether you have ever entered into the genuine possession of the
forgiving mercy of your God.

And then, still further, this penitent retrospect is the direct result
of advancement in Christian characteristics. We are drawn to begin some
study or enterprise by the illusion that there is but a little way to
go. 'Alps upon alps arise' when once we have climbed a short distance up
the hill, and it has become as difficult to go back as to go forward.

So it is in the Christian life--the sign of growing perfection is the
growing consciousness of imperfection. A spot upon a clean palm is more
conspicuous than a diffuse griminess over all the hand. One stain upon
a white robe spoils it which would not be noticed upon one less
lustrously clean. And so the more we grow towards God in Christ, and the
more we appropriate and make our own His righteousness, the more we
shall be conscious of our deficiencies, and the less we shall be
prepared to assert virtues for ourselves.

Thus it comes to pass that conscience is least sensitive when it is most
needed, and most swift to act when it has least to do. So it comes to
pass, too, that no man's acquittal of himself can be accepted as
sufficient; and that he is a fool in self-knowledge who says, 'I am not
conscious of guilt, therefore I am innocent.' 'I know nothing against
myself, yet am I not hereby justified: but He that judgeth me is the
Lord.' The more you become like Christ the more you will find out your
unlikeness to Him.

III. Lastly, note what this judgment of himself did for this man.

I said in the beginning of my remarks that it seemed to me that without
the reproduction of this estimate of ourselves there would be little
strong Christian life in us. It seems to me that that continual
remembrance which Paul carried with him of what he had been, and of
Christ's marvellous love in drawing him to Himself, was the very spring
of all that was noble and conspicuously Christian in his career. And I
venture to say, in two or three words, what I think you and I will never
have unless we have this lowly self-estimate.

Without it there will be no intensity of cleaving to Jesus Christ. If
you do not know that you are ill, you will not take the medicine. If you
do not believe that the house is on fire, you will not mind the escape.
The life-buoy lies unnoticed on the shelf above the berth as long as the
sea is calm and everything goes well. Unless you have been down into the
depths of your own heart, and seen the evil that is there, you will not
care for the redeeming Christ, nor will you grasp Him as a man does who
knows that there is nothing between him and ruin except that strong
hand. We must be driven to the Saviour as well as drawn to Him if there
is to be any reality or tightness in the clutch with which we hold Him.
And if you do not hold Him with a firm clutch you do not hold Him at
all.

Further, without this lowly estimate there will be no fervour of
grateful love. That is the reason why so much both of orthodox and
heterodox religion amongst us to-day is such a tepid thing as it is. It
is because men have never felt either that they need a Redeemer, or that
Jesus Christ has redeemed them. I believe that there is only one power
that will strike the rock of a human heart, and make the water of
grateful devotion flow out, and that is the belief in Jesus Christ as
the Redeemer of mankind, and as my Saviour. Unless that be your faith,
which it will not be except you have this conviction of my text in its
spirit and essence, there will not be in your hearts the love which will
glow there, an all-transforming power.

And is there anything in the world more obnoxious, more insipid, than
lukewarm religion? If, with marks of quotation, I might use the coarse,
strong expression of John Milton--'It gives a vomit to God Himself.'
'Because thou art neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my
mouth.'

And without it there will be little pity of, and love for, our fellows.
Unless we feel the common evil, and estimate by the intensity of its
working in ourselves how sad are its ravages in others, our charity to
men will be as tepid as our love to God. Did you ever notice that,
historically, the widest benevolence to men goes along with what some
people call the 'narrowest' theology? People tell us, for instance, to
mark the contrast between the theology which is usually called
evangelical and the wide benevolence usually accompanying it, and ask
how the two things agree. The 'wide' benevolence comes directly from the
'narrow' theology. He that knows the plague of his own heart, and how
Christ has redeemed him, will go, with the pity of Christ in his heart,
to help to redeem others.

So, dear friends, 'If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves.'
'If we confess our sins, He is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and cleanse us from all unrighteousness.'




A TEST CASE

          'Howbeit for this cause I obtained mercy, that in
          me first Jesus Christ might show forth all
          long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should
          hereafter believe.'--1 TIM. i. 16.


The smallest of God's creatures, if it were only a gnat dancing in a
sunbeam, has a right to have its well-being considered as an end of
God's dealings. But no creature is so isolated or great as that it has a
right to have its well-being regarded as the sole end of God's dealings.
That is true about all His blessings and gifts; it is eminently true
about His gift of salvation. He saves men because He loves them
individually, and desires to make them blessed; but He also saves them
because He desires that through them others shall be brought into the
living knowledge of His love. It is most especially true about great
religious teachers and guides.

Paul's humility is as manifest as his self-consciousness when he says in
my text, 'This is what I was saved for. Not merely, not even
principally, for the blessings that thereby accrue to myself, but that
in me, as a crucial instance, there should be manifested the whole
fulness of the divine love and saving power.' So he puts his own
experience as giving no kind of honour or glory to himself, but as
simply showing the grace and infinite love of Jesus Christ. Paul
disappears as but a passive recipient; and Christ strides into the front
as the actor in his conversion and apostleship.

So we may take this point of view of my text, and look at the story of
what befell the great Apostle as being in many different ways an
exhibition of the great verities of the Gospel. I desire to signalise,
especially, three points here. We see in it the demonstration of the
life of Christ; an exhibition of the love of the living Christ; and a
marvellous proof of the power of that loving and living Lord.

I. First, then, take the experience of this Apostle as a demonstration
of the exalted life, and continuous energy in the world, of Jesus
Christ.

What was it that turned the brilliant young disciple of Gamaliel, the
rising hope of the Pharisaic party, the hammer of the heretics, into one
of themselves? The appearance of Jesus Christ. Paul rode out of
Jerusalem believing Him to be dead, and His Resurrection a lie. He
staggered into Damascus, blind but seeing, and knowing that Jesus
Christ lived and reigned. Now if you will let the man tell you himself
what he saw, or thought he saw, you will come to this, that it was a
visible, audible manifestation of a corporeal Christ. For it is
extremely noteworthy that the Apostle ranks the appearance to himself,
on the road to Damascus, as in the same class with the appearances to
the other apostles which he enumerates in the great chapter in the
Epistle to the Corinthians. He draws no distinction, as far as
evidential force goes, between the appearance to Simon and to the five
hundred brethren and to the others, and that which flashed upon him and
made a Christian of him. Other men that were with him saw the light. He
saw the Christ within the blaze. Other men heard a noise; he heard
audible and intelligible words in his own speech. This is _his_ account
of the phenomenon. What do _you_ think of his account?

There are but three possible answers! It was imposture; it was delusion;
it was truth. The theory of imposture is out of court. 'Do men gather
grapes of thorns or figs of thistles?' Such a life as followed is
altogether incongruous with the notion that the man who lived it was a
deceiver. A fanatic he may have been; self-deceived he may have been;
but transparently sincere he undeniably was. It is not given to
impostors to move the world, as Paul did and does.

Was it delusion? Well it is a strange kind of hallucination which has
such physical accompaniments and consequences as those in the story--not
wanting confirmation from witnesses--which has come to us.

'At midday, O king'--in no darkness; in no shut-up chamber, 'at midday,
O king--I heard . . . I saw . . .' 'The men that were with me' partly
shared in the vision. There was a lengthened conversation; two senses at
least were appealed to, vision and hearing, and in both vision and
hearing there were partial participators. Physical consequences that
lasted for three days accompanied the hallucination; and the man 'was
blind, not seeing the sun, and neither did eat nor drink.' There must be
some soil beforehand in which delusions of such a sort can root
themselves. But, if we take the story in the Acts of the Apostles, there
is not the smallest foothold for the fashionable notion, which is
entirely due to men's dislike of the supernatural, that there was any
kind of misgiving in the young Pharisee, springing from the influence of
Stephen's martyrdom, as he went forth breathing out threatenings and
slaughter. The plain fact is that, at one moment he hated Jesus Christ
as a bad man, and believed that the story of the Resurrection was a
gross falsehood; and that at the next moment he knew Him to be living
and reigning, and the Lord of his life and of the world. Hallucinations
do not come thus, like a thunderclap on unprepared minds. Nor is there
anything in the subsequent history of the man that seems to confirm, but
everything that contradicts, the idea that such a revolutionary change
as upset all his mental furniture, and changed the whole current of his
life, and slammed in his face the door that was wide open to advancement
and reputation, came from a delusion.

I think the hallucination theory is out of court, too, and there is
nothing left but the old-fashioned one, that what he said he saw, _he
saw_, and did not fancy; and that which he said he heard, _he heard_;
and that it was not a buzzing of a diseased nerve in his own ears, but
the actual speech of the glorified Christ. Very well, then; if that be
true, what then? The old-fashioned belief--Jesus who died on the Cross
is living, Jesus who died on the Cross is glorified, Jesus who died on
the Cross is exalted to the throne of the universe, puts His hand into
the affairs of the world as a power amongst them. Paul's Christology is
but the _rationale_ of the vision that led to Paul's conversion. It was
in part because he 'saw that Just One, and heard the words of His
mouth,' that he declares, 'God hath highly exalted Him, and given Him a
name that is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow.' I do not say that the vision to Paul is a demonstration of
the reality of the Resurrection, but I do say that it is a very strong
confirmatory evidence, which the opponents of that truth will have much
difficulty in legitimately putting aside.

II. Secondly, let me ask you to consider how this man's experience is an
exhibition of the love of the living Lord.

That is the main point on which the Apostle dwells in my text, in which
he says that in him Jesus Christ 'shows forth all long-suffering.' The
whole fulness of His patient, pitying grace was lavished upon him. He
says this because he puts side by side his hostility and Christ's love,
what he had believed of Jesus, and how Jesus had borne with him and
loved him through all, and had drawn him to Himself and received him. So
he established by his own experience this great truth, that the love of
Jesus Christ is never darkened by one single speck of anger, that He
'suffereth long, and is kind'; that He meets hostility with patient
love, hatred with a larger outpouring of His affection, and that His
only answer to men's departures from Him in heart and feeling is more
mightily to seek to draw them to Himself. 'Long-suffering' means, in its
true and proper sense, the patient acceptance, without the smallest
movement of indignation, of unworthy treatment. And just as Christ on
earth 'gave His back to the smiter, and His cheeks to them that pulled
off the hair'; and let the lips of Judas touch His, nor withdrew His
face from 'shame and spitting'; and was never stirred to one impatient
or angry word by any opposition, so now, and to us all, with equal
boundlessness of endurance, He lets men hate Him, and revile Him, and
forget Him, and turn their backs upon Him; and for only answer has,
'Come unto Me all ye that labour, and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest.'

Oh, dear brethren, we can weary out all loves except one. By
carelessness, rebelliousness, the opposition of indifference, we can
chill the affection of those to whom we are dearest. 'Can a mother
forget? Yea, she may forget,' but you cannot provoke Jesus Christ to
cease His love. Some of you have been trying it all your days, but you
have not done it yet. There does come a time when 'the wrath of the
Lamb'--which is a very terrible paradox--is kindled, and will fall, I
fear, on some men and women who are listening now. But not yet. You
cannot make Christ angry. 'For this cause I obtained mercy, that in me
Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, _for a pattern_'--for
the same long-suffering is extended to us all.

And then, in like manner, I may remind you that out of Paul's
experience, as a cardinal instance and standing example of Christ's
heart and dealings, comes the thought that that long-suffering is always
wooing men to itself, and making efforts to draw them away from their
own evil. In Paul's case there was a miracle. That difference is of
small consequence. As truly as ever Christ spoke to Paul from the
heavens, so truly, and so tenderly, does He speak to every one of us. He
is drawing us all--you that yield and you that do not yield to His
attractions, by the kindliest gifts of His love, by the revelations of
His grace, by the movements of His Spirit, by the providences of our
days, by even my poor lips addressing you now--for, if I be speaking His
truth, it is not I that speak, but He that speaks in me. I beseech you,
dear friends, recognise in this old story of the persecutor turned
apostle nothing exceptional, though there be something miraculous, but
only an exceptional form of manifestation of the normal activity of the
love of Christ towards every soul. He loves, He draws, He welcomes all
that come to Him. His servant, who stood over the blind, penitent
persecutor, and said to him, '_Brother_ Saul!' was only faintly echoing
the glad reception which the elder Brother of the family gives to this
and to every prodigal who comes back; because He Himself has drawn Him.

If we will only recognise the undying truth for all of us that lies
beneath the individual experience of this apostle, we, too, may share in
the attraction of His love, in the constraining and blessed influences
of that love received, and in the welcome with which He hails us when we
turn. If this man were thus dealt with, no man need despair.

III. Lastly, we may notice how this experience is a manifestation of the
power of the living, loving Lord.

The first and plainest thing that it teaches us about that power is that
Jesus Christ is able in one moment to revolutionise a life. There is
nothing more striking than the suddenness and completeness of the
change which passed. 'One day is with the Lord as a thousand years'; and
there come moments in every life into which there is crammed and
condensed a whole world of experience, so as that a man looks back from
this instant to that before, and feels that a gulf, deep as infinity,
separates him from his old self.

Now, it is very unfashionable in these days to talk about conversion at
all. It is even more unfashionable to talk about sudden conversions. I
venture to say that there are types of character and experience which
will never be turned to good, unless they are turned suddenly; while
there are others, no doubt, to whom the course is a gradual one, and you
cannot tell where the dawn broadens into perfect day. But, in the case
of men who have grown up to some degree of maturity of life, either in
sensuous sin or crusted over with selfish worldliness, or in any other
way, by reason of intellectual pursuits, or others have become forgetful
of God and careless of religion--unless such men are in a moment
arrested and wheeled round at once, there is very little chance of their
ever being so at all.

I am sure I am speaking to some now who, unless the truth of Christ
comes into their minds with arresting flash, and unless they are in one
moment, into which an eternity is condensed, changed in their purposes,
will never be changed.

Do not, my friend, listen to the talk that sudden conversion is
impossible or unlikely. It is the only kind of conversion that some of
you are capable of. I remember a man, one of the best Christian men in a
humble station in life that I ever knew--he did not live in
Manchester--he had been a drunkard up to his fortieth or fiftieth year.
One day he was walking across an open field, and a voice, as he
thought, spoke to him and said, naming him, 'If you don't sign the
pledge to-day you will be damned!' He turned on his heel, and walked
straight down the street to the house of a temperance friend, and said,
'I have come to sign the pledge.' He signed it, and from that day to the
day of his death 'adorned the doctrine of Jesus Christ' his Saviour. If
that man had not been suddenly converted he would never have been
converted. So I say that this story of the text is a crucial instance of
Christ's power to lay hold upon a man, and wheel him right round all in
a moment, and send him on a new path. He wants to do that with all of
you to whom He has not already done it. I beseech you, do not stick your
heels into the ground in resistance, nor when He puts His hand on your
shoulder stiffen your back that He may not do what He desires with you.

May we not see here, too, a demonstration of Christ's power to make a
life nobly and blessedly new, different from all its past, and adorned
with strange and unexpected fruits of beauty and wisdom and holiness?
This man's account of his future, from the moment of that incident on
the Damascus road to the headman's block outside the walls of Rome, is
this: 'If any man be in Christ he is a new creature'; 'I live, yet not
I, but Christ liveth in me.' Christ will do that for us all; for
long-suffering was shown on the Apostle for a pattern to them who should
hereafter believe.

So, you Christian people, it is as much your business as it was Paul's,
to be visible rhetoric, manifest demonstrations in your lives of the
truth of the Gospel. Men ought to say about us, 'There must be something
in the religion that has done that for these people.' We ought to be
such that our characters shall induce the thought that the Christ who
has made men like us cannot be a figment. Do you show, Christian men,
that you are grafted upon the true Vine by the abundance of the fruit
that you bring forth? Can you venture to say, as Paul said, If you want
to know what Jesus Christ's love and power are, look at me? Do not
venture adducing yourself as a specimen of His power unless you have a
life like Paul's to look back upon.

For us all the fountain to which Paul had recourse is open. Why do we
draw so little from it? The fire which burned, refining and
illuminating, in him may be kindled in all our hearts. Why are we so
icy? His convictions are of some value, as subsidiary evidence to Gospel
facts; his experience is of still more value as an attestation and an
instance of Gospel blessings. Believe like Paul and you will be saved
like Paul. Jesus Christ will show to you all long-suffering. For though
Paul received it all he did not exhaust it, and the same long-suffering
which was lavished on him is available for each of us. Only you too must
say like him, 'I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision.'




THE GLORY OF THE KING

          'Now, unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible,
          the only wise God, be honour and glory for ever
          and ever. Amen.'--1 TIM. i. 17.


With this burst of irrepressible praise the Apostle ends his reference
to his own conversion as a transcendent, standing instance of the
infinite love and transforming power of God. Similar doxologies
accompany almost all his references to the same fact. This one comes
from the lips of 'Paul the aged,' looking back from almost the close of
a life which owed many sorrows and troubles to that day on the road to
Damascus. His heart fills with thankfulness that overflows into the
great words of my text. He had little to be thankful for, judged
according to the rules of sense; but, though weighed down with care,
having made but a poor thing of the world because of that vision which
he saw that day, and now near martyrdom, he turns with a full heart to
God, and breaks into this song of thanksgiving. There are lives which
bear to be looked back upon. Are ours of that kind?

But my object is mainly to draw your attention to what seems to me a
remarkable feature in this burst of thanksgiving. And perhaps I shall
best impress the thought which it has given to me if I ask you to look,
first, at the character of the God who is glorified by Paul's salvation;
second, at the facts which glorify such a God; and, last, at the praise
which should fill the lives of those who know the facts.

I. First, then, notice the God who is glorified by Paul's salvation.

Now what strikes me as singular about this great doxology is the
characteristics, or, to use a technical word, the attributes, of the
divine nature which the Apostle selects. They are all those which
separate God from man; all those which present Him as arrayed in
majesty, apart from human weaknesses, unapproachable by human sense, and
filling a solitary throne. These are the characteristics which the
Apostle thinks receive added lustre, and are lifted to a loftier height
of 'honour and glory,' by the small fact that he, Paul, was saved from
sins as he journeyed to Damascus.

It would be easy to roll out oratorical platitudes about these specific
characteristics of the divine nature, but that would be as unprofitable
as it would be easy. All that I want to do now is just to note the force
of the epithets; and, if I can, to deepen the impression of the
remarkableness of their selection.

With regard, then, to the first of them, we at once feel that the
designation of 'the King' is unfamiliar to the New Testament. It brings
with it lofty ideas, no doubt; but it is not a name which the writers of
the New Testament, who had been taught in the school of love, and led by
a Son to the knowledge of God, are most fond of using. 'The King' has
melted into 'the Father.' But here Paul selects that more remote and
less tender name for a specific purpose. He is 'the King'--not
'_eternal_,' as our Bible renders it, but more correctly 'the King of
the Ages.' The idea intended is not so much that of unending existence
as that He moulds the epochs of the world's history, and directs the
evolution of its progress. It is the thought of an overruling
Providence, with the additional thought that all the moments are a
linked chain, through which He flashes the electric force of His will.
He is 'King of the Ages.'

The other epithets are more appropriately to be connected with the word
'God' which follows than with the word 'King' which precedes. The
Apostle's meaning is this: 'The King of the ages, even the God who is,'
etc. And the epithets thus selected all tend in the same direction.
'Incorruptible.' That at once parts that mystic and majestic Being from
all of which the law is _decay_. There may be in it some hint of moral
purity, but more probably it is simply what I may call a physical
attribute, that that immortal nature not only _does_ not, but _cannot_,
pass into any less noble forms. Corruption has no share in His immortal
being.

As to 'invisible,' no word need be said to illustrate that. It too
points solely to the separation of God from all approach by human sense.

And then the last of the epithets, which, according to the more accurate
reading of the text, should be, not as our Bible has it, 'the only
_wise_ God,' but 'the _only_ God,' lifts Him still further above all
comparison and contact with other beings.

So the whole set forth the remote attributes which make a man feel, 'The
gulf between Him and me is so great that thought cannot pass across it,
and I doubt whether love can live half-way across that flight, or will
not rather, like some poor land bird with tiny wings, drop exhausted,
and be drowned in the abyss before it reaches the other side.' We expect
to find a hymn to the infinite love. Instead of that we get praise,
which might be upon the lips of many a thinker of Paul's day and of
ours, who would laugh the idea of revelation, and especially of a
revelation such as Paul believed in, to absolute scorn. And yet he knew
what he was saying when he did not lift up his praise to the God of
tenderness, of pity, of forgiveness, of pardoning love, but to 'the King
of the ages; the incorruptible, invisible, only God'; the God whose
honour and glory were magnified by the revelation of Himself in Jesus
Christ.

II. And so that brings me, in the second place, to ask you to look at
the facts which glorify even such a God.

Paul was primarily thinking of his own individual experience; of what
passed when the voice spoke to him, 'Why persecutest thou Me?' and of
the transforming power which had changed him, the wolf, with teeth red
with the blood of the saints, into a lamb. But, as he is careful to
point out, the personal allusion is lost in his contemplation of his own
history, as being a specimen and test-case for the blessing and
encouragement of all who 'should hereafter believe upon Him unto life
everlasting.' So what we come to is this--that the work of Jesus Christ
is that which paints the lily and gilds the refined gold of the divine
loftinesses and magnificence, and which brings honour and glory even to
that remote and inaccessible majesty. For, in that revelation of God in
Jesus Christ, there is added to all these magnificent and all but
inconceivable attributes and excellences, something that is far diviner
