His faith was as remarkable as his repentance. He saw in the bleeding,
dying Sufferer, One who is yet to return as universal King, and to him he
addressed his prayer: "Jesus, remember me when thou comest in thy
kingdom." We do not know the source of such faith. The robber may have
heard part of the trial of Jesus; he did hear him praying for his enemies;
but whatever gave rise to his belief and trust, he regarded Jesus as a
Saviour and Lord who was yet to reign and who could bring him to eternal
glory. This story thus reveals to us the truth that salvation is
conditioned upon repentance and faith. However, it contains other
important messages also. It declares that salvation is independent of
sacraments. The thief had never been baptized, nor had he partaken of the
Lord's Supper. It is obvious that had he lived he would have carried out
the requirements of his Lord by accepting these sacraments. He did, in
fact, boldly confess his faith in the presence of a hostile crowd and amid
the taunts and jeers of rulers and soldiers, yet he was saved without any
formal rites.

It is further evident that salvation is independent of good works. The
thief was pardoned before he had lived a single, righteous, innocent day.
Of course, good works follow faith; they evidence its reality; but faith
precedes and results in holiness. A life of goodness is an expression of
gratitude for salvation already begun.

It is further evident that there is no "sleep of the soul." The body may
sleep, but consciousness persists after death. The word of the Master was,
"To-day shalt thou be ... in Paradise." Again it is evident that there is
no "purgatory." If any man ever needed discipline and "purifying fires,"
it was this penitent robber. Out of a life of sin and shame he passed
immediately into a state of blessedness. This was the promise: "To-day
shalt thou be with me in Paradise."

Again it may be remarked that salvation is not universal. There were two
robbers; only one was saved. Jesus had heard them both speaking of him. He
did not say "ye," but "Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with
me in Paradise."

Last of all, it may be noted that the very essence of the joy which lies
beyond death consists in personal communion with Christ. The heart of the
promise to the dying thief was this: "Thou shalt be with me." This is our
blessed assurance, that to depart is "to be with Christ," which is "very
far better."




J. The Death And Burial. Ch. 23:44-56


    44 And it was now about the sixth hour, and a darkness came over
    the whole land until the ninth hour, 45 the sun's light failing:
    and the veil of the temple was rent in the midst. 46 And Jesus,
    crying with a loud voice, said, Father, into thy hands I commend
    my spirit: and having said this, he gave up the ghost. 47 And when
    the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying,
    Certainly this was a righteous man. 48 And all the multitudes that
    came together to this sight, when they beheld the things that were
    done, returned smiting their breasts. 49 And all his acquaintance,
    and the women that followed with him from Galilee, stood afar off,
    seeing these things.


    50 And behold, a man named Joseph, who was a councillor, a good
    and righteous man 51 (he had not consented to their counsel and
    deed), _a man_ of Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who was looking
    for the kingdom of God: 52 this man went to Pilate, and asked for
    the body of Jesus. 53 And he took it down, and wrapped it in a
    linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb that was hewn in stone, where
    never man had yet lain. 54 And it was the day of the Preparation,
    and the sabbath drew on. 55 And the women who had come with him
    out of Galilee, followed after, and beheld the tomb, and how his
    body was laid. 56 And they returned and prepared spices and
    ointments.


    And on the sabbath they rested according to the commandment.


The death of Christ was an event of such supreme importance that it
properly was accompanied by supernatural signs of deep significance. Of
these Luke mentions two. The first was the darkened skies, a fit symbol of
the blackest crime in all the history of man. The second was the rending
of the Temple veil, a type of the "new and living way" opened into the
presence of God for all believers. Thus these two signs correspond to the
human and the divine aspects of this atoning death, and indicate the
heinousness of sin and the purpose of redeeming grace.

The last word spoken by Jesus on the cross was an expression of perfect
trust and peace. He had shown his sympathy for others by his prayer, by
his promise to the penitent thief, and by his provision for his mother; by
three other words he had revealed his sufferings of mind and body and
their result in a completed redemption: "My God, my God ..."; "I thirst;"
"it is finished." He now breathed out his soul in a sentence of absolute
confidence taken from the psalmist and recorded by Luke alone: "Father,
into thy hands I commend my spirit." It was the supreme utterance of
faith. The earthly ministry of the Son of God had ended.

Luke notes the effects produced by the manner of Jesus' death, and by the
accompanying signs upon the Roman centurion, the Jewish multitudes, and
the Christian disciples. The soldier was so impressed that he "glorified
God," giving his testimony to the fact that the One whom he had crucified
as a criminal was a "righteous man." Possibly he may be regarded as a type
of that host of believing Gentiles, of whom Luke liked to write, who were
yet to enlist under the banner of the cross.

The crowds of Jews had little real desire for the crucifixion of Jesus;
they had been hounded by their rulers to cry out for his death, but they
now returned to the city "smiting their breasts" in an agony of remorse, a
prophecy of Israel's future repentance and mourning as they "look on him
whom they pierced."

Most pathetic of all was that group of saddened disciples who "stood afar
off" gazing in bewilderment upon the scene; but for them the meaning of
that cross would begin to dawn as they should meet their risen Lord. For
none of his followers has the cross lost its mystery; yet to them all it
has become a symbol of triumph and of hope.

The body of Jesus was given burial by Joseph of Arimathaea, a man whom
Matthew designates as rich, Mark as a "councillor of honorable estate,"
and Luke as "good and righteous." Thus together they describe an ideal man
from the Jewish and Roman and Greek point of view. Perhaps he is to be
criticized for not having identified himself before this more publicly
with the cause of Christ; but Luke makes not the slightest unfavorable
reflection upon his character. He declares definitely that this powerful
and influential member of the sanhedrin "had not consented" to the
"counsel and deed" of the rulers who had compassed the death of Jesus; and
now in the hour when his Master was most deeply dishonored, he risked the
scorn of the people and the hatred of the rulers and begged from Pilate
the body of Jesus, which he wrapped in linen cloth and lay reverently in
his own new, rock-hewn tomb. It was a deed of loving devotion, and adds a
gratifying contrast and a touch of tenderness to the story of the cross.

Other loving hearts longed to have a part in this expression of affection.
The women who had followed Jesus out of Galilee, noted the place of his
burial and purchased perfumes to embalm the body of their Lord. However,
as the declining sun marked the beginning, at eventide, of the Sabbath,
they rested until the first day of the week, and then they found that
their task was needless. It was well to show affection for the crucified
Master, it is a greater privilege to serve a risen Lord.




K. The Empty Tomb. Ch. 24:1-12


    1 But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they came unto
    the tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared. 2 And they
    found the stone rolled away from the tomb. 3 And they entered in,
    and found not the body of the Lord Jesus. 4 And it came to pass,
    while they were perplexed thereabout, behold, two men stood by
    them in dazzling apparel: 5 and as they were affrighted and bowed
    down their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye
    the living among the dead? 6 He is not here, but is risen:
    remember how he spake unto you when he was yet in Galilee, 7
    saying that the Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of
    sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again. 8 And
    they remembered his words, 9 and returned from the tomb, and told
    all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest. 10 Now they
    were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the _mother_ of James:
    and the other women with them told these things unto the apostles.
    11 And these words appeared in their sight as idle talk; and they
    disbelieved them. 12 But Peter arose, and ran unto the tomb; and
    stooping and looking in, he seeth the linen cloths by themselves;
    and he departed to his home, wondering at that which was come to
    pass.


After seeing where Jesus was buried the women who had followed him from
Galilee and had ministered to him, began preparing spices and ointments
with which to embalm his body. However, as the day drew to its close,
because this Friday evening was the beginning of a Jewish Sabbath, they
rested from their labor of love until Sunday, "the first day of the week,"
and then "at early dawn" they came to the tomb, but were astonished to
find that the body of Jesus was gone.

There are several explanations of this empty tomb, but only one which is
credible and which accords with the facts. Some persons profess to believe
that Jesus did not die, that he only swooned upon the cross, that he
regained consciousness after being laid in the tomb, that he escaped and
then appeared to his disciples; but Jesus had declared that he was to die
and was to rise again on the third day, and he afterwards made his
disciples believe that such an experience had been his; this theory,
therefore, cannot be held without denying the honesty and morality of our
Lord.

A second theory maintains that "his disciples came by night, and stole"
away his body; but these disciples continually declared that he rose from
the dead on the third day; according to this theory, then, these disciples
were impostors; but this can be believed by no one familiar with their
subsequent lives and influence.

It is as impossible to believe the third theory namely, that the enemies
of Jesus stole his body, for had that body been in their possession, how
gladly they would have produced it and thus forever have silenced the
disciples who declared that Jesus was alive and that his resurrection
proved these enemies had put to death an innocent Man, their divine
Messiah.

The only true explanation of this empty tomb is that given to the
wondering women by two angels: "Why seek ye the living among the dead? He
is not here, but is risen: remember how he spake unto you when he was yet
in Galilee." This startling statement of the angels embodies the substance
of the message delivered by the apostles. The truth it declares forms the
corner stone of Christian faith. The resurrection of our Lord is vitally
connected with all the realities which relate to his person and work and
to the life of his followers.

When, however, the fact of the resurrection had been reported to the
apostles, they regarded the words of the women "as idle talk, and they
disbelieved them." This incredulity on the part of the apostles shows the
absolute absurdity of another theory advanced by those who deny the
resurrection of our Lord, namely, the theory that his followers so eagerly
expected him to rise from the dead that their fevered brains finally
imagined that he had so risen and they testified to what was only a
product of their own fancy. In reality the disciples did not expect Jesus
to rise, and, as here recorded, when the truth was reported to them, they
refused to accept it until proof upon proof had been given them and doubt
and unbelief became absolutely impossible. They were prepared, however,
for further proofs by the fact that the tomb in which the body was laid
had been found empty. There is even more weighty evidence of the
resurrection; but those who deny this supremely important event must give
first some rational account of this empty tomb.




L. The Walk To Emmaus. Ch. 24:13-35


    13 And behold, two of them were going that very day to a village
    named Emmaus, which was threescore furlongs from Jerusalem. 24 And
    they communed with each other of all these things which had
    happened. 15 And it came to pass, while they communed and
    questioned together, that Jesus himself drew near, and went with
    them. 16 But their eyes were holden that they should not know him.
    17 And he said unto them, What communications are these that ye
    have one with another, as ye walk? And they stood still, looking
    sad. 18 And one of them, named Cleopas, answering said unto him,
    Dost thou alone sojourn in Jerusalem and not know the things which
    are come to pass there in these days? 19 And he said unto them,
    What things? And they said unto him, The things concerning Jesus
    the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God
    and all the people: 20 and how the chief priests and our rulers
    delivered him up to be condemned to death, and crucified him. 21
    But we hoped that it was he who should redeem Israel. Yea and
    besides all this, it is now the third day since these things came
    to pass. 22 Moreover certain women of our company amazed us,
    having been early at the tomb; 23 and when they found not his body
    they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, who
    said that he was alive. 24 And certain of them that were with us
    went to the tomb, and found it even so as the women had said: but
    him they saw not. 25 And he said unto them, O foolish men, and
    slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken! 26
    Behooved it not the Christ to suffer these things, and to enter
    into his glory? 27 And beginning from Moses and from all the
    prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things
    concerning himself. 28 And they drew nigh unto the village,
    whither they were going: and he made as though he would go
    further. 29 And they constrained him, saying, Abide with us; for
    it is toward evening, and the day is now far spent. And he went in
    to abide with them. 30 And it came to pass, when he had sat down
    with them to meat, he took the bread and blessed; and breaking
    _it_ he gave to them. 31 And their eyes were opened, and they knew
    him; and he vanished out of their sight. 32 And they said one to
    another, Was not our heart burning within us, while he spake to us
    in the way, while he opened to us the scriptures? 33 And they rose
    up that very hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven
    gathered together, and them that were with them, 34 saying, The
    Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon. 35 And they
    rehearsed the things _that happened_ in the way, and how he was
    known of them in the breaking of the bread.


No man saw Christ rise; but many saw the risen Christ. He appeared to Mary
and to Peter and to James and to "the eleven" and to more than five
hundred disciples at one time; but of the appearances on the day of his
resurrection none is recorded with more dramatic vividness and more
definiteness of detail than that related by Luke when Jesus walked with
two disciples toward Emmaus.

This village was probably situated some seven miles northwest of
Jerusalem. Thither these two men were moving with sad and discouraged
hearts when Jesus joined them and drew from them expressions of their
disappointment and despair. The One on whom they had set their hopes of
redemption for Israel had been put to death, and although he had spoken
mysteriously of a resurrection on the third day, the day was passing, and
he had not been seen, although it was true that reports had reached them
of a vision of angels who said that he was alive. Such in substance seem
to have been their words, in no small measure a confession of obstinate
unbelief. They had little expectation that the Lord would fulfill his own
promises; the third day of which he had spoken was not ended and yet they
were hopelessly turning their backs upon Jerusalem; heavenly messengers
had sent them an announcement of cheer which they refused to receive.

It was not strange, therefore, that Jesus rebuked them: "O foolish men,
and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!
Behooved it not the Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his
glory?" It is noticeable that Jesus did not chide them for refusing to
accept his own words, or those of their friends, or those of angels; they
were rebuked for not believing the Old Testament. They had accepted it in
part; as men often accept just so much as suits their prejudices and
tastes and notions; but they failed to believe in all that the prophets
had spoken, and particularly the predictions of Jesus' atoning death, and
of his return to the heavenly glory which he would share when he ascended.
They listened in wonder to his explanation of the Scriptures, and finally
as they were sitting at meat with him they discovered that they were in
the actual presence of their living Lord. As he disappeared from sight,
they hastened back to the disciples in Jerusalem and found them already
