which are reckoned up in order, as it were stars, inasmuch as they come
short of that brightness of wisdom, which gladdens the forementioned
day, are only for the rule of the night. For they are necessary to such,
as that Thy most prudent servant could not speak unto as unto spiritual,
but as unto carnal; even he, who speaketh wisdom among those that are
perfect. But the natural man, as it were a babe in Christ and fed on
milk, until he be strengthened for solid meat and his eye be enabled to
behold the Sun, let him not dwell in a night forsaken of all light, but
be content with the light of the moon and the stars. So dost Thou speak
to us, our All-wise God, in Thy Book, Thy firmament; that we may discern
all things, in an admirable contemplation; though as yet in signs and in
times, and in days, and in years.

But first, wash you, be clean; put away evil from your souls, and from
before mine eyes, that the dry land may appear. Learn to do good, judge
the fatherless, plead for the widow, that the earth may bring forth the
green herb for meat, and the tree bearing fruit; and come, let us reason
together, saith the Lord, that there may be lights in the firmament of
the heaven, and they may shine upon the earth. That rich man asked of
the good Master, what he should do to attain eternal life. Let the
good Master tell him (whom he thought no more than man; but He is good
because He is God), let Him tell him, if he would enter into life, he
must keep the commandments: let him put away from him the bitterness
of malice and wickedness; not kill, not commit adultery, not steal, not
bear false witness; that the dry land may appear, and bring forth the
honouring of father and mother, and the love of our neighbour. All these
(saith he) have I kept. Whence then so many thorns, if the earth be
fruitful? Go, root up the spreading thickets of covetousness; sell that
thou hast, and be filled with fruit, by giving to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven; and follow the Lord if thou wilt be
perfect, associated with them, among whom He speaketh wisdom, Who
knoweth what to distribute to the day, and to the night, that thou also
mayest know it, and for thee there may be lights in the firmament of
heaven; which will not be, unless thy heart be there: nor will that
either be, unless there thy treasure be; as thou hast heard of the good
Master. But that barren earth was grieved; and the thorns choked the
word.

But you, chosen generation, you weak things of the world, who have
forsaken all, that ye may follow the Lord; go after Him, and confound
the mighty; go after Him, ye beautiful feet, and shine ye in the
firmament, that the heavens may declare His glory, dividing between the
light of the perfect, though not as the angels, and the darkness of the
little ones, though not despised. Shine over the earth; and let the
day, lightened by the sun, utter unto day, speech of wisdom; and night,
shining with the moon, show unto night, the word of knowledge. The moon
and stars shine for the night; yet doth not the night obscure them,
seeing they give it light in its degree. For behold God saying, as
it were, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven; there came
suddenly a sound from heaven, as it had been the rushing of a mighty
wind, and there appeared cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon
each of them. And there were made lights in the firmament of heaven,
having the word of life. Run ye to and fro every where, ye holy fires,
ye beauteous fires; for ye are the light of the world, nor are ye put
under a bushel; He whom you cleave unto, is exalted, and hath exalted
you. Run ye to and fro, and be known unto all nations.

Let the sea also conceive and bring forth your works; and let the waters
bring forth the moving creature that hath life. For ye, separating the
precious from the vile, are made the mouth of God, by whom He saith, Let
the waters bring forth, not the living creature which the earth brings
forth, but the moving creature having life, and the fowls that fly above
the earth. For Thy Sacraments, O God, by the ministry of Thy holy ones,
have moved amid the waves of temptations of the world, to hallow the
Gentiles in Thy Name, in Thy Baptism. And amid these things, many great
wonders were wrought, as it were great whales: and the voices of Thy
messengers flying above the earth, in the open firmament of Thy Book;
that being set over them, as their authority under which they were to
fly, whithersoever they went. For there is no speech nor language, where
their voice is not heard: seeing their sound is gone through all the
earth, and their words to the end of the world, because Thou, Lord,
multipliedst them by blessing.

Speak I untruly, or do I mingle and confound, and not distinguish
between the lucid knowledge of these things in the firmament of heaven,
and the material works in the wavy sea, and under the firmament of
heaven? For of those things whereof the knowledge is substantial and
defined, without any increase by generation, as it were lights of wisdom
and knowledge, yet even of them, the material operations are many and
divers; and one thing growing out of another, they are multiplied by Thy
blessing, O God, who hast refreshed the fastidiousness of mortal senses;
that so one thing in the understanding of our mind, may, by the motions
of the body, be many ways set out, and expressed. These Sacraments have
the waters brought forth; but in Thy word. The necessities of the people
estranged from the eternity of Thy truth, have brought them forth,
but in Thy Gospel; because the waters themselves cast them forth, the
diseased bitterness whereof was the cause, why they were sent forth in
Thy Word.

Now are all things fair that Thou hast made; but behold, Thyself art
unutterably fairer, that madest all; from whom had not Adam fallen, the
brackishness of the sea had never flowed out of him, that is, the human
race so profoundly curious, and tempestuously swelling, and restlessly
tumbling up and down; and then had there been no need of Thy dispensers
to work in many waters, after a corporeal and sensible manner,
mysterious doings and sayings. For such those moving and flying
creatures now seem to me to mean, whereby people being initiated and
consecrated by corporeal Sacraments, should not further profit, unless
their soul had a spiritual life, and unless after the word of admission,
it looked forwards to perfection.

And hereby, in Thy Word, not the deepness of the sea, but the earth
separated from the bitterness of the waters, brings forth, not the
moving creature that hath life, but the living soul. For now hath it no
more need of baptism, as the heathen have, and as itself had, when it
was covered with the waters; (for no other entrance is there into the
kingdom of heaven, since Thou hast appointed that this should be the
entrance): nor does it seek after wonderfulness of miracles to work
belief; for it is not such, that unless it sees signs and wonders, it
will not believe, now that the faithful earth is separated from the
waters that were bitter with infidelity; and tongues are for a sign, not
to them that believe, but to them that believe not. Neither then does
that earth which Thou hast founded upon the waters, need that flying
kind, which at Thy word the waters brought forth. Send Thou Thy word
into it by Thy messengers: for we speak of their working, yet it is Thou
that workest in them that they may work out a living soul in it. The
earth brings it forth, because the earth is the cause that they work
this in the soul; as the sea was the cause that they wrought upon
the moving creatures that have life, and the fowls that fly under the
firmament of heaven, of whom the earth hath no need; although it feeds
upon that fish which was taken out of the deep, upon that table which
Thou hast prepared in the presence of them that believe. For therefore
was He taken out of the deep, that He might feed the dry land; and the
fowl, though bred in the sea, is yet multiplied upon the earth. For of
the first preachings of the Evangelists, man's infidelity was the cause;
yet are the faithful also exhorted and blessed by them manifoldly, from
day to day. But the living soul takes his beginning from the earth: for
it profits only those already among the Faithful, to contain themselves
from the love of this world, that so their soul may live unto Thee,
which was dead while it lived in pleasures; in death-bringing pleasures,
Lord, for Thou, Lord, art the life-giving delight of the pure heart.

Now then let Thy ministers work upon the earth,--not as upon the waters
of infidelity, by preaching and speaking by miracles, and Sacraments,
and mystic words; wherein ignorance, the mother of admiration, might
be intent upon them, out of a reverence towards those secret signs. For
such is the entrance unto the Faith for the sons of Adam forgetful of
Thee, while they hide themselves from Thy face, and become a darksome
deep. But--let Thy ministers work now as on the dry land, separated from
the whirlpools of the great deep: and let them be a pattern unto the
Faithful, by living before them, and stirring them up to imitation. For
thus do men hear, so as not to hear only, but to do also. Seek the Lord,
and your soul shall live, that the earth may bring forth the living
soul. Be not conformed to the world. Contain yourselves from it: the
soul lives by avoiding what it dies by affecting. Contain yourselves
from the ungoverned wildness of pride, the sluggish voluptuousness of
luxury, and the false name of knowledge: that so the wild beasts may be
tamed, the cattle broken to the yoke, the serpents, harmless. For
these be the motions of our mind under an allegory; that is to say, the
haughtiness of pride, the delight of lust, and the poison of curiosity,
are the motions of a dead soul; for the soul dies not so as to lose all
motion; because it dies by forsaking the fountain of life, and so is
taken up by this transitory world, and is conformed unto it.

But Thy word, O God, is the fountain of life eternal; and passeth not
away: wherefore this departure of the soul is restrained by Thy word,
when it is said unto us, Be not conformed unto this world; that so the
earth may in the fountain of life bring forth a living soul; that is,
a soul made continent in Thy Word, by Thy Evangelists, by following the
followers of Thy Christ. For this is after his kind; because a man is
wont to imitate his friend. Be ye (saith he) as I am, for I also am
as you are. Thus in this living soul shall there be good beasts, in
meekness of action (for Thou hast commanded, Go on with thy business in
meekness, so shalt thou be beloved by all men); and good cattle, which
neither if they eat, shall they over-abound, nor, if they eat not, have
any lack; and good serpents, not dangerous, to do hurt, but wise to take
heed; and only making so much search into this temporal nature, as may
suffice that eternity be clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made. For these creatures are obedient unto reason, when being
restrained from deadly prevailing upon us, they live, and are good.

For behold, O Lord, our God, our Creator, when our affections have
been restrained from the love of the world, by which we died through
evil-living; and begun to be a living soul, through good living; and
Thy word which Thou spokest by Thy apostle, is made good in us, Be not
conformed to this world: there follows that also, which Thou presently
subjoinedst, saying, But be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind;
not now after your kind, as though following your neighbour who went
before you, nor as living after the example of some better man (for Thou
saidst not, "Let man be made after his kind," but, Let us make man after
our own image and similitude), that we might prove what Thy will is. For
to this purpose said that dispenser of Thine (who begat children by the
Gospel), that he might not for ever have them babes, whom he must be
fain to feed with milk, and cherish as a nurse; be ye transformed (saith
he) by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good
and acceptable and perfect will of God. Wherefore Thou sayest not, "Let
man be made," but Let us make man. Nor saidst Thou, "according to his
kind"; but, after our image and likeness. For man being renewed in his
mind, and beholding and understanding Thy truth, needs not man as his
director, so as to follow after his kind; but by Thy direction proveth
what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of Thine: yea, Thou
teachest him, now made capable, to discern the Trinity of the Unity, and
the Unity of the Trinity. Wherefore to that said in the plural, Let us
make man, is yet subjoined in the singular, And God made man: and
to that said in the plural, After our likeness, is subjoined in the
singular, After the image of God. Thus is man renewed in the knowledge
of God, after the image of Him that created him: and being made
spiritual, he judgeth all things (all things which are to be judged),
yet himself is judged of no man.

But that he judgeth all things, this answers to his having dominion over
the fish of the sea, and over the fowls of the air, and over all cattle
and wild beasts, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth. For this he doth by the understanding of
his mind, whereby he perceiveth the things of the Spirit of God; whereas
otherwise, man being placed in honour, had no understanding, and is
compared unto the brute beasts, and is become like unto them. In Thy
Church therefore, O our God, according to Thy grace which Thou hast
bestowed upon it (for we are Thy workmanship created unto good
works), not those only who are spiritually set over, but they also who
spiritually are subject to those that are set over them,--for in this
way didst Thou make man male and female, in Thy grace spiritual, where,
according to the sex of body, there is neither male nor female, because
neither Jew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free.--Spiritual persons
(whether such as are set over, or such as obey); do judge spiritually;
not of that spiritual knowledge which shines in the firmament (for they
ought not to judge as to so supreme authority), nor may they judge of
Thy Book itself, even though something there shineth not clearly; for we
submit our understanding unto it, and hold for certain, that even what
is closed to our sight, is yet rightly and truly spoken. For so man,
though now spiritual and renewed in the knowledge of God after His image
that created him, ought to be a doer of the law, not a judge. Neither
doth he judge of that distinction of spiritual and carnal men, who
are known unto Thine eyes, O our God, and have not as yet discovered
themselves unto us by works, that by their fruits we might know them:
but Thou, Lord, dost even now know them, and hast divided and called
them in secret, or ever the firmament was made. Nor doth he, though
spiritual, judge the unquiet people of this world; for what hath he
to do, to judge them that are without, knowing not which of them shall
hereafter come into the sweetness of Thy grace; and which continue in
the perpetual bitterness of ungodliness?

Man therefore, whom Thou hast made after Thine own image, received not
dominion over the lights of heaven, nor over that hidden heaven
itself, nor over the day and the night, which Thou calledst before the
foundation of the heaven, nor over the gathering together of the waters,
which is the sea; but He received dominion over the fishes of the sea,
and the fowls of the air, and over all cattle, and over all the earth,
and over all creeping things which creep upon the earth. For He judgeth
and approveth what He findeth right, and He disalloweth what He findeth
amiss, whether in the celebration of those Sacraments by which such
are initiated, as Thy mercy searches out in many waters: or in that, in
which that Fish is set forth, which, taken out of the deep, the devout
earth feedeth upon: or in the expressions and signs of words, subject to
the authority of Thy Book,--such signs, as proceed out of the mouth,
and sound forth, flying as it were under the firmament, by interpreting,
expounding, discoursing disputing, consecrating, or praying unto Thee,
so that the people may answer, Amen. The vocal pronouncing of all which
words, is occasioned by the deep of this world, and the blindness of the
flesh, which cannot see thoughts; So that there is need to speak aloud
into the ears; so that, although flying fowls be multiplied upon the
earth, yet they derive their beginning from the waters. The spiritual
man judgeth also by allowing of what is right, and disallowing what he
finds amiss, in the works and lives of the faithful; their alms, as it
were the earth bringing forth fruit, and of the living soul, living
by the taming of the affections, in chastity, in fasting, in holy
meditations; and of those things, which are perceived by the senses of
the body. Upon all these is he now said to judge, wherein he hath also
power of correction.

But what is this, and what kind of mystery? Behold, Thou blessest
mankind, O Lord, that they may increase and multiply, and replenish the
earth; dost Thou not thereby give us a hint to understand something? why
didst Thou not as well bless the light, which Thou calledst day; nor the
firmament of heaven, nor the lights, nor the stars, nor the earth, nor
the sea? I might say that Thou, O God, who created created us after
Thine Image, I might say, that it had been Thy good pleasure to bestow
this blessing peculiarly upon man; hadst Thou not in like manner blessed
the fishes and the whales, that they should increase and multiply, and
replenish the waters of the sea, and that the fowls should be multiplied
upon the earth. I might say likewise, that this blessing pertained
properly unto such creatures, as are bred of their own kind, had I found
it given to the fruit-trees, and plants, and beasts of the earth. But
now neither unto the herbs, nor the trees, nor the beasts, nor serpents
is it said, Increase and multiply; notwithstanding all these as well as
the fishes, fowls, or men, do by generation increase and continue their
kind.

What then shall I say, O Truth my Light? "that it was idly said, and
without meaning?" Not so, O Father of piety, far be it from a minister
of Thy word to say so. And if I understand not what Thou meanest by
that phrase, let my betters, that is, those of more understanding than
myself, make better use of it, according as Thou, my God, hast given to
each man to understand. But let my confession also be pleasing in Thine
eyes, wherein I confess unto Thee, that I believe, O Lord, that Thou
spokest not so in vain; nor will I suppress, what this lesson suggests
to me. For it is true, nor do I see what should hinder me from thus
understanding the figurative sayings of Thy Bible. For I know a thing
to be manifoldly signified by corporeal expressions, which is understood
one way by the mind; and that understood many ways in the mind, which
is signified one way by corporeal expression. Behold, the single love
of God and our neighbour, by what manifold sacraments, and innumerable
languages, and in each several language, in how innumerable modes of
speaking, it is corporeally expressed. Thus do the offspring of the
waters increase and multiply. Observe again, whosoever readest this;
behold, what Scripture delivers, and the voice pronounces one only way,
In the Beginning God created heaven and earth; is it not understood
manifoldly, not through any deceit of error, but by various kinds of
true senses? Thus do man's offspring increase and multiply.

If therefore we conceive of the natures of the things themselves, not
allegorically, but properly, then does the phrase increase and multiply,
agree unto all things, that come of seed. But if we treat of the words
as figuratively spoken (which I rather suppose to be the purpose of
the Scripture, which doth not, surely, superfluously ascribe this
benediction to the offspring of aquatic animals and man only); then
do we find "multitude" to belong to creatures spiritual as well as
corporeal, as in heaven and earth, and to righteous and unrighteous, as
in light and darkness; and to holy authors who have been the ministers
of the Law unto us, as in the firmament which is settled betwixt
the waters and the waters; and to the society of people yet in the
bitterness of infidelity, as in the sea; and to the zeal of holy souls,
as in the dry land; and to works of mercy belonging to this present
life, as in the herbs bearing seed, and in trees bearing fruit; and to
spiritual gifts set forth for edification, as in the lights of heaven;
and to affections formed unto temperance, as in the living soul. In all
these instances we meet with multitudes, abundance, and increase; but
what shall in such wise increase and multiply that one thing may be
expressed many ways, and one expression understood many ways; we find
not, except in signs corporeally expressed, and in things mentally
conceived. By signs corporeally pronounced we understand the generations
of the waters, necessarily occasioned by the depth of the flesh;
by things mentally conceived, human generations, on account of the
fruitfulness of reason. And for this end do we believe Thee, Lord, to
