[263] Cf. Hennessy, in _Rev. Celt._, i. 39-40. In place of _badb_, Dr.
Hyde (_Lit. Hist. Irl._, p. 440) uses the word _vulture_.

[264] Hennessy, in _Rev. Celt._, i. 52.

[265] Chief general reference: Sir John Rhys, _Arthurian Legend_
(Oxford, 1891). Chief sources: Nennius, _Historia Britonum_ (circa 800);
Geoffrey of Monmouth, _Historia Regum Britanniae_ (circa 1136); Wace,
_Le Roman de Brut_ (circa 1155); Layamon's _Brut_ (circa 1200); Marie de
France, _Lais_ (twelfth-thirteenth century); _The Four Ancient Books of
Wales_ (twelfth-fifteenth century), edited by W. F. Skene; _The
Mabinogion_ (based on the _Red Book of Hergest_, a fourteenth-century
manuscript), edited by Lady Charlotte Guest, Sir John Rhys and J. G.
Evans, and Professor J. Loth; Malory, _Le Morte D'Arthur_ (1470); _The
Myvyrian Archaiology of Wales_, collected out of ancient manuscripts
(Denbigh, 1870); _Iolo Manuscripts_, a selection of ancient Welsh
manuscripts (Llandovery, 1848).

[266] In a Welsh poem of the twelfth century (see W. F. Skene, _Four
Ancient Books_, Edinburgh, 1868, ii. 37, 38) wherein the war feats of
Prince Geraint are described, his men, who lived and fought a long time
after the period assigned to Arthur, are called the men of Arthur; and,
as Sir John Rhys thinks, this is good evidence that the genuine
Arthur was a mythical figure, one might almost be permitted to say a
god, who overshadows and directs his warrior votaries, but who, never
descending into the battle, is in this respect comparable with the Irish
war-goddess the _Badb_ (cf. Rhys, _Celtic Britain_, London, 1904, p.
236).

[267] Cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, chap. 1.

[268] Cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, pp. 24, 48. Sir John Rhys sees good
reasons for regarding Arthur as a culture hero, because of Arthur's
traditional relation with agriculture, which most culture heroes, like
Osiris, have taught their people (ib., pp. 41-3).

[269] Cf. G. Maspero, _Contes populaires de l'Egypte Ancienne_{3}
(Paris, 1906), Intro., p. 57.

[270] Sommer's Malory's _Morte D'Arthur_, iii. 1.

[271] Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 9.

[272] I am indebted to Professor J. Loth for help with this etymology.

[273] Cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 22.

[274] i. 10; ii. 21{b}; iii. 70; cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 60.

[275] See Williams' _Seint Greal_, pp. 278, 304, 341, 617, 634, 658,
671; Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 61.

[276] Cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, pp. 51, 35; and see our study, pp.
374-6.

[277] _Chevalier de la Charrette_ (ed. by Tarbe), p. 22; _Romania_, xii.
467, 515; cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 54.

[278] _Romania_, xii. 467-8, 473-4; cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 55.

[279] Cf. Tylor, _Prim. Cult._,{4} ii. 93-4.

[280] _Romania_, xii. 508; cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 54.

[281] Book XIX, c. i.

[282] In the _Lebar Brecc_ there is a tract describing eight Eucharistic
Colours and their mystical or hidden meaning; and green is so described
that we recognize in its Celtic-Christian symbolism the same essential
significance as in the writings of both pagan and non-Celtic Christian
mystics, thus:--'This is what the Green denotes, when he (the priest)
looks at it: that his heart and his mind be filled with great faintness
and exceeding sorrow: for what is understood by it is his burial at the
end of life under mould of earth; for green is the original colour of
every earth, and therefore the colour of the robe of Offering is likened
unto green' (Stokes, _Tripartite Life_, Intro., p. 189). During the
ceremonies of initiation into the Ancient Mysteries, it is supposed that
the neophyte left the physical body in a trance state, and in full
consciousness, which he retained afterwards, entered the subjective
world and beheld all its wonders and inhabitants; and that coming out of
that world he was clothed in a robe of sacred green to symbolize his own
spiritual resurrection and re-birth into real life--for he had
penetrated the Mystery of Death and was now an initiate. Even yet there
seems to be an echo of the ancient Egyptian Mysteries in the Festival of
Al-Khidr celebrated in the middle of the wheat harvest in Lower Egypt.
Al-Khidr is a holy personage who, according to the belief of the people,
was the Vizier of Dhu'l-Karnen, a contemporary of Abraham, and who,
never having died, is still living and will continue to live until the
Day of Judgement. And he is always represented 'clad in green garments,
whence probably the name' he bears. Green is thus associated with a hero
or god who is immortal and unchanging, like the Tuatha De Danann and
fairy races (see Sir Norman Lockyer's _Stonehenge and Other Stone
Monuments_, London, 1909, p. 29). In modern Masonry, which preserves
many of the ancient mystic rites, and to some extent those of initiation
as anciently performed, green is the symbol of life, immutable nature,
of truth, and victory. In the evergreen the Master Mason finds the
emblem of hope and immortality. And the masonic authority who gives this
information suggests that in all the Ancient Mysteries this symbolism
was carried out--green symbolizing the birth of the world and the moral
creation or resurrection of the initiate (_General History, Cyclopedia,
and Dictionary of Freemasonry_, by Robert Macoy, 33{o}, New York, 1869).

[283] _Myv. Arch._, i. 175. The text itself in this work is said to be
copied from the _Green Book_--now unknown. Cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._ p.
56 n.

[284] In this text, the Gwenhwyvar who is in the power of Melwas is
referred to as Arthur's second wife Gwenhwyvar, for according to the
Welsh Triads (i. 59; ii. 16; iii. 109) there are three wives of Arthur
all named Gwenhwyvar. As Sir John Rhys observes, no poet has ever
availed himself of all three, for the evident reason that they would
have spoilt his plot (_Arth. Leg._, p. 35).

[285] D. ab Gwilym's Poetry (London, 1789), poem cxi, line 44. Cf.
Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 66.

[286] Malory, Book I, c. xxv. One account of Arthur's sword _Caledvwlch_
or _Caleburn_ describes it as having been made in the Isle of Avalon
(Lady Ch. Guest's _Mabinogion_, ii. 322 n.; also _Myv. Arch._, ii. 306).

[287] Malory, Book IX, c. xv; Sir John Rhys takes the Lady of the
Lake who sends Arthur the sword and the one who aids him afterwards
(though, apparently by error, two characters in Malory) as different
aspects of the one lake-lady _Morgen_ (_Arth. Leg._, p. 348).

[288] Merlin explained to Arthur that King Loth's wife was Arthur's own
sister (Sommer's _Malory_, i. 64-5); and King Loth is one of the rulers
of the Otherworld.

[289] Book XXI, c. vi.

[290] This poem, according to Gaston Paris, was translated during the
late twelfth century from a French original now lost (_Romania_, x.
471). Cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 127.

[291] Malory, Book XII, cc. iii-x; Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, pp. 145, 164.
Galahad, however, does not belong to the more ancient Arthurian romances
at all, so far as scholars can determine; and, therefore, too much
emphasis ought not to be placed on this episode in connexion with the
character of Arthur.

[292] We should like to direct the reader's attention to the interesting
similarity shown between this old story of _Kulhwch and Olwen_ and the
fairy legend which we found living in South Wales, and now recorded by
us on page 161, under the title of _Einion and Olwen_. As we have there
suggested, the legend seems to be the remnant of a very ancient bardic
tale preserved in the oral traditions of the people; and the prevalence
of such bardic traditions in a part of Wales where some of the
_Mabinogion_ stories either took shape, or from where they drew
folk-lore material, would make it probable that there may even be some
close relationship between the Olwen of the story and the Olwen of our
folk-tale. If it could be shown that there is, we should be able at once
to regard both Olwens as 'Fair-Folk' or of the _Tylwyth Teg_, and the
quest of Kulhwch as really a journey to the Otherworld to gain a fairy
wife.

[293] We may even have in the story of _Kulhwch and Olwen_ a symbolical
or mystical account of ancient Brythonic rites of initiation, which have
also directly to do with the spiritual world and its invisible
inhabitants.

[294] Cf. J. Loth, _Les Mabinogion_ (Paris, 1889), p. 252 n.

[295] Cf. J. Loth, _Le Mabinogi de Kulhwch et Olwen_ (Saint-Brieuc,
1888), Intro., p. 7.

[296] Lady Ch. Guest's _Mabinogion_ (London, 1849), ii. 323 n.

[297] Cf. R. H. Fletcher, _Arthurian Material in the Chronicles_, in
_Harv. Stud. and Notes in Phil. and Lit._, x. 20-1.

[298] Fletcher, ib., x. 29; 26.

[299] Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, p. 7; and Rhys, _The Welsh People_{3}
(London, 1902), p. 105.

[300] Cf. Fletcher, op. cit., x. 43-115; from ed. by San-Marte (A.
Schulz), _Gottfried's von Monmouth Hist. Reg. Brit._ (Halle, 1854), Eng.
trans. by A. Thompson, _The British History_, &c. (1718).

[301] Cf. Fletcher, op. cit., pp. 117-44.

[302] Sir Frederic Madden, _Layamon's Brut_ (London, 1847), ii. 384.
Here the Germanic elves are by Layamon made the same in character and
nature as Brythonic elves or fairies.

[303] Madden, _Layamon's Brut_, ii. 144.

[304] J. Bedier's ed., _Societe des anciens textes francais_ (Paris,
1902).

[305] E. Muret's ed., _Societe des anciens textes francais_ (Paris,
1903).

[306] A. C. L. Brown, _The Knight and the Lion_; also, by same author,
_Iwain_, in _Harv. Stud. and Notes in Phil. and Lit._, vii. 146, &c.

[307] _Celtic Mag._, xii. 555; _Romania_ (1888); cf. Brown, ib.

[308] J. Loth, _Les Romans arthuriens_, in _Rev. Celt._, xiii. 497.

[309] _Bibliotheca Normannica_, iii, _Die Lais der Marie de France_, pp.
86-112.

[310] Cf. W. H. Schofield, _The Lays of Graelent and Lanval, and the
Story of Wayland_, in Pub. Mod. Lang. Ass. of America, xv. 176.

[311] Cf. Schofield, _The Lay of Guingamor_, in _Harv. Stud. and Notes
in Phil. and Lit._, v. 221-2.

[312] For editions, and fuller details of the fairy elements, see De La
Warr B. Easter, _A Study of the Magic Elements in the_ ROMANS D'AVENTURE
_and the_ ROMANS BRETONS (Johns Hopkins Univ., Baltimore, 1906). See
also Lucy A. Paton, _Studies in the Fairy Mythology of the Arthurian
Romance_, Radcliffe College Monograph XIII (New York, 1903).

[313] Perc., vi. 235; cf. Easter's Dissertation, p. 42 n.

[314] _Joufrois_, 3179 ff.; ed. Hofmann und Muncker (Halle, 1880); cf.
Easter's Diss., pp. 40-2 n.

[315] _Brun_, 562 ff., 3237, 3251, 3396, 3599 ff.; ed. Paul Meyer
(Paris, 1875); cf. ib., pp. 42 n., 44 n.

[316] E. Anwyl, _The Four Branches of the Mabinogi_, in _Zeit. fuer Celt.
Phil._ (London, Paris, 1897), i. 278.

[317] Cf. Nutt, _Voy. of Bran_, ii. 19, 21.

[318] _Black Book of Caermarthen_, xvii, stanza 7, ll. 5-8. This book
dates from 1154 to 1189 as a manuscript; cf. Skene, _Four Anc. Books_,
i. 3, 372.

[319] Stanzas 19-20. This book took shape as a manuscript from the
fourteenth to fifteenth century, according to Skene. Cf. Skene, _Four
Anc. Books_, i. 3, 464.

[320] See _A Fugitive Poem of Myrddin in his Grave. Red Book of
Hergest_, ii. Skene, ib., i. 478-81, stanza 27.

[321] Chief general references: H. D'Arbois de Jubainville, _L'Epopee
celtique en Irlande_, _Le Cycle Mythologique Irlandais_; Kuno Meyer and
Alfred Nutt, _The Happy Otherworld and the Celtic Doctrine of Re-birth_.
Chief sources: the _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_ (A. D. 1100); the _Book of
Leinster_ (twelfth century); the _Lais_ of Marie de France (twelfth to
thirteenth century); the _White Book of Rhyderch_, Hengwrt Coll.
(thirteenth to fourteenth century); the _Yellow Book of Lecan_
(fifteenth century); the _Book of Lismore_ (fifteenth century); the
_Book of Fermoy_ (fifteenth century); the _Four Ancient Books of Wales_
(twelfth to fifteenth century).

[322] One of the commonest legends among all Celtic peoples is about
some lost city like the Breton Is, or some lost land or island (cf.
Rhys, _Arth. Leg._, c. xv, and _Celtic Folk-Lore_, c. vii); and we
can be quite sure that if, as some scientists now begin to think (cf.
Batella, _Pruebas geologicas de la existencia de la Atlantida_, in
_Congreso internacional de Americanistas_, iv., Madrid, 1882; also
Meyers, _Grosses Konversations-Lexikon_, ii. 44, Leipzig und Wien, 1903)
Atlantis once existed, its disappearance must have left from a
prehistoric epoch a deep impress on folk-memory. But the Otherworld idea
being in essence animistic is not to be regarded, save from a
superficial point of view, as conceivably having had its origin in a
lost Atlantis. The real evolutionary process, granting the disappearance
of this island continent, would seem rather to have been one of
localizing and anthropomorphosing very primitive Aryan and pre-Aryan
beliefs about a heaven-world, such as have been current among almost all
races of mankind in all stages of culture, throughout the two Americas
and Polynesia as well as throughout Europe, Asia, and Africa. (Cf.
Tylor, _Prim. Cult._,{4} ii. 62, 48, &c.)

[323] _White Book of Rhyderch_, folio 291{a}; cf. Rhys, _Arth. Leg._,
pp. 268-9.

[324] From _Echtra Condla_, in the _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_. Cf. _Le Cycle
Myth. Irl._, pp. 192-3.

[325] Cf. Eleanor Hull, _The Silver Bough in Irish Legend_, in
_Folk-Lore_, xii.

[326] Cf. Eleanor Hull, op. cit., p. 431.

[327] Classical parallels to the Celtic Otherworld journeys exist in the
descent of Dionysus to bring back Semele, of Orpheus to recover his
beloved Eurydike, of Herakles at the command of his master Eurystheus to
fetch up the three-headed Kerberos--as mentioned first in Homer's
_Iliad_ (cf. Tylor, _Prim. Cult._,{4} ii. 48); and chiefly in the voyage
of Odysseus across the deep-flowing Ocean to the land of the departed
(Homer, _Odyss._ xi).

[328] Servius, _ad Aen._, vi. 136 ff.

[329] _Voy. of Bran_, i, pp. 2 ff. The tale is based on seven
manuscripts ranging in age from the _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_ of about A. D.
1100 to six others belonging to the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth
centuries (cf. ib., p. xvi).

[330] This tale exists in several manuscripts of the fourteenth and
fifteenth centuries; i. e. _Book of Ballymote_, and _Yellow Book of
Lecan_, as edited and translated by Stokes, in _Irische Texte_, III. i.
183-229; cf. _Voy. of Bran_, i. 190 ff.; cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp.
326-33.

[331] The fountain is a sacred fountain containing the sacred salmon;
and the nine hazels are the sacred hazels of inspiration and poetry.
These passages are among the most mystical in Irish literature. Cf. pp.
432-3.

[332] Cf. Stokes's trans. in _Irische Texte_ (Leipzig, 1891), III. i.
211-16.

[333] The Greeks saw in Hermes the symbol of the Logos. Like Manannan,
he conducted the souls of men to the Otherworld of the gods, and then
brought them back to the human world. Hermes 'holds a rod in his hands,
beautiful, golden, wherewith he spellbinds the eyes of men whomsoever he
would, and wakes them again from sleep'--in initiations; while Manannan
and the fairy beings lure mortals to the fairy world through sleep
produced by the music of the Silver Branch.--Hippolytus on the Naasenes
(from the Hebrew _Nachash_, meaning a 'Serpent'), a Gnostic school; cf.
G. R. S. Mead, _Fragments of a Faith Forgotten_, pp. 198, 201. Or again,
'the Caduceus, or Rod of Mercury (Hermes), and the Thyrsus in the Greek
Mysteries, which conducted the soul from life to death, and from death
to life, figured forth the serpentine power in man, and the path whereby
it would carry the "man" aloft to the height, if he would but cause the
"Waters of the Jordan" to "flow upwards".'--G. R. S. Mead. ib., p. 185.

[334] Cf. Hennessy's ed. in _Todd Lectures_, ser. I. i. 9.

[335] Among the early ecclesiastical manuscripts of the so-called
_Prophecies_. See E. O'Curry, _Lectures_, p. 383.

[336] Cf. Eleanor Hull, op. cit., pp. 439-40.

[337] Now in three versions based on the _L. U._ MS. Our version is
collated from O'Curry's translation in _Atlantis_, i. 362-92, ii.
98-124, as revised by Kuno Meyer, _Voy. of Bran_, i. 152 ff.; and from
Jubainville's translation in _L'Ep. celt. en Irl._, pp. 170-216.

[338] As Alfred Nutt pointed out, 'There is no parallel to the position
or to the sentiments of Fand in the post-classic literature of Western
Europe until we come to Guinevere and Isolt, Ninian and Orgueilleuse'
(_Voy. of Bran_, i. 156 n.).

[339] See poem _Tir na nog_ (Land of Youth), by Michael Comyn, composed
or collected about the year 1749. Ed. by Bryan O'Looney, in _Trans.
Ossianic Soc._, iv. 234-70.

[340] Laeghaire, who also came back from Fairyland on a fairy horse, and
fifty warriors with him each likewise mounted, to say good-bye for ever
to the king and people of Connaught, were warned as they set out for
this world not to dismount if they wished to return to their fairy
wives. The warning was strictly observed, and thus they were able to go
back to the _Sidhe_-world (see p. 295).

[341] Cf. _Bibliotheca Normannica_, iii, _Die Lais der Marie de France_,
pp. 86-112.

[342] Cf. Stokes's trans., in _Rev. Celt._, ix. 453-95, x. 50-95. Most
of the tale comes from the _L. U._ MS.; cf. _L'Ep. celt. en Irl._, pp.
449-500.

[343] _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 385-401. The MS. text, _Echira Thaidg mheic
Chein_, or 'The Adventure of Cian's son Teigue', is found in the _Book
of Lismore_.

[344] Summarized and quoted from translation by R. I. Best, in _Eriu_,
iii. 150-73. The text is found in the _Book of Fermoy_ (pp. 139-45), a
fifteenth-century codex in the Royal Irish Academy.

[345] Folios 113-15, trans. O'Beirne Crow, _Journ. Kilkenny Archae.
Soc._ (1870-1), pp. 371-448; cf. Rhys, _Hib. Lect._, pp. 260-1.

[346] Cf. Skene, _Four Ancient Books of Wales_, i. 264-6, 276, &c.

[347] Cf. _Silva Gadelica_, ii. 301 ff., from Additional MS. 34119,
dating from 1765, in British Museum.

[348] _Giolla an Fhiugha_, or 'The Lad of the Ferrule', trans. by
Douglas Hyde, in _Irish Texts Society_, London, 1899.

[349] Cf. Meyer and Nutt, _Voy. of Bran_, i. 147, 228, 230, 235; 161.

[350] The bulk of the text comes from the _Book of Fermoy_. Cf. Stokes's
trans. in _Rev. Celt._, xiv. 59, 49, 53, &c.

[351] J. Loth, _L'Emigration bretonne en Armorique_ (Paris, 1883), pp.
139-40.

[352] Ed. and trans. by W. Stokes, Calcutta, 1866. This _Vision_ has
been erroneously ascribed to the celebrated Abbot of Iona, who died in
703; but Professor Zimmer has regarded it as a ninth-century
composition; cf. _Voy. of Bran_, i. 219 ff.

[353] Cf. _Voy. of Bran_, i. 195 ff.

[354] See J. G. Campbell, _The Fians_, pp. 260-7.

[355] _The Literary Movement in Ireland_, in _Ideals in Ireland_, ed. by
Lady Gregory (London, 1901), p. 95.

[356] Cf. _Voy. of Bran_, i. 331.

[357] General reference: _Essay upon the Irish Vision of the happy
Otherworld and the Celtic Doctrine of Re-birth_, by Alfred Nutt in Kuno
Meyer's _Voyage of Bran_. Chief sources: _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_; _Book of
Leinster_; _Four Ancient Books of Wales_; _Mabinogion_; _Silva
Gadelica_; _Barddas_, a collection of Welsh manuscripts made about 1560;
and the _Annals of the Four Masters_, compiled in the first half of the
seventeenth century.

[358] Cf. Plato, _Republic_, x; _Phaedo_; _Phaedrus_, &c.; Iamblichus,
_Concerning the Mysteries of Egypt, Chaldaea, Assyria_; Plutarch,
_Mysteries of Isis (De Iside et Osiride)_.

[359] He says:--'I, for my part, suspect that the spirit was implanted
in them (rational creatures, men) from without' _(De Principiis_, Book
I, c. vii. 4);... 'the cause of each one's actions is a pre-existing
one; and then every one, according to his deserts, is made by God either
a vessel unto honour or dishonour' (ib., Book III, c. i. 20). 'Whence we
are of opinion that, seeing the soul, as we have frequently said, is
immortal and eternal, it is possible that, in the many and endless
periods of duration in the immeasurable and different worlds, it may
descend from the highest good to the lowest evil, or be restored from
the lowest evil to the highest good' (ib., Book III, c. i, 21);...
'every one has the reason in himself, why he has been placed in this or
that rank in life' (ib., Book III, c. v, 4).

[360] Cf. Bergier, _Origene_, in _Dict. de Theologie_, v. 69.

[361] _Holy Bible_, Revised Version, St. Matt. xi. 14-15; cf. St. Matt.
xvii. 10-13, St. Mark ix. 13, St. Luke vii. 27, St. John i. 21.

[362] Tertullian's conclusion is as follows:--'These substances ("soul
and body") are, in fact, the natural property of each individual; whilst
"the spirit and power" (cf. Mal. iv. 5) are bestowed as external gifts
by the grace of God, and so may be transferred to another person
according to the purpose and will of the Almighty, as was anciently the
case with respect to the spirit of Moses' (cf. Num. xii. 2).--_De Anima_
c. xxxv; cf. trans, in _Ante-Nicene Christian Library_ (Edinburgh,
1870), xv. 496-7.

[363] Origen says:--'But that there should be certain doctrines not made
known to the multitude, which are [revealed] after the exoteric ones
have been taught, is not a peculiarity of Christianity alone, but also
of philosophic systems, in which certain truths are exoteric and others
esoteric' (_Origen against Celsus_, Book I, c. vii).

[364] How Tertullian almost literally accepted the re-birth doctrine is
shown in his _Apology_, chapter xlviii, concerning the resurrection of
the body. It is the corrupted form of the doctrine, viz. transmigration
of human souls into animal bodies, which he therein, as well as in his
_De Anima_ and elsewhere, chiefly and logically combats, as Origen also
combated it. He first shows why a human soul must return into a human
body in accordance with natural analogy, every creature being after its
own kind always; and then, because the purpose of the Resurrection is
the judgement, that the soul must return into its own body. And he
concludes:--'It is surely more worthy of belief that a man will be
restored from a man, any given person from any given person, but still a
man; so that the same kind of soul may be reinstated in the same mode of
existence, even if not into the same outward form' (_The Apology of
Tertullian for the Christians_; cf. trans. by T. H. Bindley, Oxford,
1890, pp. 137-9).

[365] British Museum MS. Add. 5114, vellum--a Coptic manuscript in the
dialect of Upper Egypt. Its undetermined date is placed by Woide at
latest about the end of the fourth century. It was evidently copied by
one scribe from an older manuscript, the original probably having been
the _Apocalypse of Sophia_, by Valentius, the learned Gnostic who lived
in Egypt for thirty years during the second century. See the translation
of the Schwartze's parallel Latin version of _Pistis Sophia_ and its
introduction, both by G. R. S. Mead (London, 1896).

[366] The chief passages are as follows, Jesus being the
speaker:--'Moreover, in the region of the soul of the rulers, destined
to receive it, I found the soul of the prophet Elias, in the aeons of
the sphere, and I took him, and receiving his soul also, I brought it to
the virgin of light, and she gave it to her receivers; they brought it
to the sphere of the rulers, and cast it into the womb of Elizabeth.
Wherefore the power of the little Iao, who is in the midst, and the soul
of Elias the prophet, are united with the body of John the Baptist. For
this cause have ye been in doubt aforetime, when I said unto you, "John
said, I am not the Christ"; and ye said unto me, "It is written in the
Scripture, that when the Christ shall come, Elias will come before him,
and prepare his way." And I, when ye had said this unto me, replied unto
you, "Elias verily is come, and hath prepared all things, according as
it is written; and they have done unto him whatsoever they would." And
when I perceived that ye did not understand that I had spoken concerning
the soul of Elias united with John the Baptist, I answered you openly
and face to face with the words, "If ye will receive it, John the
Baptist is Elias who, I said, was for to come"' (_Pistis Sophia_, Book
I, 12-13, Mead's translation).

[367] 'The Saviour answered and said unto his disciples:--"Preach ye
unto the whole world, saying unto men, 'Strive together that ye may
receive the mysteries of light in this time of stress, and enter into
the kingdom of light. Put not off from day to day, and from cycle to
cycle, in the belief that ye will succeed in obtaining the mysteries
when ye return to the world in another cycle'"' (_Pistis Sophia_, Book
II, 317, Mead's translation).

[368] Cf. Bergier, _Manicheisme_, in _Dict. de Theol._, iv. 211-13.

[369] The _Refutation of Irenaeus_, until quite recently, has been the
chief source of much of our knowledge concerning Gnosticism. It was
written during the second century at Lyons, by Irenaeus, a bishop of
Gaul, far from any direct contact with the still flourishing Gnosticism.
But now with the discovery of genuine manuscripts of Gnostic works: (1)
the _Askew Codex_, vellum, British Museum, London, containing the
_Pistis Sophia_ (see above, p. 361 n.) and extracts from the _Books of
the Saviour_; (2) the _Bruce Codex_ (two MSS.), papyrus, Bodleian
Library, Oxford, containing the fragmentary _Book of the Great Logos_,
an unknown treatise, and fragments; and (3) the _Akhmim Codex_
(discovered in 1896), papyrus, Egyptian Museum, Berlin, containing _The
Gospel of Mary_ (or _Apocryphon of John_), _The Wisdom of Jesus Christ_,
and _The Acts of Peter_, we are able to check from original sources the
Fathers in many of their writings and canons concerning Gnostic
'heresies'; and find that Irenaeus, the last refuge of Christian
haeresiologists, has so condensed and paraphrased his sources that we
cannot depend upon him at all for a consistent exposition of Gnostic
doctrines, which with more or less prejudice he is trying to refute. It
is true that the age of these manuscripts has not been satisfactorily
determined; in fact most of them have not yet been carefully studied.
Very probably, however, as appears to be the case with the _Pistis
Sophia_, they have been copied from manuscripts which were contemporary
with or earlier than the time of Irenaeus, and hence may be regarded as
good authority in determining Gnostic teachings. (Cf. all of above note
with G. R. S. Mead, _Fragments of a Faith Forgotten_, London, 1900, pp.
147, 151-3.)

Many unprejudiced scholars are now unwilling to admit the rulings of the
Church Councils which determined what was orthodox and what heretical
doctrines among the Gnostic-Christians, because many of their dogmatic
decisions were based upon the unscholarly _Refutation of Irenaeus_ and
upon other equally unreliable evidence. The data which have accumulated
in the hands of scholars about early Christian thought and Gnosticism
are now much more complete and trustworthy than the similar data were
upon which the Council of Constantinople in 553 based its decision with
respect to the doctrine of re-birth; and the truth coming to be
recognized seems to be that the Gnostics rather than the Church Fathers,
who adopted from them what doctrines they liked, condemning those they
did not like, should henceforth be regarded as the first Christian
theologians, and mystics. If this view of the very difficult and complex
matter be accepted, then modern Christianity itself ought to be allowed
to resume what thus appears to have been its original position--so long
obscured by the well-meaning, but, nevertheless, ill-advised
ecclesiastical councils--as the synthesizer of pagan religions and
philosophies. Some such view has been accepted by many eminent Christian
theologians since Origen: i. e. the Cambridge Platonist, Henry More,
openly advocated the re-birth doctrine in the seventeenth century; and
in later times it has been preached from Christian pulpits by such men
as Henry Ward Beecher and Phillips Brooks.

[370] See A. Bertrand, _La Religion des Gaulois, les Druides et le
Druidisme_ (Paris, 1897); H. Jennings, _The Rosicrucians_ (London,
1887); the Work of Paracelsus; H. Cornelius Agrippa, _De Occulta
Philosophia_ (Paris, 1567); H. P. Blavatsky's _Isis Unveiled_, and the
_Secret Doctrine_ (London, 1888); and _Hermetic Works_, by Anna
Kingsford and E. Maitland (London, 1885).

[371] Cf. Bergier, _Purgatoire_, in _Dict. de Theol._, v. 409. A Celt, a
professed faithful and fervent adherent of the Church of Rome, whom I
met in the Morbihan where he now lives, told me that he believes
thoroughly in the doctrine of re-birth, and that it is according to his
opinion the proper and logical interpretation of the doctrine of
Purgatory; and he added that there are priests in his Church who have
told him that their personal interpretation of the purgatorial doctrine
is the same. Thus some Roman Catholics do not deny the re-birth
doctrine. And such conversations as this with Catholic Celts in Ireland
and Brittany lead me to believe that to a larger extent than has been
suspected the old Celtic Doctrine of Re-birth may have been one of the
chief foundations for the modern Roman Catholic Doctrine of Purgatory,
whose origin is not clearly indicated in any theological works. For us
this probability is important as well as interesting, and especially so
when we remember the profound influence which the Celtic St. Patrick's
Purgatory certainly exerted on the Church during the Middle Ages when
the doctrine of Purgatory was taking definite shape (see our chapter x).

[372] _Barddas_ (Llandovery, 1862) is 'a collection (by Iolo Morganwg, a
Bard) of original documents, illustrative of the theology, wisdom, and
usage of the Bardo-Druidic System of the Isle of Britain'. The original
manuscripts are said to have been in the possession of Llywelyn Sion, a
Bard of Glamorgan, about 1560. _Barddas_ shows considerable Christian
influence, yet in its essential teachings is sufficiently distinct.
Though of late composition, _Barddas_ seems to represent the traditional
bardic doctrines as they had been handed down orally for an unknown
period of time, it having been forbidden in earlier times to commit such
doctrines to writing. We are well aware also of the adverse criticisms
passed upon these documents; but since no one questions their Celtic
origin--whether it be ancient or more modern--we are content to use
them.

[373] _Barddas_, i, 189-91.

[374] _Barddas_, i, 177.

[375] Preface to _Barddas_, xlii.

[376] One of the greatest errors formerly made by European Sanskrit
scholars and published broadcast throughout the West, so that now it is
popularly accepted there as true, is that Nirvana, the goal of Indian
philosophy and religion, means annihilation. It does mean annihilation
(evolutionary transmutation of lower into higher), but only of all those
forces or elements which constitute man as an animal. The error arose
from interpreting exoterically instead of esoterically, and was a
natural result of that system of western scholarship which sees and
often cares only to examine external aspects. Native Indian scholars who
have advised us in this difficult problem prefer to translate _Nirvana_
as 'Self-realization', i. e. a state of supernormal consciousness (to be
acquired through the evolution of the individual), as much superior to
the normal human consciousness as the normal human consciousness is
superior to the consciousness existing in the brute kingdom.

[377] _De Bel. Gal._, lib. vi. 14. 5; vi. 18. 1.

[378] Book V, 31. 4.

[379] _De Situ Orbis_, iii. c. 2: 'One point alone of the Druids'
teaching has become generally known among the common people (in order
that they should be braver in war), that souls are eternal and there is
a second life among the shades.'

[380] i. 449-62.

[381] Lucan, i. 457-8; i. 458-62.

[382] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 345, 347 ff.

[383] _Folk-Lore_, xii. 64, &c.; also cf. Eleanor Hull, _The Cuchullin
Saga in Irish Literature_ (London, 1898), Intro., p. 23, &c.

[384] What is probably the oldest form of a tale concerning Conchobhar's
birth makes Conchobhar 'the son of a god who incarnated himself in the
same way as did Lug and Etain' (cf. _Voy. of Bran_, ii. 73).

[385] See _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_, 101{b}; and _Book of Leinster_,
123{b}:--'_Cuchulainn mc dea dechtiri_.'

[386] We have already mentioned the belief that gods having their abode
in the sun could leave it to assume bodies here on earth and become
culture heroes and great teachers (see p. 309).

[387] From _Wooing of Emer_ in _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_; cf. _Voy. of
Bran_, ii. 97.

[388] _L'Epopee celt. en Irl._, p. 11.

[389] Cf. _Voy. of Bran_, ii. p. 74 ff.

[390] In the _Leabhar na h-Uidhre_, 133{a}-134{b}; cf. _Le Cycle Myth.
Irl._, pp. 336-43; cf. _Voy. of Bran_, i. 49-52; cf. O'Curry, _Manners
and Customs_, iii. 175.

[391] Cf. Stokes's ed. _Annals of Tigernach, Third Frag._ in _Rev.
Celt._ xvii. 178. In the piece called _Tucait baile Mongain_ in the
_Leabhar na h-Uidhre_, p. 134, col. 2, 'Mongan is seen living with his
wife the year of the death of Ciaran mac int Shair, and of Tuathal
Mael-Garb, that is to say in 544,' following the _Chronicum Scotorum_,
Hennessy's ed., pp. 48-9. As D'Arbois de Jubainville adds, the Irish
chronicles of this epoch are only approximate in their dates. Thus,
while the _Four Masters_ (i. 243) makes the death of Mongan A. D. 620,
the _Annals of Ulster_ makes it A. D. 625, the _Chronicum Scotorum_ A.
D. 625, the _Annals of Clonmacnoise_, A. D. 624, and _Egerton MS._ 1782
A. D. 615 (cf. _Voy. of Bran_, i. 137-9).

[392] J. O'Donovan, _Annals of Ireland by the Four Masters_ (Dublin,
1856), i. 121.

[393] Cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 336-43; O'Curry, _Manners and
Customs_ iii. 175; _L. U._, 133{a}-134{b}; and _Voy. of Bran_, i. 52.

[394] _Voy. of Bran_, i. 44-5; from _The Conception of Mongan_.

[395] Meyer's version, _Voy. of Bran_, i. 73-4.

[396] Cf. _Voy. of Bran_, i. 137.

[397] _Voy. of Bran_, i. 22-8, quatrains 48-59, &c.

[398] In _L. U._; cf. _Le Cycle Myth. Irl._, pp. 311-22; and _Voy. of
Bran_, ii. 47-53.

[399] In the Irish conception of re-birth there is no change of sex: Lug
is re-born as a boy, in Cuchulainn; Finn as Mongan; Etain as a girl. But
it seems that Etain as a mortal had no consciousness of her previous
divine existence, while Cuchulainn and Mongan knew their non-human
origin and pre-existence.

[400] Some time after this, according to one part of the tale, Eochaid
stormed Midir's fairy palace--for the purpose localized in Ireland--and
won Etain back, but the fairies cast a curse on his race for this, and
Conaire, his grandson, fell a victim to it. Such a recovering of Etain
by Eochaid may vaguely suggest a re-birth of Etain, through the power
exerted by Eochaid, who, being a king, is to be regarded in his
non-human nature as one of the Tuatha De Danann himself, like Midir his
rival.

[401] Cf. _The Gilla decair_, in _Silva Gadelica_, pp. 300-3.

[402] Cf. _Voy. of Bran_, ii. 76 ff. The Christian scribe's version
fills up the space between Tuan's death and re-birth by making him pass
eighty years as a stag, twenty as a wild boar, one hundred as an eagle,
and twenty as a salmon (ib., p. 79). In this particular example, the
uninitiated scribe (evidently having failed to grasp an important aspect
of the re-birth doctrine as this was esoterically explained in the
Mysteries, namely, that between death and re-birth, while the conscious
Ego is resident in the Otherworld, the physical atoms of the discarded
human body may transmigrate through various plant and animal bodies)
appears to set forth as Celtic an erroneous doctrine of the
transmigration of the conscious Ego itself (see p. 513 n.). In other
texts, for example in the song which Amairgen (considered the Gaelic
equivalent or even original of the Brythonic Taliessin) sang as he, with
the conquering Sons of Mil, set foot on Ireland, there are similar
transformations, attributed to certain heroes like Taliessin (see the
_Mabinogion_) and Tuan mac Cairill during their disembodied states after
death and until re-birth. But these transformations seem to echo
poetically, and often rationally, a very mystical Celtic pantheism, in
which Man, regarded as having evolved upwards through all forms and
conditions of existence, is at one with all creation:--

  I am the wind which blows o'er the sea;
  I am the wave of the deep;
  I am the bull of seven battles;
  I am the eagle on the rock;
  I am a tear of the sun;
  I am the fairest of plants;
  I am a boar for courage;
  I am a salmon in the water;
  I am a lake in the plain;
  I am the world of knowledge;
  I am the head of the battle-dealing spear;
  I am the god who fashions fire in the head;
  Who spreads light in the gathering on the mountain?
  Who foretells the ages of the moon?
  Who teaches the spot where the sun rests?

And Amairgen also says:--'I am,' [Taliessin] 'I have been' (_Book of
Invasions_; cf. _Voy. of Bran_, ii. 91-2; cf. Rhys, _Hib. Lect._, p.
549; cf. Skene, _Four Ancient Books_, i. 276 ff.).

In later times, especially among non-bardic poets, there has been a
similar tendency to misinterpret this primitive mystical Celtic
pantheism into the corrupt form of the re-birth doctrine, namely
transmigration of the human soul into animal bodies. Dr. Douglas Hyde
has sent to me the following evidence:--'I have a poem, consisting of
nearly one hundred stanzas, about a pig who ate an Irish manuscript, and
who by eating it recovered human speech for twenty-four hours and gave
his master an account of his previous embodiments. He had been a
right-hand man of Cromwell, a weaver in France, a subject of the Grand
Signor, &c. The poem might be about one hundred or one hundred and fifty
years old.' It is probable that the poet who composed this poem intended
to add a touch of modern Irish humour by making use of the pig. We
should, nevertheless, bear in mind that the pig (or, as is more commonly
the rule, the wild boar) holds a very curious and prominent position in
the ancient mythology of Ireland, and of Wales as well. It was regarded
as a magical animal (cf. p. 451 n.); and, apparently, was also a Druid
symbol, whose meaning we have lost. Possibly the poet may have been
aware of this. If so, he does not necessarily imply transmigration of
the human soul into animal bodies; but is merely employing symbolism.

[403] See _Taliessin_ in the _Mabinogion_, and the _Book of Taliessin_
