a vengeance, simply because neither of them has learnt that the Lord is 
the maker of them all.

This is a hideous conclusion.  But it is one towards which the poor will 
tend in every country in which the rich are merely rich, spending their 
wealth in self-enjoyment, atoned for by a modicum of alms.

I said a modicum of alms.  I ought to have said, any amount of alms, any 
amount of charity.  Throughout the great cities of Europe--in London as 
much as anywhere--hundreds of thousands are saying, "We want no alms.  We 
intend to reconstitute society, even at the expense of blood, so that no 
man, woman, or child, shall need the rich man's alms.  We do not choose, 
for it is not just, that he should take credit to himself for giving us a 
shilling when he owes us a pound, ten, a hundred pounds--owes us, in 
fact, all by which he and his class are richer than us and our class.  
And we will make him pay his debt."

I do not say that such words are wise.  I believe them to be foolish--
suicidal.  I believe that it is those who patiently wait on the Lord, and 
not the discontented who fret themselves till they do evil, who will 
inherit the land, and be refreshed in peace.  I believe that all those 
who take the sword will perish by the sword; that those who appeal to 
brute force will always find it--just because it is brute force--always 
strongest on the side of the rich, who can hire it for evil, as for good.

I only say, that so hundreds of thousands think; so they speak, and will 
speak more and more loudly, as long as the present tone of society 
endures,--good-natured and well meaning, but luxurious, covetous, 
ignoble, frivolous, ignorant; believing--all classes alike, not only that 
money makes the man, but worse far--that money makes the woman also; and 
all the while half-ashamed of itself, half-distrustful of itself, and 
trying to buy off man by alms, and God by superstition.

So long as the great mass of the poor of any city know nothing of the 
great mass of the rich of that city, save as folk who roll past them in 
their carriages, seemingly easy while they are struggling, seemingly 
happy while they are wretched, so long will the rich of that city be 
supposed, however falsely, to be what the French workmen used to call 
mangeurs d'hommes--exploiteurs d'hommes--to get their wealth by means of 
the poverty, their comfort by means of the misery of their fellow-men; 
and so long will they be exposed to that mere envy and hatred which 
pursues always the more prosperous, till, in some national crisis, when 
the rich and poor meet together, both parties will be but too apt to 
behave, through mutual fear and hate, as if not God, but the devil, was 
the maker of them all.

These words are strong.  How can they be too strong, in face of what is 
now passing in a neighbouring land?  Not too strong, either, in view of 
the actual state of vast masses of the poor in London itself, and indeed 
of any one of our great cities.

That matter has been reported on, preached on, spoken on, till all other 
civilized countries reproach Britain with the unique contrast between the 
exceeding wealth of some classes and the exceeding poverty of others; 
till we, instead of being startled by the reproach, take the present 
state of things as a matter of course, a physical necessity, a law of 
nature and society, that there should be, in the back streets of every 
great city, hordes of, must I say, savages? neither decently civilized 
nor decently Christianized, uncertain, most of them, of regular 
livelihood, and therefore shiftless and reckless, extravagant in 
prosperity, and in adversity falling at once into want and pauperism.  
You may ask any clergyman, any minister of religion of any denomination, 
whether the thing is not so.  Or if you want to read the latest news 
about the degradation of your fellow-subjects, read a little book called 
"East and West," and judge for yourselves, whether such a population, 
numbered by hundreds of thousands, are in a state pleasing to God, or 
safe for those classes of whom they only know that they pay them wages, 
and that these wages are as small as they can be forced to take.  Read 
that book; and then ask yourselves, is it wonderful that, in one 
district, before the mission of the society for which I plead was 
established, the poor used seriously to believe that it was the wish and 
endeavour of the rich to grind them down, and keep them poor.  We, of 
course, know that the poor folk were mistaken but do we not know, too--
some of us--that there are political economists in the world, who, though 
they would not willingly make the poor poorer than they are, are still of 
opinion that it is good for the nation, on the whole, that the present 
state of things should continue; that there should be always a reserve of 
labour, in plain English, a vast multitude who have not quite work enough 
to live on, ready to be called on in any emergency of business, and used, 
to beat down, by their competition, the wages of their fellow-workmen?  
Is this theory altogether novel and unheard of?  Or this theory also, 
that for this very reason, Emigration, which looks the very simplest 
remedy for most of this want,--while nine-tenths of the bounteous earth 
is waiting to be subdued and replenished by the poor wretches who cannot 
get at it--that Emigration, I say, is an unnecessary movement--that the 
people are all wanted at home--to be such as the parson and the mission 
women find them?

And it may be that the poor folk have heard--for a bird of the air may 
carry the matter in these days of a free press--that some rich folk, at 
least, hold this opinion, and translate it freely out of the delicate 
language of political economy, into the more vigorous dialect used in the 
fever alleys and smallpox courts in which the poor are left to wait for 
work.  But if there be any rich persons in this congregation who hold 
these peculiar economic doctrines, let me recommend to them, more than to 
any other persons present, that they would support a society which 
alleviates the hard pressure of their system; which helps to make it 
tolerable and prudent by teaching the poor to save; by teaching them, in 
London alone,--how to save œ54,000 in the last eleven years.  Let them 
help this society heartily.

The children of this world are--in their generation--wiser than the 
children of light.  But how long their generation will last, depends 
mainly (we are told) on how far they make themselves friends out of the 
mammon of unrighteousness.

But if, again, there be rich people in this congregation, as I trust 
there are many and many, who start, indignant, at such an imputation, and 
utterly deny its truth--then,--if it be false, why in the name of God, 
and of humanity, and of common prudence, why do they not go to these 
people and tell them so?  Why do they not prove that it is not so, by 
showing a little more human sympathy, not merely for them behind their 
backs, but sympathy with them face to face?  If they wish to know how 
much can be done by only a little active kindness, they have only to read 
the pages of that painful, and yet pleasant, book--"East and West,"--
which I have just quoted; and to read, also, an appendix to it--a Paper 
originally read at the Church Congress, Manchester, by the present Lord 
Chancellor--a document which it would be an impertinence in me to 
recommend or praise.

Bring yourselves then boldly into contact with these classes, and 
especially into contact with the women--with the wives and mothers.  For 
it is through the women, through them mainly, if not altogether, that 
civilization and religion can be introduced among any degraded class.  It 
was so in the Middle Age.  The legends which tell us how woman was then 
the civilizer, the softener, the purifier, the perpetual witness to 
fierce and coarse men, that there were nobler aims in life than pleasure, 
and power, and the gratification of revenge; that not self-assertion, but 
self-sacrifice was the Divine ideal, toward which all must aspire.  These 
old legends are immortal; for they speak of facts and laws which will 
endure as long as there are women upon earth.  Through the woman, the 
civilizer and the Christianizer must reach the man.  Through the wife, he 
must reach the husband.  Through the mother, he must reach the children.  
I say he must.  It is easy to complain that the clergy in every age and 
country have tried to obtain influence over women.  They have been forced 
to do so, because otherwise they could obtain no influence at all.  And 
if a priesthood should arise hereafter, whose calling was to teach not 
religion but irreligion, not the good news that there is a good God, and 
that we can know Him; but the bad news that there is no God, or, if there 
is, we cannot know Him; then would that priesthood find it necessary to 
appeal like all other priesthoods, to the women, and to teach them how to 
teach their children.

But more.  It is not religion only which must be taught through the wives 
and mothers, but sound science also, and sound economy.  If you intend 
(as I trust some here intend) to teach the labouring classes those laws 
of health and life, on which depend the comfort, the wholesomeness, often 
the decency and the morality of the poor man's home, then you must teach 
those laws first to the house-mother, who brings the children into the 
world, and brings them up, who puts them to bed at night, and prepares 
their food by day.  If you wish to teach habits of thrift, and sound 
notions of economy to the labouring classes, you must teach them first to 
the housewife, who has to make the weekly earnings cover, if possible, 
the week's expenses.  If you wish to soften and to purify the man, you 
must first soften and purify the woman, or at least encourage her not to 
lose what womanliness she has left, amid sights, and sounds, and habits 
which tend continually to destroy her womanhood.  You must encourage her, 
I say, to remember always that she is a woman still, and let her teach--
as none can teach like her--true manfulness to her husband and her sons.

And how can you best do that?  Not by giving her shillings, not by 
preaching at her, not by scolding her:  but by behaving to her as what 
she is--a woman and a sister--and cheering her heavy heart by simple 
human kindliness.  What she wants amid all her poverty and toil, her 
child-bearing and child-rearing, what she wants, I say, to keep her brave 
and strong, is to know by actual sight and speech that she is still not 
an outcast; not alone; that she is still a member of the human family, 
that her fellow-woman has not forgotten her; and that, therefore, it may 
be, He that was born of woman has not forgotten her either.  That she 
has, after all, a God in heaven, who can be touched with the feeling of 
her infirmities, and can help her and those she loves, to struggle 
through all their temptations, seeing that He too was tempted in all 
things like them, yet without sin.

It is only personal intercourse with them--only the meeting of the rich 
and poor together, in the belief that God is the maker of them all, that 
will do that.  But it will do it.

Only personal intercourse will reconcile these people to their condition, 
in as far as they OUGHT to be reconciled to it.  But personal intercourse 
will reconcile them to it, as far as it ought, but no further.  And I 
think that the system of personal intercourse attempted by this Society 
is, on the whole, the best yet devised.  It is imperfect, as all attempts 
to make that straight which is crooked, and to number that which is 
wanting--to patch, in a word, a radically vicious system of society,--
must be imperfect; but it is the best plan which I have yet seen.  I find 
no fault with other plans, God forbid!  Wisdom is justified of all her 
children; and the amount of evil is so great, and (as I believe, so 
dangerous), that I must bid God-speed to any persons who will do 
anything, always saving and excepting indiscriminate almsgiving.

But it seems to me that the soothing and civilizing, and in due time 
Christianising, effect of personal intercourse cannot begin better than 
through a woman, herself of the working class, who has struggled as these 
poor souls have struggled, and conquered, more or less, where they are 
failing.  That through her they should be brought in contact with women 
of the more comfortable and cultivated class, who are their immediate 
employers, if not their immediate neighbours; and through them, again, 
brought in contact with women of that class, of whom I shall only say, 
that if they were not meant for some such noble work as this--and not for 
mere pleasure and mere display, then for what purpose, in heaven or 
earth, were they made? and why has Providence taken the trouble (as it 
were) to elaborate, by long ages of civilization, that most exquisite of 
all products of nature and of art--A Lady?

Ah! what the ladies of England might do, and that without interfering in 
the least with their duties as wives and mothers, if they would work 
together, as a class!  If they would work as well and humanly while they 
are in towns, as most of them do work while they are in the country; as 
some of them do, to their honour, in the towns already!  But how many? 
what proportion do those who do good bear to those who do nothing?  What 
a small amount of humanizing and civilizing intercourse with some women 
of the labouring class is there in the case of the wives of rich men who 
come up to town, merely for the season, and forget that it is their 
temporary and uncertain stay in London which causes much of the temporary 
and uncertain employment of the London poor, and their consequent 
temptation to unthrift and recklessness!  How little humanizing and 
civilizing intercourse with the poor is carried on by the wives of those 
employers of labour who surely, surely owe something more to their 
husband's work people, than to be aware (by hearsay) that they are duly 
paid every Saturday night?

But I shall be told:  We need not fear--we can justify ourselves before 
God and man.  I shall be reminded of all that has been done, and done 
well too, for the poor during the last generation, and bidden not to 
calumniate my countrymen.  True, much has been done; and done well.  And 
true also it is that no effort to make the rich and poor meet together, 
to bring the different classes of society into contact with each other, 
but has succeeded--has sown good seed--which I trust may bring forth good 
fruit in the day when every tree shall be judged by its fruit.  The 
events of 1830, startling and warning, and those of 1848, more pregnant, 
if possible, with warning than the former, awakened a spirit of humanity 
in England, which was also a spirit of prudence and of common sense.

But I cannot conceal from myself, or you, that the earnestness which was 
awakened in those days is dying out in these.  The richer classes of 
every country are tempted from time to time to fits of laziness--fits of 
frivolity and luxury, surfeits, in which men say, with a shrug and a 
yawn--"Why be very much in earnest?  Why take so much trouble?  Somebody 
must always be rich, why should not I?  Somebody must enjoy the money, 
why should not I?  At all events, things will last my time."  And that 
such a surfeit has fallen upon the rich of this land, is a fact; for that 
this is the tone of to-day, and that the tone increases, none can deny 
who knows that which calls itself the WORLD, and calls itself so only too 
truly; the world of which it is written, that all that is in the world--
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life--
is not of the Father, but of the world.  And the world passeth away, and 
the lust thereof.  But he who doeth the will of God, he alone abideth for 
ever.

God grant that we, who have just seen the most cunningly organized and 
daintily bedizened specimen of a world, which ever flaunted on the earth 
since men began to build their towers of Babel, collapse and crumble at a 
single blow, may take God's hint, that the fashion of this world passeth 
away.  Let the idle, the frivolous, the sensual, and those who, like 
Figaro's Marquis, have earned all earthly happiness by only taking the 
trouble to be born--let them look back on this last awful Christmas-tide, 
and hear, speaking in fact unmistakeable, the voice of the Lord.  Think 
ye that they whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices were 
sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they suffered such things?  I 
tell you, "Nay:  but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish."

There are those who will hear such words with a smile, even with a sneer, 
and say, Such wholesale judgments of God, even granting that there are 
such things, are, after all, very rare:  it is very seldom that a whole 
class, a whole system of society, is punished in mass--and why then need 
we trouble ourselves about so remote a probability?

Then know this--that as surely as God sometimes punishes wholesale, so 
surely is He always punishing in detail.  By that infinite concatenation 
of moral causes and effects, which makes the whole world one mass of 
special Providences, every sin of ours will punish itself, and probably 
punish itself in kind.  Are we selfish?  We shall call out selfishness in 
others.  Do we neglect our duty?  Then others will neglect their duty to 
us.  Do we indulge our passions?  Then others, who depend on us, will 
indulge theirs, to our detriment and misery.  Do we squander our money?  
Then our children and our servants will squander our money for us.

Do we?--but what use to go on reminding men of truths which no one 
believes, because they are too painful and searching to be believed in 
comfort?  What use to tell men what they never will confess to be true--
that by every crime, folly, even neglect of theirs, they drive a thorn 
into their own flesh, which will trouble them for years to come, it may 
be to their dying day?  And yet so it is.


Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small;
Though with patience He stands waiting, with exactness grinds He all.


As those who neglect their fellow-creatures will discover, by the most 
patent undeniable proofs, in that last great day, when the rich and poor 
shall meet together, and then, at least, discover that the Lord is the 
maker of them all.



Footnotes:

{1}  These sermons by the Rev. Charles Kingsley M.A., late rector of 
Eversley and Canon of Westminster, were edited by the Rev. W. Harrison, 
M.A., rector of Brington.--DP.




*** End of the Project Gutenberg eText All Saint's Day and Other Sermons 
*** 1890 Macmillan and Co. *** *** Corrected and fully spell-checked to 
here ***



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ALL SAINTS' DAY AND OTHER SERMONS***


******* This file should be named 10116.txt or 10116.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/1/1/10116


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
