little and there a little, all through life preparing a man for His
purpose. The great Artificer toils at His task, 'rising early' and
working long, and not discouraged when He comes upon a black vein in
the white marble, nor when the hard stone turns the edge of His
chisels.

Now I would have you notice that there lies in this conception a very
important thought, viz. God cannot make you fit for heaven all at a
jump, or by a simple act of will. That is not His way of working. He
can make a world so, He cannot make a saint so. He can speak and it
is done when it is only a universe that has to be brought into being;
or He can say, 'Let there be light,' and light springs at His word.
But He cannot say, and He does not say, Let there be holiness, and it
comes. Not so can God make man meet for the 'inheritance of the
saints in light.' And it takes Him all His energies, for all a
lifetime, to prepare His child for what He wants to make of him.

There is another thought here, which I can only touch, and that is
that God cannot give a man that glorified body of which I have been
speaking, unless the man's spirit is Christlike. He cannot raise a
bad man at the resurrection with the body of His glory. By the
necessities of the case it is confined to the purified, because it
corresponds to their inward spiritual being. It is only a perfect
spirit that can dwell in a perfect body. You could not put a bad man,
Godless and Christless, into the body which will be fit for them whom
Christ has changed first of all in heart and spirit into His own
likeness. He would be like those hermit crabs that you see on the
beach who run into any kind of a shell, whether it fits them or not,
in order to get a house.

There are two principles at work in the resurrection of the dead. The
glorified body is not the physical outcome of the material body here,
but is the issue and manifestation, in visible form, of the perfect
and Christlike spirit. Some shall rise to glory and immortality, some
to shame and everlasting contempt. If we are to stand at the last
with the body of our humiliation changed into a body of glory, we
must begin by being changed in the spirit of our mind. As the mind
is, so will the body be one day. But, passing from such thoughts as
these, and remembering that the Apostle here is speaking only about
Christian people, and the divine operations upon them, we may still
extend the meaning of this significant word 'wrought' somewhat
further, and ask you just to consider, and that very briefly, the
three-fold processes which, in the divine working, terminate in, and
contemplate, this great issue.

God has wrought us for it in the very act of making us what we are.
Human nature is an insoluble enigma, if this world is its only field.
Amidst all the waste, the mysterious waste, of creation, there is no
more profligate expenditure of powers than that which is involved in
giving a man such faculties and capacities, if this be the only field
on which they are to be exercised. If you think of what most of us do
in this world, and of what it is in us to be, and to do, it is almost
ludicrous to consider the disproportion. All other creatures fit
their circumstances; nothing in them is bigger than their
environment. They find in life a field for every power. You and I do
not. 'The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
roosting-places.' They all correspond to their circumstances, but we
have an infinitude of faculty lying half dormant in each of us, which
finds no work at all in this present world. And so, looking at men as
they are with eternity in their hearts, with natures that go reaching
out towards infinity, the question comes up: 'Wherefore hast Thou
made all men in vain? What is the use of us, and why should we be
what we are, if there is nothing for us except this poor present?'
God, or whoever made us, has made a mistake; and strangely enough, if
we were not made, but evolved, evolution has worked out faculties
which have no correspondence with the things around them.

Life and man are an insoluble enigma except on one hypothesis, and
that is that this is a nursery-ground, and that the plants will be
pricked out some day, and planted where they are meant to grow. The
hearts that feel after absolute and perfect love, the spirits
that can conceive the idea of an infinite goodness, the dumb desires,
the blank misgivings that wander homeless amidst the narrowness of
this poor earth, all these things proclaim that there is a region
where they will find their nutriment and expatiate, and when we look
at a man we can only say, He that hath wrought him for an infinite
world, and an endless communion with a perfect good, is God.

Still further, another field of the divine operation to this end is
in what we roughly call 'providences.' What is the meaning of all
this discipline through which we are passed, if there is nothing to
be disciplined for? What is the good of an apprenticeship if there is
no journeyman's life to come after it, where the powers that have
been slowly acquired shall be nobly exercised upon broader fields?
Why should men be taken, as it were, and, like the rough iron from
the ground,

  'Be heated hot with hopes and fears,
  And plunged in baths of hissing tears,
  And battered with the shocks of doom,'

if, after all the process, the polished shaft is to be broken in two,
and tossed away as rubbish? If death ends faculty, it is a pity that
the faculty was so patiently developed. If God is educating us all in
His school, and then means that, like some wastrel boys, we should
lose all our education as soon as we leave its benches, there is
little use in the rod, and little meaning in the training. Brethren!
life is an insoluble riddle unless the purpose of it lie yonder, and
unless all this patient training of our sorrows and our gladnesses,
the warmth that expands and the cold that contracts the heart, the
light that gladdens and the darkness that saddens the eye and the
spirit, are equally meant for training us for the perfect life of a
perfect soul moving a perfect body in a perfect universe. Here is a
pillar in some ancient hall that has fallen into poor hands, and has
had a low roof thrown across the centre of the chamber at half its
height. In the lower half there is part of a pillar that means
nothing; ugly, bare, evidently climbing, and passing through the
aperture, and away above yonder is the carved capital and the great
entablature that it carries. Who could understand the shaft unless he
could look up through the aperture, and see the summit? And who can
think of life as anything but a wretched fragment unless he knows
that all which begins here runs upwards into the room above, and
there finds its explanation and its completion?

But there is the third sphere of the divine operation. As in creation
and in providence, so in all the work and mystery of our redemption,
this is the goal that God has in view. It was not worth Christ's
while to come and die, if nothing more was to come of it than the
imperfect reception of His blessings and gifts which the noblest
Christian life in this world presents. The meaning and purpose of the
Cross, the meaning and purpose of all the patient dealings of His
whispering Spirit, are that we shall be like our Divine Lord in
spirit first, and in body afterwards.

And everything about the experiences of a true Christian spirit is
charged with a prophecy of immortality. I have not time to dwell upon
one point gathered from the context, that I intended to have insisted
upon, viz. that the very desires which God's good Spirit works in a
believing soul are themselves confirmations of their own fulfilment.
But if you notice at your leisure the verses that precede my text,
you will find that the Apostle adduces the groanings of 'earnest
desire to be clothed with our house which is from Heaven,' as a proof
that we _have_ 'a building of God, a house not made with hands.'
That is to say, every longing in a Christian heart when it is most
filled with that Spirit, and most in contact with God, and which is
the answer of that heart to a promise of Christ--every such longing
carries with it the assurance of its own fulfilment. He that hath
wrought it has wrought it in order that the desire may fit us for its
answer, and that the open mouth may be ready for the abundant filling
which His grace designs. He works upon us, therefore, by making us
desire a gift, and then He gives that which He desires. So let us
cherish these longings, not for the accident of escaping death, nor
as choosing the path by which we shall reach the blessed issue, but
longing for that great issue itself; and try to keep more distinct
and clear before all our minds this thought, 'God means for me the
participation in Christ's glorified Manhood, and my attaining of that
Manhood is the end that He has in view in all that He does with me.'

III. So I must say one word about the last thought that is here, and
that is the certainty and the confidence. 'Therefore we are always
confident,' says the Apostle.

'He that hath wrought us for the self-same thing is God.' Then we may
be sure that as far as He is concerned, the work will not be
suspended nor vain. _This_ man does not begin to build and is
unable to finish. This workman has infinite resources, an unchanging
purpose, and infinite long-suffering. He will complete His task.

In the quarries of Egypt you will find gigantic stones, half-dressed,
and intended to have been transported to some great temple. But there
they lie, the work incomplete, and they never carried to their place.
There are no half-polished stones in God's quarries. They are all
finished where they lie, and then borne across the sea, like Hiram's
from Lebanon, to the Temple on the hill. It is a certainty that God
will finish His work; and since 'He that hath wrought us is God,' we
may be sure that He will not stop till He has done.

But it is a certainty that you can thwart. It is an operation that
you can counterwork. The potter in Jeremiah's parable was making a
vessel upon his wheel, and the vessel was marred in his hand, and did
not turn out what he wanted it. The meaning of the metaphor, which
has often been twisted to express the very opposite, is that the
potter's work may fail, that the artificer may be balked, that you
can counterwork the divine dealing, and that all His purpose in your
creation, in His providence and in His gift of His Son for your
redemption, may come to nought as far as you are concerned. 'I
beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain.' 'In vain
have I smitten your children,' wailed the Divine Love; 'they have
received no correction.' In vain God lavishes upon some of us His
mercies, in vain for some of us has Christ toiled and suffered and
died. Oh, brother! do not let all God's work on you come to nought,
but yield yourselves to it. Rejoice in the confidence that He is
moulding your character, cheerfully welcome and accept the
providences, painful as they may be, by which He prepares you for
heaven. The chisel is sharp that strikes off the superfluous pieces
of marble, and when the chisel cuts, not into marble, but into a
heart, there is a pang. Bear it, bear it! and understand the meaning
of the blow of the sculptor's mallet, and see in all life the divine
hand working towards the accomplishment of His own loving purpose.
Then if we turn to Him, amid the pains of His discipline and the joys
of His gifts of grace, with recognition and acceptance of His meaning
in them all, and cry to Him, 'Thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever,
forsake not the work of Thine own hands,' we may be always confident,
as knowing that 'the Lord will perfect that which concerneth us.'




THE OLD HOUSE AND THE NEW

   'We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent
   from the body, and to be present with the Lord.'--2 COR. v. 8.


There lie in the words of my text simply these two things; the
Christian view of what death is, and the Christian temper in which to
anticipate it.

I. First, the Christian view of what death is.

Now it is to be observed that, properly speaking, the Apostle is not
here referring to the state of the dead, but to the act of dying. The
language would more literally and accurately be rendered 'willing to
_go from_ home, from the body, and to _go_ home, to the Lord.' The
moment of transition of course leads to a permanent state, but it is
the moment of transition which is in view in the words. I need not
remind you, I suppose, that the metaphor of the home is one which has
already been dwelt upon in the early part of the chapter, where the
contrast is drawn between the transitory house of 'this tent,' and
the 'building of God,' the body of incorruption and glory which the
saints at the Resurrection day shall receive. So, then, the Christian
view of the act of death is that it is simply a change of abode.

Very clearly and firmly does Paul draw the line between the man and
his dwelling-place. Life is more than a result of organisation.
Consciousness, thought, feeling, are more than functions of matter.
No materialist philosopher has ever been, or ever will be, able to
explain within the limits of his system the strange difference
between the cause and the effect; how it comes to pass that at the
one end of the chain there is an impression upon a nerve, and at the
other there is pain; how at the one end there is the throb of an inch
of matter in a man's skull, and at the other end there are thoughts
that breathe and words that burn, and that live for ever. That brings
us up to the edge of a gulf over which no materialist philosopher has
ever been able to cast a bridge. The scalpel cannot cut deep enough
to solve this mystery. Conscience as well as instinct cry out against
the theory that the worker and the tools are inseparable. For such a
theory reduces human actions to mechanical results, and shatters all
responsibility. Man is more than his dwelling-place. You crush a
shell on the beach with your heel, and you slay its tiny inhabitant.
But you can pull down the tent, and pluck up its pegs, and roll up
its canvas, and put it away in a dark corner, and the tenant is
untouched. The foolish senses crown Death as last, and lord of all.
But wisdom says, 'Life and thought have gone away side by side,
leaving doors and windows wide,' and that is all that has happened.

Still further, my text suggests that to the Christian soul the
departure from the one house is the entrance into the other. The home
has been the body; the home is now to be Jesus Christ. And very
beautiful and significant with meanings, which only experience will
fully unfold, is the representation that the Lord Christ Himself
assumes the place which the bodily environment has hitherto held.

That teaches us, at all events, that there is a new depth and
closeness of union with Jesus waiting the Christian soul, when it
lays aside the separating film of flesh. Here the bodily
organisation, with its limitations, necessarily shuts us off from the
closeness of intercourse which is possible for a naked soul. We know
not how much separation may depend upon the immersing of the spirit
in the fleshly tabernacle, but this we know, that, though here and
now, by faith which dominates sense, souls can live in Christ even
whilst they live in the body; yet there shall come a form of union so
much more close, intimate, all-pervading, and all-encircling, as that
the present union with Him by faith, precious as it is, shall be, as
the Apostle calls it in our context, 'absence from the Lord.' 'We
have to be discharged,' says an old thinker, 'of a great deal of what
we call body, and then we shall be more truly ourselves,' and more
truly united to Him who, if we are Christian people at all, is the
self of ourselves and the life of our lives. No man knows how close
he can nestle to the bosom of Christ when the film of flesh is rent
away. Just as when in some crowded street of a great city some grimy
building is pulled down, a sudden daylight fills the vacant space,
and all the site that had been shut out from the sky for many years
is drenched in sunshine, so when 'the earthly house of this
tabernacle' is ruinated and falls, the light will flood the place
where it stood, and to be 'absent from the body' shall be to be
'present with the Lord.'

May we go a step further and suggest that, perhaps, in the bold
metaphor of my text, there is an answer to the questions which so
often rack loving and parted hearts? 'Do the dead know aught of what
affects us here? and can they do aught but gaze on Him, and love, and
rest?' If it be that there is any such analogy as seems to be dimly
shadowed in my text, between the relation of the body on earth to the
spirit that inhabits it, and that of Jesus Christ to him who dwells
in Him, and is clothed by Him, then it may be that, as the flesh, so
the Christ transmits to the spirit that has Him for its home
impressions from the outside world, and affords a means of action
upon that world. Christ may be, if I might so say, the sensorium of
the disembodied spirit; and Christ may be the hand of the man who
hath no other instrument by which to express himself. But all that is
fancy perhaps, speculation certainly; and yet there seems to be a
shadow of a foundation for at least entertaining the possibility of
such a thought as that Jesus is the means of knowing and the means of
acting to those who rest from their labours in Him, and dwell in
peace in His arms. But be that as it may, the reality of a close
communion and encircling by the felt presence of Jesus Christ, which,
in its blessed closeness, will make the closest communion here seem
to be obscure, is certainly declared in the words before us.

Then this transition is regarded in my text as being the work of a
moment. It is not a long journey of which the beginning is 'to go
_from_ home, from the body,' and the end is 'to _go_ home, to the
Lord.' But it is one and the same motion which, looked at from the
one side, is departure, and looked at from the other is arrival. The
old saying has it, 'there is but a step between me and death.' The
truth is, there is but a step between me and _life_. The mighty angel
in the Apocalypse, that stood with one foot on the firm land and the
other on the boundless ocean, is but the type of the spirit in the
brief moment of transition, when the consciousness of two worlds
blends, and it is clothed upon with the house which is from heaven,
in the very act of stripping off the earthly house of this
tabernacle.

Nor need I remind you, I suppose, in more than a sentence, that this
transition obviously leads into a state of conscious communion with
Jesus Christ. The dreary figment of an unconscious interval for the
disembodied spirit has no foundation, either in what we know of
spirit, or in what is revealed to us in Scripture. For the one thing
that seems to make it probable--the use of that metaphor of 'sleeping
in Jesus'--is quite sufficiently accounted for by the notions of
repose, and cessation of outward activity, and withdrawal of capacity
of being influenced by the so-called realities of this lower world,
without dragging in the unfounded notion of unconsciousness. My text
is incompatible with it, for it is absurd to say of an unconscious
spirit, clear of a bodily environment, that it is anywhere; and there
is no intelligible sense in which the condition of such a spirit can
be called being 'with the Lord.'

So, then, I think a momentary transition, with uninterrupted
consciousness, which leads to a far deeper and more wonderful and
blessed sense of unity with Jesus Christ than is possible here on
earth, is the true shape in which the act of death presents itself to
the Christian thinker.

And remember, dear brethren, that is all we know. Nothing else is
certain--nothing but this, 'with the Lord,' and the resulting
certainty that therefore it is well with them. It is enough for our
faith, for our comfort, for our patient waiting. They live in Christ,
'and there we find them worthier to be loved,' and certainly lapped
in a deeper rest. 'Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.'

II. In the next place, note the Christian temper in which to
anticipate the transition.

'We are always courageous, and willing rather to leave our home in
the body, and to go home to the Lord.' Now I must briefly remind you
of how the Apostle comes to this state of feeling. He has been
speaking about the natural shrinking, which belongs to all humanity,
from the act of dissolution, considered as being the stripping off of
the garment of the flesh. And he has declared, on behalf of himself
and the early Christian Church, his own and their personal desire
that they might escape from that trial by the path which seemed
possible to the early Christians--viz. that of surviving until the
return of Jesus Christ from Heaven, when they would be 'clothed upon
with the house which is from Heaven,' without the necessity of
stripping off that with which at present they are invested. Then he
says--and this is a very remarkable thought--that just because this
instinctive shrinking from death and yearning for the glorified body
is so strong in the Christian heart, that is a sign that there is
such a glorified body waiting for us. He says, 'we know that if our
house ... were dissolved, we have a building of God.' And his reason
for knowing it is this, '_for_ in this we groan.' That is a bold
position to say that a yearning in the Christian consciousness
prophesies its own fulfilment. Our desires are the prophecies of His
gifts. Then, on this certainty--which he deduces from the fact of the
longing for it--on this certainty of the glorious, ultimate body of
the Resurrection he bases his willingness expressed in the text, to
go through the unwelcome process of leaving the old house, although
he shrinks from it.

So, then, Christian faith does not destroy the natural reluctance to
put aside the old companion of our lives. The old house, though it be
smoky, dimly lighted, and, by our own careless keeping, sluttish and
grimy in many a corner, yet is the only house we have ever known, and
to be absent from it is untried and strange. There is nothing wrong
in saying 'we would not be unclothed but clothed upon.' Nature speaks
there. We may reverently entertain the same feelings which our
Pattern acknowledged, when He said, 'I have a baptism to be baptized
with, and how am I straitened until it be accomplished.' And there
would be nothing sinful in repeating His prayer with His conditions,
'If it be possible, let this cup pass from Me.'

But then the text suggests to us the large Christian possessions and
hope which counterwork this reluctance, in the measure in which we
live lives of faith. There is the assurance of that ultimate home in
which all the transiency of the present material organisation is
exchanged for the enduring permanence which knows no corruption. The
'tent' is swept away to make room for the 'building.' The earthly
house is dissolved in order that there may be reared round the
homeless tenant the house eternal, 'not made with hands,' God's own
work, which is waiting in the heavens; because the power that shall
frame it is there. Not only that great hope of the 'body of His
glory,' with which at the last all true souls shall be invested, but
furthermore, 'the earnest of the spirit,' and the blessed experiences
therefrom, resulting even here, ought to make the unwelcome necessity
less unwelcome. If the firstfruits be righteousness and peace and joy
of the Holy Ghost, what shall the harvest be? If the 'earnest,' the
shilling given in advance, be so precious, what will the whole wealth
of the inheritance which it heralds be when it is received?

For such reasons the transitory passage becomes less painful and
unwelcome. Who is there that would hesitate to dip his foot into the
ice-cold brook if he knew that it would not reach above his ankles,
and that a step would land him in blessedness unimagined till
experienced?

Therefore the Christian temper is that of quiet willingness and
constant courage. There is nothing hysterical here, nothing morbid,
nothing overstrained, nothing artificial. The Apostle says: 'I would
rather not. I should like if I could escape it. It is an unwelcome
necessity; but when I see what I do see beyond,' I am ready. Since so
it must be, I will go, not reluctantly, nor dragged away from life,
nor clinging desperately to it as it slips from my hands, nor
dreading anything that may happen beyond; but always courageous, and
prepared to go whithersoever the path may take me, since I am sure
that it ends in His bosom. He is willing to go from the home of the
body, because to do that is to go home to Christ.

There are other references of our Apostle's, substantially of the
same tone as that of my text, but with very beautiful and encouraging
differences. When he was nearer his end, when it seemed to him as if
the headsman's block was not very far off, his _willingness_ had
intensified into 'having a _desire_ to depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better.' And when the end was all but reached,
and he knew that death was waiting just round the next turn in the
road, he said, with the confidence that in the midst of the struggle
would have been vainglory, but at the end of it was a foretaste of
the calm of Heaven, 'I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness.'
That is our model, dear brethren,--'always courageous,' afraid of
nothing in life, in death, or beyond, and therefore willing to go
from home from the body and to go home to the Lord.

Think of this man thus fronting the inevitable, with no excitement
and with no delusions. Remember what Paul believed about death, about
sin, about his own sin, about judgment, about hell. And then think of
how to him death had made its darkness beautiful with the light of
Christ's face, and all the terror was gone out of it. Do you think so
about death? Do you shrink from it? Why? Why do you not take Paul's
cure for the shrinking? If you can say, 'To me to live is Christ,'
you will have no difficulty in saying, 'and to die is gain.' That is
the only way by which you can come to such a temper, and then you
will be willing to move from the cottage to the palace, and to wait
in peace till you are shifted again into 'the building of God, the
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.'




PLEASING CHRIST

   'We labour that whether present or absent we may be
   accepted of Him.'--2 COR. v. 2.


We do not usually care very much for, or very much trust, a man's own
statement of the motives of his life, especially if in the statement
he takes credit for lofty and noble ones. And it would be rather a
dangerous experiment for the ordinary run of so-called Christian
people to stand up and say what Paul says here, that the supreme
design and aim towards which all their lives are directed is to
please Jesus Christ. In his case the tree was known by its fruits.
Certainly there never was a life of more noble self-abnegation, of
more continuous heroism, of loftier aspiration and lowlier service
than the life of which we see the very pulse in these words.

But Paul is not only professing his own faith, he is speaking in the
name of all his brethren. 'We,' ought to include every man and woman
who calls himself or herself a Christian. It is this setting of the
will of Jesus Christ high up above all other commandments, and
proposing to one's self as the aim that swallows up all other aims,
that I may please Him--it is this, and not creeds, forms, opinions,
professions, or even a faith that simply trusts in Him for salvation,
that makes a true Christian. You are a Christian in the precise
measure in which Christ's will is uppermost and exclusive in your
life, and for all your professions and your orthodoxy and your
worship and your faith, not one hair's-breadth further. Here is the
signature and the common characteristic of all real Christians, 'We
labour that whether present or absent we may be well-pleasing to
Him.'

So then in looking together at these words now, I take three points,
the supreme aim of the Christian life; the concentration of effort
which that aim demands; and the insignificance to which it reduces
all external things.

I. First, then, let me deal with that supreme aim of the Christian
life.

The word which is, correctly enough, rendered 'accepted,' may more
literally, and perhaps with a closer correspondence to the Apostle's
meaning, be translated 'well-pleasing,' and the aim is this, not
merely that we may be accepted, but that we may bring a smile into
His face, and some joy and complacent delight in us into His heart,
when He looks upon our doings. That pleasure of Jesus Christ in them
that 'fear Him, and in them that hope in His mercy' and do His will
is a present emotion that fills His heart in looking upon His
followers, and it will be especially declared in the solemn, final
judgment. We must keep in view both of these periods, if we would
rightly understand the sweep of the aim which ought to be uppermost
in all Christian people. Here and now in our present acts, we should
so live as to occasion a present sentiment of complacent delight in
us, in the heart of the Christ who sees us here and now and always.
We should so live as that at that far-off future day when we shall
'all be manifested before the Judgment-seat of Christ,' the Judge may
bend from His tribunal, and welcome us into His presence with a word
of congratulation and an outstretched hand of loving reception. Set
that two-fold aim before you, Christian men and women, else you will
fail to experience the full stimulus of this thought.

Now such an aim as this implies a very wonderful conception of Jesus
Christ's present relations to us. It is a truth that we may minister
to His joy. It is a truth that just as really as you mothers are glad
when you hear from a far-off land that your boy is doing well, and
getting on, so Jesus Christ's heart fills with gladness when He sees
you and me walking in the paths in which He would have us go. We
often think about our dear dead that they cannot know of us and
our doings here, because the sorrow that would sometimes come from
the contemplation of our evil, or of our misfortunes, would trouble
them in their serene rest. We know not how that may be, but this at
least we do know, that the Man Jesus Christ, who, like those dear
ones, 'was dead, and is alive for evermore,' in His human nature has
knowledge of all His children's failures, as well as successes, and
is affected with some shadow of regret, or with some reality of
delight, according as they follow or stray from the paths in which He
would have them walk. If it be so with Him it may be so with them;
and though it be not so with them it must be so with Him. So this
strange, sweet, tender, and powerful thought is a piece of plain
prose, that Christ is glad when you and I are good.

Does it need any word to emphasise the force of that motive to a
Christian heart that loves the Master? Surely this is the great and
blessed peculiarity of all the morality of Christianity that it has
all a personal bearing and aspect, and that just as the sum of all
our duty is gathered up in the one command, 'Imitate Christ,' so the
motive for all our duty lies in 'If you love Me, keep My
commandments,' and the reward which ought to stimulate more than
anything besides is the one thought, not, of what I shall get because
I am good, but of what I shall give Him by my obedience, a joy in the
heart that was stabbed through and through by sorrow for my sake.
That we may please Him 'who pleased not Himself,' is surely the
grandest motive on which the pursuit of holiness, and the imitation
of Jesus Christ can ever be made to rest. Oh! how different, and how
much more blessed such a motive and aim is than all the lower reasons
for which men are sometimes exhorted and encouraged to be good! What
a difference it is when we say, 'Do that thing because it is right,'
and when we say, 'Do that thing because you will be happier if you
do,' or when we say, 'Do it because He would like you to do it.' The
one is all cold and abstract. To stand before a man and simply say:
'Now go and do your duty,' is a poor way of setting his feet upon a
rock and establishing his goings. Duty is not a word that stirs men's
hearts, however it may awe their consciences. It rises up before us
like some goddess statuesque and serene, with purity, indeed, in her
deep and solemn eyes, but with nothing appealing to our affections in
her stern lineaments. But when the thought of 'You ought' melts into
'For my sake,' and through the dissolving face of the cold marble
goddess there shine the beloved lineaments of Him who 'wears the
Godhead's most benignant grace,' the smile upon His face becomes a
motive that touches all hearts. Transmute obligation into gratitude,
and in front of duty and appeals to self put Christ, and all the
harshness and difficulty and burden and self-sacrifice of obedience
becomes easy and a joy.

Then let me remind you that this one supreme aim of pleasing Jesus
Christ can be carried on through all life in every varying form,
great or small. A blessed unity is given to our whole being when the
little things and the big things, the easy things and the hard
things, deeds which are conspicuous and deeds which no eye sees, are
all brought under the influence of the one motive and made co-operant
to the one end. Drive that one steadfast aim through your lives like
a bar of iron, and it will give the lives strength and
consistency--not rigidity, because they may still be flexible.
Nothing will be too small to be consecrated by that motive; nothing
too great to own its power. You can please Him everywhere and always.
The only thing that is inconsistent with pleasing Him is the thing
which, alas! we do at all times and should do at no time, and that is
to sin against Him. If we bear with us this as a conscious motive in
every part of our day's work it will give us a quick discernment as
to what is evil, which I believe nothing else will so surely give. If
you desire life to be noble, uniform, dignified, great in its
minutest acts and solemn in its very trifles, and if you would have
some continual test and standard by which you can detect all
spurious, apparent virtues, and discover lurking and masked
temptations, carry this one aim clear and high above all else, and
make it the purpose of the whole life, to be well-pleasing unto Him.

II. Now, in the next place, notice the concentrated effort which this
aim requires.

The word rendered in my text 'labour' is a peculiar one, very seldom
employed in Scripture. It means, in its most literal signification,
to be fond of honour, or to be actuated by a love of honour; and
hence it comes, by a very natural transition, to mean to strive to
gain something for the sake of the honour connected with it. That is
to say, it not only expresses the notion of diligent, strenuous
effort, but it reveals the reason for that diligence and
strenuousness in what I may call (for the word might almost be so
rendered) the _ambition_ of being honoured by pleasing Christ.
So that the 'labour' of my text covers the whole ground, not only of
the act but of its motive. The concentration of effort which such an
aim requires may be enforced by one or two simple exhortations.

First, let me say that we ought, as Christian people, to cultivate
this noble ambition of pleasing Jesus Christ. Men have all got the
love of approbation deep in them. God put it there for a good
purpose, not that we might shape our lives so as to get others to pat
us on the back, and say, 'Well done!' but that, in addition to the
other solemn and sovereign motives for following the paths of
righteousness, we might have this highest ambition to impel us on the
road. And it is the duty of all Christians to see to it that they
discipline themselves so as, in their own feelings, to put high above
all the approbation or censure of their fellows the approbation or
censure of Jesus Christ. That will take some cultivation. It is a
great deal easier to shape our courses so as to get one another's
praise. I remember a quaint saying in a German book. 'An old
schoolmaster tried to please this one and that one, and it failed.
"Well, then," said he, "I will try to please Christ." And that
succeeded.'

And let me remind you that a second part of the concentration of
effort which this aim requires is to strive with the utmost energy in
the accomplishment of it. Paul did not believe that anybody could
please Jesus Christ without a fight for it. His notion of acceptable
service was service which a man suppressed much to render, and
overcame much to bring. And I urge upon you this, dear brethren, that
with all the mob of faces round about us which shut out Christ's
face, and with all the temptations to follow other aims, and with the
weaknesses of our own characters, it never was, is not, nor ever will
be, an easy thing, or a thing to be done without a struggle and a
dead lift, to live so as to be well-pleasing to Him.

Look at Paul's metaphors with which he sets forth the Christian
life--a warfare, a race, a struggle, a building up of some great
temple structure, and the like--all suggesting at the least the idea
of patient, persistent, continuous toil, and most of them suggesting
also the idea of struggle with antagonistic forces and difficulties,
either within or without. So we must set our shoulders to the wheel,
put our backs into our work. Do not think that you are going to be
carried into the condition of conformity with Jesus Christ in a
dream, or that the road to heaven is a primrose path, to be trodden
in silver slippers. 'I will not offer unto the Lord that which doth
cost me nothing,' and if you do, it will be worth exactly what it
costs. There must be concentration of effort if we are to be
well-pleasing to Him.

But then do not forget, on the other hand, that deeper than all
effort, and the very spring and life of it, there must be the opening
of our hearts for the entrance of His life and spirit, by the
presence of which only are we well-pleasing to Christ. That which
pleases Him in you and me is our likeness to Him. According to the
old Puritan illustration, the refiner sat by the furnace until he
could see in the molten metal his own face mirrored, and then he knew
it was pure. So what pleases Christ in us is the reflection of
Himself. And how can we get that likeness to Himself except by
receiving into our hearts the Spirit that was in Christ Jesus, and
will dwell in us, and will produce in us in our measure the same
image that it formed in Him? 'Work _out_ your own salvation,'
because 'it is God that worketh _in_ you.' Labour, concentrate
effort, and above all open the heart to the entrance of that
transforming power.

III. Lastly, let me suggest the utter insignificance to which this
aim reduces all externals.

'We labour,' says Paul, 'that whether present or absent, we may be
accepted.' What differences of condition are covered by that
parenthetical phrase--'present or absent!' He talks about it as if it
was a very small matter, does he not? And what is included in it?
Whether a man shall be in the body or out of it; that is to say,
whether he be alive or dead. Here is an aim then, so great, so lofty,
so all-comprehensive that it reduces the difference between living in
the world and being out of it, to a trifle. And if we stand so high
up that these two varieties of condition dwindle into insignificance
and seem to have melted into one, do you think that there is anything
else that will be very big? If the difference between life and death
is dwindled and dwarfed, what else do you suppose will remain?
Nothing, I should think.

So if we only, by God's help, which will be given to us if we want
it, keep this clear before us as the motive of all our life, then all
the possible alternatives of human condition and circumstance will
sink into insignificance, and from that lofty summit will 'show
scarce so gross as beetles' in the air beneath our lofty station.

Whether we be rich or poor, solitary or beset by friends, happy or
sad, hopeful or despairing, young or old, wearied or buoyant, learned
or foolish, it matters not. The one aim lifts itself before us, and
they in whose eyes shine the light of that great issue are careless
of the road along which they pass. Do you enlist yourselves in the
company that fires at the long range, and all those that take aim at
the shorter ones will seem to be very pitifully limiting their
powers.

Then remember that this same aim, and this same result may be equally
pursued and attained whether here or yonder. It is something to have
a course of life which runs straight along, unbent aside, and not cut
short off, by the change from earth to Heaven. And this felicity he
only has who, amidst things temporal and insignificant, sees and
seeks the eternal smile on the face of his unchanging Saviour. On
earth, in death, through eternity, such a life will be homogeneous
and of a piece; and when all other aims are hull down below the
horizon, forgotten and out of sight, then still this will be the
purpose, and yonder it will be the accomplished purpose, of each, to
please the Lord Jesus Christ.

My dear friend, remember that in its full meaning this aim regards
the future, and points onward to that great judgment-seat where you
and I will certainly each of us give account of himself. Do you think
that you will please Christ then? Do you think that when that day
dawns, a smile of welcome will come into His eyes, and a glow of
gladness at the meeting into yours? Or have you cause to fear that
you will 'call on the rocks and the hills to cover you from the face
of Him that sitteth on the Throne?'

We are all close by one another; our voices are very audible to each
other. Do you learn, Christian people, that the first,--or at least a
prime--condition of all Christian and Christ-pleasing life, is a
wholesome disregard of what anybody says but Himself. The old
Lacedaemonians used to stir themselves to heroism by the thought:
'What will they say of us in Sparta?' The governor of some outlying
English colony minds very little what the people that he is set to
rule think about him. He reports to Downing Street, and it is the
opinion of the Home Government that influences him. You report to
headquarters. Never mind what anybody else thinks of you. Your
business is to please Christ, and the less you trouble yourselves
about pleasing men the more you will succeed in doing it. Be deaf to
the tittle tattle of your fellow soldiers in the ranks. It is your
Commander's smile that will be your highest reward.

  'Fame is no plant that grows on mortal soil,
  But lives and spreads aloft by those pure eyes,
  And perfect witness of all-judging Jove;
  As he pronounces lastly on each deed,
  Of so much fame in heaven expect thy meed.'




THE LOVE THAT CONSTRAINS

   'The love of Christ constraineth us.'--2 COR. v. 14.


It is a dangerous thing to be unlike other people. It is still more
dangerous to be better than other people. The world has a little heap
of depreciatory terms which it flings, age after age, at all men who
have a higher standard and nobler aims than their fellows. A
favourite term is 'mad.' So, long ago they said, 'The prophet is a
fool; the spiritual man is mad,' and, in His turn, Jesus was said to
be 'beside Himself,' and Festus shouted from the judgment-seat to
Paul that he was mad. A great many people had said the same thing
about him before, as the context shows. For the verse before my text
is: 'Whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God: or whether we be
sober, it is for your cause.' Now the former clause can only refer to
other people's estimate of the Apostle. No doubt there were many
things about him that gave colour to it. He said that a dead Man had
appeared to him and spoken with him. He said that he had been carried
up into the third heaven. He had a very strange creed in the judgment
of the times. He had abandoned a brilliant career for a very poor
one. He was obviously utterly indifferent to the ordinary aims of
men. He had a consuming enthusiasm. And so the world explained him
satisfactorily to itself by the short and easy method of saying,
'Insane.' And Paul explained himself by the great word of my text,
'The love of Christ constraineth us.' Wherever there is a life
adequately under the influence of Christ's love the results will be
such as an unsympathising world may call madness, but which are the
perfection of sober-mindedness. Would there were more such madmen! I
wish to try to make one or two of them now, by getting some of you to
take for your motto, 'The love of Christ constraineth us.'

I. Now the first thing to notice is this constraining love.

I need not spend time in showing that when Paul says here 'The love
of Christ,' he means Christ's love to him, not his to Christ. That is
in accordance with his continual usage of the expression; and it is
in accordance with facts. For it is not my love to Jesus, but His
love to me, that brings the real moulding power into my life, and my
love to Him is only the condition on which the true power acts upon
me. To get the fulcrum and the lever which will heave a life up to
the heights you have to get out of yourselves.

Now Paul never saw Jesus Christ in this earthly life. Timothy, who is
associated with him in this letter, and perhaps is one of the 'us,'
never saw Him either. The Corinthian believers whom he is addressing
had, of course, never seen Him. And yet the Apostle has not the
slightest hesitation in taking that great benediction of Christ's
love and spreading it over them all. That love is independent of time
and of space; it includes humanity, and is co-extensive with it.
Unturned away by unworthiness, unrepelled by non-responsiveness,
undisgusted by any sin, unwearied by any, however numerous, foiling
of its attempts, the love of Christ, like the great heavens that bend
above us, wraps us all in its sweetness, and showers upon us all its
light and its dew.

And yet, brethren, I would have you remember that whilst we thus try
to paint, in poor, poor words, the universality of that love, we have
to remember that it does not partake of the weakness that infects all
human affections, which are only strong when they are narrow, and as
the river expands it becomes shallow, and loses the force in its flow
which it had when it was gathered between straiter banks, so as that
a universal charity is almost akin to a universal indifference. But
this love that grasps us all, this river that 'proceedeth from the
Throne of God and of the Lamb,' flows in its widest reaches as deep
and as impetuous in its career as if it were held within the
narrowest of gorges. For Christ's universal love is universal only
because it is individualising and particular. We love our nation by
generalising and losing sight of the individuals. Christ loves the
world because He loves every man and woman in it, and His grace
enwraps all because His grace hovers over each.
