
[Footnote 544: See the papers by Mrs Bode in _J.R.A.S._ 1893, pp. 517-66
and 763-98, and Mrs Rhys Davids in _Ninth Congress of Orientalists_,
vol. I. p. 344.]

[Footnote 545: Feminine Upasika.]

[Footnote 546: Sutta-Nipata, 289.]

[Footnote 547: _E.g._ Mahamangala and Dhammika-Sutta in Sut. Nip. II. 4
and 14.]

[Footnote 548: Dig. Nik. 31.]

[Footnote 549: It may seem superfluous to insist on this, yet Warren in
his _Buddhism in Translations_ uniformly renders Bhikkhu by priest.]

[Footnote 550: The same idea occurs in the Upanishads, _e.g._ Brih.-Ar.
Up. IV. 4. 23, "he becomes a true Brahman."]

[Footnote 551: Especially in R.O. Franke's article in the _J.P.T.S._
1908. To demonstrate the "literary dependence" of chapters XI., XII. of
the Cullavagga does not seem to me equivalent to demonstrating that the
narratives contained in those chapters are "air-bubbles."]

[Footnote 552: The mantras of the Brahmans were hardly a sacred book
analogous to the Bible or Koran and, besides, the early Buddhists would
not have wished to imitate them.]

[Footnote 553: _E.g._ Dig. Nik. XVI.]

[Footnote 554: Cullav. XI. i. 11.]

[Footnote 555: Especially in Chinese works.]

[Footnote 556: Upali, Dasaka, Sonaka, Siggava (with whom the name of
Candravajji is sometimes coupled) and Tissa Moggaliputta. This is the
list given in the Dipavamsa.]

[Footnote 557: Sam. Nik. XVI. 11. The whole section is called Kassapa
Samyutta.]

[Footnote 558: They are to be found chiefly in Cullavagga, XII.,
Dipavamsa, IV. and V. and Mahavamsa, IV.]

[Footnote 559: The Dipavamsa adds that all the principal monks present
had seen the Buddha. They must therefore all have been considerably over
a hundred years old so that the chronology is open to grave doubt. It
would be easier if we could suppose the meeting was held a hundred years
after the enlightenment.]

[Footnote 560: They are said to have rejected the Parivara, the
Patisambhida, the Niddesa and parts of the Jataka. These are all later
parts of the Canon and if the word rejection were taken literally it
would imply that the Mahasangiti was late too. But perhaps all that is
meant is that the books were not found in their Canon. Chinese sources
(_e.g._ Fa Hsien, tr. Legge, p. 99) state that they had an Abhidhamma of
their own.]

[Footnote 561: _Buddhist Records of the Western World_, vol. II. pp.
164-5; Watters, _Yuean Chwang_, pp. 159-161.]

[Footnote 562: Cap. XXXVI. Legge, p. 98.]

[Footnote 563: See I-tsing's _Records of the Buddhist Religion_, trans.
by Takakusu, p. XX. and Nanjio's _Catalogue of the Buddhist Tripitaka_,
nos. 1199, 1105 and 1159.]

[Footnote 564: An exception ought perhaps to be made for the Japanese
sects.]

[Footnote 565: The names are not quite the same in the various lists and
it seems useless to discuss them in detail. See Dipavamsa, V. 39-48,
Mahavamsa, V. ad in., Rhys Davids, _J.R.A.S._ 1891, p. 411, Rockhill,
_Life of the Buddha_, chap, VI., Geiger, _Trans. of Mahavamsa_, App. B.]

[Footnote 566: The Hemavatikas, Rajagirikas, Siddhattas, Pubbaselikas,
Aparaselikas and Apararajagirikas.]

[Footnote 567: Published in the _J.P.T.S._ 1889. Trans, by S.Z. Aung and
Mrs Rhys Davids, 1915. The text mentions doctrines only. The names of
the sects supposed to hold them are supplied by the commentary.]

[Footnote 568: They must not be confused with the four philosophic
schools Vaibhashika, Sautrantika, Yogacara and Madhyamika. These came
into existence later.]

[Footnote 569: But the Vetulyakas were important in Ceylon.]

[Footnote 570: See Paramartha's _Life of Vasabandhu_, Toung Pao, 1904,
p. 290.]

[Footnote 571: See Rhys Davids in _J.R.A.S._ 1892, pp. 8-9. The name is
variously spelt. The P.T.S. print Sammitiya, but the Sanskrit text of
the Madhyamakavritti (in _Bibl. Buddh._) has Sammitiya. Sanskrit
dictionaries give Sammatiya. The Abhidharma section of the Chinese
Tripitaka (Nanjio, 1272) contains a sastra belonging to this school.
Nanjio, 1139 is apparently their Vinaya.]

[Footnote 572: Kern (_Versl. en Med. der K. Akad. van Wetenschappen
Letterk._ 4. R.D. VIII. 1907, pp. 312-319, cf. _J.R.A.S._ 1907, p. 432)
suggested on the authority of Kashgarian MSS. that the expression
Vailpulya sutra is a misreading for Vaitulya sutra, a sutra of the
Vetulyakas. Ananda was sometimes identified with the phantom who
represented the Buddha.]

[Footnote 573: It is remarkable that this view, though condemned by the
Katha-vatthu, is countenanced by the Khuddaka-patha.]

[Footnote 574: The Katha-vatthu constantly cites the Nikayas.]

[Footnote 575: Pali Sabbatthivadins.]

[Footnote 576: Cf. the doctrine of the Sankhya. For more about the
Sarvastivadins see below, Book IV. chap. XXII.]

[Footnote 577: See especially Le Nord-Ouest de L'Inde dans le Vinaya des
Mulasarvastivadins by Przyluski in _J.A._ 1914, II. pp. 492 ff.]

[Footnote 578: See articles by Fleet in _J.R.A.S._ of 1903, 1904,
1908-1911 and 1914: Hultzsch in _J.R.A.S._ 1910-11: Thomas in _J.A._
1910: S. Levi, _J.A._ 1911.]

[Footnote 579: Asoka's statement is confirmed (if it needs confirmation)
by the Chinese pilgrim I-ching who saw in India statues of him in
monastic costume.]

[Footnote 580: For a bibliography of the literature about these
inscriptions see Vincent Smith, _Early History of India_, 3rd ed. 1914,
pp. 172-4.]

[Footnote 581: The dialect is not strictly speaking the same in all the
inscriptions.]

[Footnote 582: Piyadassi, Sanskrit Priyadarsin. The Dipavamsa, VI. 1 and
14, calls Asoka Piyadassi and Piyadassana. The name Asoka has hitherto
only been found in one edict discovered at Hyderabad, _J.R.A.S._ 1916,
p. 573.]

[Footnote 583: The principal single edicts are (1) that known as Minor
Rock Edict I. found in four recensions, (2) The Bhabru (or Bhabra) Edict
of great importance for the Buddhist scriptures, (3) Two Kalinga Edicts,
(4) Edicts about schism, found at Sarnath and elsewhere, (4)
Commemorative inscriptions in the Terai, (5) Dedications of caves.]

[Footnote 584: Asoka came to the throne about 270 B.C. (268 or 272
according to various authorities) but was not crowned until four years
later. Events are generally dated by the year after his coronation
(abhisheka), not after his accession.]

[Footnote 585: I must confess that Law of Piety (Vincent Smith) does not
seem to me very idiomatic.]

[Footnote 586: See Senart, _Inscrip. de Piyadassi_, II. pp. 314 ff.]

[Footnote 587: The Second Minor Rock Edict.]

[Footnote 588: Rajuka and pradesika.]

[Footnote 589: I.e. Syria, Egypt, Macedonia, Cyrene and Epirus.]

[Footnote 590: Kingdoms in the south of India.]

[Footnote 591: The inhabitants of the extreme north-west of India, not
necessarily Greeks by race.]

[Footnote 592: Possibly Tibet.]

[Footnote 593: Or Nabhapamtis. In any case unknown.]

[Footnote 594: All these appear to have been tribes of Central India.]

[Footnote 595: Dipav. VIII.; Mahav. XII.]

[Footnote 596: Pillar Edict VI.]

[Footnote 597: Perhaps meant to be equivalent to 251 B.C. Vincent Smith
rejects this date and thinks that the Council met in the last ten years
of Asoka's reign. But the Sinhalese account is reasonable. Asoka was
very pious but very tolerant. Ten years of this regime may well have led
to the abuse complained of.]

[Footnote 598: Jataka, no. 472.]

[Footnote 599: See for instance the _Life of Hsuean Chuang_; Beal, p. 39;
Julien, p. 50.]

[Footnote 600: I consider it possible, though by no means proved, that
the Abhidhamma was put together in Ceylon.]

[Footnote 601: For the Burmese Canon see chap. XXVI. Even if the Burmese
had Pali scriptures which did not come from Ceylon, they sought to
harmonize them with the texts known there.]

[Footnote 602: Pali Tipitaka.]

[Footnote 603: So in Maj. Nik. xxi. a man who proposes to excavate comes
Kuddalapitakam adaya, "With spade and basket."]

[Footnote 604: The list of the Vinaya books is:

  Parajikam } together constituting the Sutta-vibhanga.
  Pacittiyam}

  Mahavagga } together constituting the Khandakas.
  Cullavagga}

  Parivara-patha: a supplement and index. This book was rejected by some
  schools.

Something is known of the Vinaya of the Sarvastivadins existing in a
Chinese translation and in fragments of the Sanskrit original found in
Central Asia. It also consists of the Patimokkha embedded in a
commentary called Vibhaga and of two treatises describing the foundation
of the order and its statutes. They are called Kshudrakavastu and
Vinayavastu. In these works the narrative and anecdotal element is
larger than in the Pali Vinaya. See also my remarks on the Mahavastu
under the Mahayanist Canon. For some details about the Dharmagupta
Vinaya, see _J.A._ 1916, ii. p. 20: for a longish extract from the
Muelasarv. Vinaya, _J.A._ 1914, ii. pp. 493-522.]

[Footnote 605: I find it hard to accept Francke's view that the Digha
should be regarded as the Book of the Tathagata, deliberately composed
to expound the doctrine of Buddhahood. Many of the suttas do not deal
with the Tathagata.]

[Footnote 606: The Samyutta quotes by name a passage from the Digha as
"spoken by the Lord": compare Sam. Nik. XXII. 4 with Dig. Nik. 21. Both
the Anguttara and Samyutta quote the last two cantos of the
Sutta-Nipata.]

[Footnote 607: It appears that the canonical book of the Jataka consists
only of verses and does not include explanatory prose matter. Something
similar to these collections of verses which are not fully intelligible
without a commentary explaining the occasions on which they were uttered
may be seen in Chandogya Up. VI. The father's answers are given but the
son's questions which render them intelligible are not found in the text
but are supplied in the commentary.]

[Footnote 608: The following ia a table of the Sutta Pitaka:

  I. Digha-Nikaya      }
  II. Majjhima-Nikaya  } Collections of discourses mostly attributed
  III. Samyutta-Nikaya } to the Buddha.
  IV. Anguttara-Nikaya }

  V. Khuddaka-Nikaya: a collection of comparatively short treatises,
  mostly in poetry, namely:
     1. Dhammapada.
     2. Udana       } Utterances of the Buddha with explanations
     3. Itivuttakam } af the attendant circumstances.
     4. Khuddaka-patha: a short anthology.
     5. Sutta-nipata: a collection of suttas mostly in verse.
    *6. Thera-gatha: poems by monks.
    *7. Theri-gatha: poems by nuns.
     8. Niddesa: an old commentary on the latter half of the Sutta-nipata,
        ascribed to Sariputta.
    *9. The Jataka verses.
    10. Patisambhida.
   *11. Apadana.
   *12. Buddha-vamsa.
   *13. Vimana-vatthu.
   *14. Peta-vatthu.
   *15. Cariya-pitaka.

The works marked * are not found in the Siamese edition of the Tripitaka
but the Burmese editions include four other texts, the Milinda-panha,
Petakopadesa, Suttassanigaha, and Nettipakarana.

The Khuddaka-Nikaya seems to have been wanting in the Pitaka of the
Sarvastivadins or whatever sect supplied the originals from which the
Chinese Canon was translated, for this Canon classes the Dhammapada as a
miscellaneous work outside the Sutta Pitaka. Fragments of the
Sutta-nipata have been found in Turkestan but it is not clear to what
Pitaka it was considered to belong. For mentions of the Khuddaka-Nikaya
in Chinese see _J.A._ 1916, pp. 32-3.]

[Footnote 609: See _J.R.A.S._ 1891, p. 560. See too _Journal P.T.S._
1919, p. 44. Lexicographical notes.]

[Footnote 610: Mrs Rhys Davids' _Translations of the Dhamma-sangani_
give a good idea of these books.]

[Footnote 611: The works comprised in this Pitaka are:

  1. Dhamma-sangani.
  2. Vibhanga.
  3. Katha-vatthu.
  4. Puggala-pannatti.
  5. Dhatu-katha.
  6. Yamaka.
  7. Patthana.

The Abhidhamma of the Sarvastivadins was entirely different. It seems
probable that the Abhidhamma books of all schools consisted almost
entirely of explanatory matter and added very little to the doctrine
laid down in the suttas. It would appear that the only new topic
introduced in the Pali Abhidhamma is the theory of relations (paccaya).]

[Footnote 612: Maj. Nik. XXII. and Angut. Nik. IV. 6.]

[Footnote 613: Pali means primarily a line or row and then a text as
distinguished from the commentary. Thus Palimattam means the text
without the commentary and Palibhasa is the language of the text or what
we call Pali. See _Pali and Sanskrit_, R.O. Franke, 1902. Windisch,
"Ueber den sprachlichen Character des Pali," in _Actes du XIV'me Congres
des Orientalistes_, 1905. Grierson, "Home of Pali" in _Bhandarkar
Commemorative Essays_, 1917.]

[Footnote 614: It is not easy to say how late or to what extent Pali was
used in India. The Milinda-Panha (or at least books II. and III.) was
probably composed in North Western India about the time of our era.
Dharmapala wrote his commentaries (c. 500 A.D.) in the extreme south,
probably at Conjeevaram. Pali inscriptions of the second or third
century A.D. have been discovered at Sarnath but contain mistakes which
show that the engraver did not understand the language (_Epig. Ind_.
1908, p. 391). Bendall found Pali MSS. in Nepal, _J.R.A.S._ 1899, p.
422.]

[Footnote 615: Magadha of course was not his birth-place and the dialect
of Kosala must have been his native language. But it is not hinted that
he had any difficulty in making himself understood in Magadha and
elsewhere.]

[Footnote 616: E.g. nominatives singular in _e_. For the possible
existence of scriptures anterior to the Pali version and in another
dialect, see S. Levi, _J.A._ 1912, II. p. 495.]

[Footnote 617: Cullavag. V. 33, chandaso aropema.]

[Footnote 618: Although Pali became a sacred language in the South, yet
in China, Tibet and Central Asia the scriptures were translated into the
idioms of the various countries which accepted Buddhism.]

[Footnote 619: Mahaparinibbana-sutta, II. 26. Another expressive
compound is Dhumaka-likam (Cullav. XI. 1. 9) literally smoke-timed. The
disciples were afraid that the discipline of the Buddha might last only
as long as the smoke of his funeral pyre.]

[Footnote 620: Winternitz has acutely remarked that the Pali Pitaka
resembles the Upanishads in style. See also Keith, _Ait. Ar_. p. 55. For
repetitions in the Upanishads, see Chand. v. 3. 4 ff., v. 12 ff. and
much in VII. and VIII., Brihad. Ar. III. ix. 9 ff., VI. iii. 2, etc.
This Upanishad relates the incident of Yajnavalkya and Maitreyi twice.
So far as style goes, I see no reason why the earliest parts of the
Vinaya and Sutta Pitaka should not have been composed immediately after
the Buddha's death.]

[Footnote 621: E.g. Mahav. 1. 49, Dig. Nik. I. 14, Sut. Vib. Bhikkhuni,
LXIX., Sut. Vib. Paraj. III. 4. 4.]

[Footnote 622: Cullav. IV. 15. 4.]

[Footnote 623: Ang. Nik. IV. 100. 5, ib. v. lxxiv. 5.]

[Footnote 624: See Buehler in _Epigraphia Indica_, vol. II. p. 93.]

[Footnote 625: Even at the time of Fa Hsien's visit to India (c. 400
A.D.) the Vinaya of the Sarvastivadin school was preserved orally and
not written. See Legge's trans, p. 99.]

[Footnote 626: Ang. Nik. IV. 160. 5, Bhikkhu bahussuta ... matikadhara
monks who carry in memory the indices.]

[Footnote 627: Cullavag. XI., XII. ]

[Footnote 628: Dig. Nik. 1.]

[Footnote 629: It is remarkable that this account contemplates five
Nikayas (of which the fifth is believed to be late) but only two
Pitakas, the Abhidhamma not being mentioned.]

[Footnote 630: It refers to a king Pingalaka, said to have reigned two
hundred years after the Buddha's time.]

[Footnote 631: Mahav XI. 3.]

[Footnote 632: Mahav. II. 17.]

[Footnote 633: Cullav. IX. 5.]

[Footnote 634: The passages are:

  1. The Vinaya-Samukasa. Perhaps the sermon at Benares with
     introductory matter found at the beginning of the Mahavagga.
     See Edmunds, in _J.R.A.S._ 1913, p. 385.
  2. The Alia-Vasani (Pali Ariya-Vasani) = the Samgiti-sutta of the
     Digha Nikaya.
  3. The Anagata-bhayani = Anguttara-Nikaya, V. 77-80, or part of it.
  4. The Munigatha=Sutta-Nipata, 206-220.
  5. The Moneyasute=Moneyya-sutta in the Itivuttakam, 67: see
     also Ang. Nik. III. 120.
  6. The Upatisapasine. The question of Upatissa: not identified.
  7. The Laghulovade musavadam adhigicya. The addresses to Rahula
     beginning with subject of lying=Maj. Nik. 61.]

[Footnote 635: See _J.A._ 1916, II. pp. 20,38.]

[Footnote 636: For the date see the chapter on Ceylon.]

[Footnote 637: S. Levi gives reasons for thinking that the prohibitions
against singing sacred texts (ayataka gitassara, Cullavag. V. 3) go back
to the period when the Vedic accent was a living reality. See _J.A._
1915, I. pp. 401 ff.]

[Footnote 638: _Museon_, 1905, p. 23. Anesaki thinks the text used by
Gunabhadra was in Pali but the Abhayagiri, which had Mahayanist
proclivities, may have used Sanskrit texts.]

[Footnote 639: Nikaya-Sangrahawa, Fernando, _Govt. Record Office_,
Colombo, 1918.]

[Footnote 640: See Mahayana-sutralatikara, xvi. 22 and 75, with Levi's
notes.]

[Footnote 641: Cullav. VII. 3.]

[Footnote 642: In the first book of the Mahavagga. ]

[Footnote 643: Ang. Nik. V. 201 and VI. 40.]

[Footnote 644: It may be objected that some Suttas are put into the
mouths of the Buddha's disciples and that their words are very like
those of the Master. But as a rule they spoke on behalf of him and the
object was to make their language as much like his as possible.]

[Footnote 645: The Pali anthology known by this name was only one of
several called Dhammapada or Udana which are preserved in the Chinese
and Tibetan Canons.]

[Footnote 646: The work might also be analyzed as consisting of three
old documents (the tract on morality, an account of ancient heresies,
and a discourse on spiritual progress) put together with a little
connecting matter, and provided with a prologue and epilogue.]

[Footnote 647: But in Ceylon there was a decided tendency to rewrite
Sinhalese treatises in Pali.]

[Footnote 648: Cf. Divyav. ed. Cowell, p. 37 and Sam. Nik. _P.T.S._
edition, vol. IV. p. 60.]

[Footnote 649: See Takakusu on the Abhidharma literature of the
Sarvastivadins in the _Journ. of the Pali Text Society_, 1905, pp.
67-147.]

[Footnote 650: But not always. See S. Levi, _J.A._ 1910, p. 436.]

[Footnote 651: See Lueders, _Bruchstuecke Buddhistischer Dramen_, 1911 and
ib. _Das Sari putra-prakarana_, 1911.]

[Footnote 652: Inscriptions from Swat written in an alphabet supposed to
date from 50 B.C. to 50 A.D. contain Sanskrit verses from the Dharmapada
and Mahaparinirvanasutra. See _Epig. Indica_, vol. IV. p. 133.]

[Footnote 653: E.g. The Sanskrit version of the Sutta-Nipata. See
_J.R.A.S._ 1916, pp. 719-732.]

[Footnote 654: See the remarks on the Samyuktagama in _J.A._ 1916, II.
p. 272.]

[Footnote 655: In the same spirit, the Chinese version of the Ekottara
(sec. 42) makes the dying Buddha order his bed to be made with the head
to the north, because northern India will be the home of the Law. See
_J.A._ Nov., Dec. 1918, p. 435.]

[Footnote 656: See for the whole question, Peri, Les Femmes de Cakya
Muni, _B.E.F.E.O._ 1918, No. 2.]

[Footnote 657: Those of the Dharmaguptas, Mahasanghikas and
Mahisasakas.]

[Footnote 658: See _J.A.O.S._ Dec. 1910, p. 24.]

[Footnote 659: Jacobi considers the Yoga Sutras later than 450 A.D. but
if we adopt Peri's view that Vasubandhu, Asanga's brother, lived from
about 280-360, the fact that they imply a knowledge of the Vijnanavada
need not make them much later than 300 A.D. It is noticeable that both
Asanga and the Yoga Sutras employ the word _dharma-megha_.]

[Footnote 660: Called Citta in the Yoga philosophy.]

[Footnote 661: See Tylor, _Primitive Culture_, vol. II. pp. 410 ff.
Savages often supplement fasting by the use of drugs and the Yoga Sutras
(IV. 1) mention that supernatural powers can be obtained by the use of
herbs.]

[Footnote 662: Klesa: Kilesa in Pali.]

[Footnote 663: The practices systematized in the Yoga Sutras are
mentioned even in the older Upanishads such as the Maitrayana,
Svetasvatara and Chandogya.]

[Footnote 664: An extreme development of the idea that physical
processes can produce spiritual results is found in Rasesvara Darsana or
the Mercurial System described in the Sarva-Darsana-Sangraha chap. IX.
_Marco Polo_ (Yule's Edition, vol. II. pp. 365, 369) had also heard of
it.]

[Footnote 665: It seems to me analogous to the _introversion_ of
European mystics. See Underhill, _Mysticism_, chaps, VI. and VII.]

[Footnote 666: Jhana in Pali.]

[Footnote 667: Samprajnata and Asamprajnata, called also sa- and
nirbija, with and without seed.]

[Footnote 668: Savitarka and Savicara, in which there is investigation
concerned with gross and subtle objects respectively: Sananda, in which
there is a feeling of joy: Sasmita, in which there is only
self-consciousness. The corresponding stages in Buddhism are described
as phases of Jhana not of Samadhi.]

[Footnote 669: It is not easy to translate. _Megha_ is cloud and
_dharma_ may be rendered by righteousness but has many other meanings.
For the metaphor of the cloud compare the title of the English mystical
treatise _The Cloud of Unknowing_.]

[Footnote 670: Siddhi, vibhuti, aisvarya. A belief in these powers is
found even in the Rig Veda where it is said (X. 136) that munis can fly
through the air and associate with gods.]

[Footnote 671: So too European mystics "are all but unanimous in their
refusal to attribute importance to any kind of visionary experience"
(Underhill, _Mysticism_, p. 335). St John of the Cross, Madame Guyon and
Walter Hilton are cited as severe critics of such experience.]

[Footnote 672: Cf. Underbill's remarks about contemplation (_Mysticism_,
p. 394). "Its results feed every aspect of the personality: minister to
its instinct for the Good, the Beautiful and the True. Psychologically
it is an induced state in which the field of consciousness is greatly
contracted: the whole of the self, its conative power, being sharply
focussed, concentrated upon one thing. We pour ourselvea out or, as it
sometimes seems to us, _in_ towards this overpowering interest: seem to
ourselves to reach it and be merged with it. Whatever the thing may be,
in this act we _know_ it, as we cannot know it by any ordinary devices
of thought."]

[Footnote 673: See instances quoted in W. James, _Varieties of Religious
Experience_, pp. 251-3.]

[Footnote 674: This curious idea is also countenanced, though not much
emphasized, by the Brahma Sutras, IV. 4. 15. The object of producing
such bodies is to work off Karma. The Yogi acquires no new Karma but he
may have to get rid of accumulated Karma inherited from previous births,
which must bear fruit. By "making himself many" he can work it off in
one lifetime.]

[Footnote 675: _World as Will and Idea_, Book III. p. 254 (Haldane and
Kemp's translation).]

[Footnote 676: E.g. Dig. Nik. II. 95, etc.]

[Footnote 677: St Theresa, St Catharine of Siena and Rudman Merawin. Cf.
1 John ii. 20, 27. "Ye know all things."]

[Footnote 678: Chandog. Up. VIII. 15.]

[Footnote 679: As also to the Samhitas of the Vaishnavas and the Agamic
literature of the Saivas. The six cakras are: (1) Muladhara at the base
of the spinal cord, (2) Svadhishthana below the navel, (3) Manipura near
the navel, (4) Anahata in the heart, (5) Visuddha at the lower end of
the throat, (6) Ajna between the eyebrows. See Avalon, _Tantric Texts_,
II. Shatcakranirupana. Ib. _Tantra of Great Liberation_, pp. lvii ff.,
cxxxii ff. Ib. _Principles of Tantra_, pp. cvii ff. Gopinatha Ras,
_Indian Iconography_, pp. 328 ff. See also "Manual of a Mystic" (_Pali
Text Soc._) for something apparently similar, though not very
intelligible, in Hinayanist Buddhism.]

[Footnote 680: For the later Yoga see further Book V. I have recently
received A. Avalon, _The Serpent Power_, from which it appears that the
danger of the process lies in the fact that as Kundalini ascends, the
lower parts of the body which she leaves become cold. The preliminary
note on Yoga in Grieraon and Barnett's Lalla-Vakyani (_Asiat. Soc.'s
Monographs_, vol. XVII. 1920) contains much valuable information, but
both works arrived too late for me to make use of them.]

[Footnote 681: Maj. Nik. 36 and 85, but not in 26.]

[Footnote 682: Dig. Nik. 2. For the methods of Buddhist meditation, the
reader may consult the "Manual of a Mystic," edited (1896) and
translated (1916) by the _Pali Text Society_. But he will not find it
easy reading.]

[Footnote 683: See Ang. Nik. 1. 20 for a long list of the various kinds
of meditation. A conspectus of the system of meditation is given in
Seidenstuecker, _Pali-Buddhismus_, pp. 344-356.]

[Footnote 684: Dig. Nik. XXII. _ad. in._]

[Footnote 685: Dig. Nik. I. 21-26.]

[Footnote 686: See, for instance, Dig. Nik. II. 75. Sometimes five
Jhanas are enumerated. This means that reasoning and investigation are
eliminated successively and not simultaneously, so that an additional
stage is created.]

[Footnote 687: See _Dhamma-Sangani_; Mrs Rhys Davids' translation, pp.
45-6 and notes. Also _Journal of Pali Text Society_, 1885, p. 32, for
meaning of the difficult word Ekodibhava.]

[Footnote 688: _E.g._ Maj. Nik. 77; Ang. Nik. 1. XX. 63.]

[Footnote 689: Hardy, _Eastern Monachism_, pp. 252 ff.]

[Footnote 690: But also without shape, colour or outward appearance, so
this statement must not be taken too literally.]

