S: And the heaven shall be opened so that it shall be all openings,

078.020
Y: And the mountains shall vanish, as if they were a mirage.

P: And the hills are set in motion and become as a mirage.

S: And the mountains shall be moved off so that they shall remain a mere
semblance.

078.021
Y: Truly Hell is as a place of ambush,

P: Lo! hell lurketh in ambush,

S: Surely hell lies in wait,

078.022
Y: For the transgressors a place of destination:

P: A home for the rebellious.

S: A place of resort for the inordinate,

078.023
Y: They will dwell therein for ages.

P: They will abide therein for ages.

S: Living therein for ages.

078.024
Y: Nothing cool shall they taste therein, nor any drink,

P: Therein taste they neither coolness nor (any) drink

S: They shall not taste therein cool nor drink

078.025
Y: Save a boiling fluid and a fluid, dark, murky, intensely cold,

P: Save boiling water and a paralysing cold:

S: But boiling and intensely cold water,

078.026
Y: A fitting recompense (for them).

P: Reward proportioned (to their evil deeds).

S: Requital corresponding.

078.027
Y: For that they used not to fear any account (for their deeds),

P: For lo! they looked not for a reckoning;

S: Surely they feared not the account,

078.028
Y: But they (impudently) treated Our Signs as false.

P: They called Our revelations false with strong denial.

S: And called Our communications a lie, giving the lie (to the truth).

078.029
Y: And all things have We preserved on record.

P: Everything have We recorded in a Book.

S: And We have recorded everything in a book,

078.030
Y: "So taste ye (the fruits of your deeds); for no increase shall We
grant you, except in Punishment."

P: So taste (of that which ye have earned). No increase do We give you
save of torment.

S: So taste! for We will not add to you aught but chastisement.

078.031
Y: Verily for the Righteous there will be a fulfilment of (the heart's)
desires;

P: Lo! for the duteous is achievement -

S: Surely for those who guard (against evil) is achievement,

078.032
Y: Gardens enclosed, and grapevines;

P: Gardens enclosed and vineyards,

S: Gardens and vineyards,

078.033
Y: And voluptuous women of equal age;

P: And voluptuous women of equal age;

S: And voluptuous women of equal age;

078.034
Y: And a cup full (to the brim).

P: And a full cup.

S: And a pure cup.

078.035
Y: No vanity shall they hear therein, nor Untruth:-

P: There hear they never vain discourse, nor lying -

S: They shall not hear therein any vain words nor lying.

078.036
Y: Recompense from thy Lord, a gift, (amply) sufficient,

P: Requital from thy Lord - a gift in payment -

S: A reward from your Lord, a gift according to a reckoning:

078.037
Y: (From) the Lord of the heavens and the earth, and all between,
(Allah) Most Gracious: None shall have power to argue with Him.

P: Lord of the heavens and the earth, and (all) that is between them,
the Beneficent; with Whom none can converse.

S: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, the
Beneficent Allah, they shall not be able to address Him.

078.038
Y: The Day that the Spirit and the angels will stand forth in ranks,
none shall speak except any who is permitted by (Allah) Most Gracious,
and He will say what is right.

P: On the day when the angels and the Spirit stand arrayed, they speak
not, saving him whom the Beneficent alloweth and who speaketh right.

S: The day on which the spirit and the angels shall stand in ranks; they
shall not speak except he whom the Beneficent Allah permits and who
speaks the right thing.

078.039
Y: That Day will be the sure Reality: Therefore, whoso will, let him
take a (straight) return to his Lord!

P: That is the True Day. So whoso will should seek recourse unto his
Lord.

S: That is the sure day, so whoever desires may take refuge with his
Lord.

078.040
Y: Verily, We have warned you of a Penalty near, the Day when man will
see (the deeds) which his hands have sent forth, and the Unbeliever
will say, "Woe unto me! Would that I were (mere) dust!"

P: Lo! We warn you of a doom at hand, a day whereon a man will look on
that which his own hands have sent before, and the disbeliever will
cry: "Would that I were dust!"

S: Surely We have warned you of a chastisement near at hand: the day
when man shall see what his two hands have sent before, and the
unbeliever shall say: O! would that I were dust!

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 79:

              AN-NAZIAT (THOSE WHO DRAG FORTH, SOUL-SNATCHERS)
 Total Verses: 46 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

079.001
Y: By the (angels) who tear out (the souls of the wicked) with violence;

P: By those who drag forth to destruction,

S: I swear by the angels who violently pull out the souls of the wicked,

079.002
Y: By those who gently draw out (the souls of the blessed);

P: By the meteors rushing,

S: And by those who gently draw out the souls of the blessed,

079.003
Y: And by those who glide along (on errands of mercy),

P: By the lone stars floating,

S: And by those who float in space,

079.004
Y: Then press forward as in a race,

P: By the angels hastening,

S: Then those who are foremost going ahead,

079.005
Y: Then arrange to do (the Commands of their Lord),

P: And those who govern the event,

S: Then those who regulate the affair.

079.006
Y: One Day everything that can be in commotion will be in violent
commotion,

P: On the day when the first trump resoundeth.

S: The day on which the quaking one shall quake,

079.007
Y: Followed by oft-repeated (commotions):

P: And the second followeth it,

S: What must happen afterwards shall follow it.

079.008
Y: Hearts that Day will be in agitation;

P: On that day hearts beat painfully

S: Hearts on that day shall palpitate,

079.009
Y: Cast down will be (their owners') eyes.

P: While eyes are downcast

S: Their eyes cast down.

079.010
Y: They say (now): "What! shall we indeed be returned to (our) former
state?"

P: (Now) they are saying: Shall we really be restored to our first state

S: They say: Shall we indeed be restored to (our) first state?

079.011
Y: "What! - when we shall have become rotten bones?"

P: Even after we are crumbled bones?

S: What! when we are rotten bones?

079.012
Y: They say: "It would, in that case, be a return with loss!"

P: They say: Then that would be a vain proceeding.

S: They said: That then would be a return occasioning loss.

079.013
Y: But verily, it will be but a single (Compelling) Cry,

P: Surely it will need but one shout,

S: But it shall be only a single cry,

079.014
Y: When, behold, they will be in the (full) awakening (to Judgment).

P: And lo! they will be awakened.

S: When lo! they shall be wakeful.

079.015
Y: Has the story of Moses reached thee?

P: Hath there come unto thee the history of Moses?

S: Has not there come to you the story of Musa?

079.016
Y: Behold, thy Lord did call to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa:-

P: How his Lord called him in the holy vale of Tuwa,

S: When his Lord called upon him in the holy valley, twice,

079.017
Y: "Go thou to Pharaoh for he has indeed transgressed all bounds:"

P: (Saying:) Go thou unto Pharaoh - Lo! he hath rebelled -

S: Go to Firon, surely he has become inordinate.

079.018
Y: "And say to him, 'Wouldst thou that thou shouldst be purified (from
sin)'?"-

P: And say (unto him): Hast thou (will) to grow (in grace)?

S: Then say: Have you (a desire) to purify yourself:

079.019
Y: "'And that I guide thee to thy Lord, so thou shouldst fear Him?'"

P: Then I will guide thee to thy Lord and thou shalt fear (Him).

S: And I will guide you to your Lord so that you should fear.

079.020
Y: Then did (Moses) show him the Great Sign.

P: And he showed him the tremendous token.

S: So he showed him the mighty sign.

079.021
Y: But (Pharaoh) rejected it and disobeyed (guidance);

P: But he denied and disobeyed,

S: But he rejected (the truth) and disobeyed.

079.022
Y: Further, he turned his back, striving hard (against Allah).

P: Then turned he away in haste,

S: Then he went back hastily.

079.023
Y: Then he collected (his men) and made a proclamation,

P: Then gathered he and summoned

S: Then he gathered (men) and called out.

079.024
Y: Saying, "I am your Lord, Most High".

P: And proclaimed: "I (Pharaoh) am your Lord the Highest."

S: Then he said: I am your lord, the most high.

079.025
Y: But Allah did punish him, (and made an) example of him, - in the
Hereafter, as in this life.

P: So Allah seized him (and made him) an example for the after (life)
and for the former.

S: So Allah seized him with the punishment of the hereafter and the
former life.

079.026
Y: Verily in this is an instructive warning for whosoever feareth
(Allah).

P: Lo! herein is indeed a lesson for him who feareth.

S: Most surely there is in this a lesson to him who fears.

079.027
Y: What! Are ye the more difficult to create or the heaven (above)?
(Allah) hath constructed it:

P: Are ye the harder to create, or is the heaven that He built?

S: Are you the harder to create or the heaven? He made it.

079.028
Y: On high hath He raised its canopy, and He hath given it order and
perfection.

P: He raised the height thereof and ordered it;

S: He raised high its height, then put it into a right good state.

079.029
Y: Its night doth He endow with darkness, and its splendour doth He
bring out (with light).

P: And He made dark the night thereof, and He brought forth the morn
thereof.

S: And He made dark its night and brought out its light.

079.030
Y: And the earth, moreover, hath He extended (to a wide expanse);

P: And after that He spread the earth,

S: And the earth, He expanded it after that.

079.031
Y: He draweth out therefrom its moisture and its pasture;

P: And produced therefrom the water thereof and the pasture thereof,

S: He brought forth from it its water and its pasturage.

079.032
Y: And the mountains hath He firmly fixed;-

P: And He made fast the hills,

S: And the mountains, He made them firm,

079.033
Y: For use and convenience to you and your cattle.

P: A provision for you and for your cattle.

S: A provision for you and for your cattle.

079.034
Y: Therefore, when there comes the great, overwhelming (Event),-

P: But when the great disaster cometh,

S: But when the great predominating calamity comes;

079.035
Y: The Day when man shall remember (all) that he strove for,

P: The day when man will call to mind his (whole) endeavour,

S: The day on which man shall recollect what he strove after,

079.036
Y: And Hell-Fire shall be placed in full view for (all) to see,-

P: And hell will stand forth visible to him who seeth,

S: And the hell shall be made manifest to him who sees

079.037
Y: Then, for such as had transgressed all bounds,

P: Then, as for him who rebelled

S: Then as for him who is inordinate,

079.038
Y: And had preferred the life of this world,

P: And chose the life of the world,

S: And prefers the life of this world,

079.039
Y: The Abode will be Hell-Fire;

P: Lo! hell will be his home.

S: Then surely the hell, that is the abode.

079.040
Y: And for such as had entertained the fear of standing before their
Lord's (tribunal) and had restrained (their) soul from lower desires,

P: But as for him who feared to stand before his Lord and restrained his
soul from lust,

S: And as for him who fears to stand in the presence of his Lord and
forbids the soul from low desires,

079.041
Y: Their abode will be the Garden.

P: Lo! the Garden will be his home.

S: Then surely the garden-- that is the abode.

079.042
Y: They ask thee about the Hour,-'When will be its appointed time?

P: They ask thee of the Hour: when will it come to port?

S: They ask you about the hour, when it will come.

079.043
Y: Wherein art thou (concerned) with the declaration thereof?

P: Why (ask they)? What hast thou to tell thereof?

S: About what! You are one to remind of it.

079.044
Y: With thy Lord in the Limit fixed therefor.

P: Unto thy Lord belongeth (knowledge of) the term thereof.

S: To your Lord is the goal of it.

079.045
Y: Thou art but a Warner for such as fear it.

P: Thou art but a warner unto him who feareth it.

S: You are only a warner to him who would fear it.

079.046
Y: The Day they see it, (It will be) as if they had tarried but a single
evening, or (at most till) the following morn!

P: On the day when they behold it, it will be as if they had but tarried
for an evening or the morn thereof.

S: On the day that they see it, it will be as though they had not
tarried but the latter part of a day or the early part of it.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 80:

                             ABASA (HE FROWNED)
 Total Verses: 42 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

080.001
Y: (The Prophet) frowned and turned away,

P: He frowned and turned away

S: He frowned and turned (his) back,

080.002
Y: Because there came to him the blind man (interrupting).

P: Because the blind man came unto him.

S: Because there came to him the blind man.

080.003
Y: But what could tell thee but that perchance he might grow (in
spiritual understanding)?-

P: What could inform thee but that he might grow (in grace)

S: And what would make you know that he would purify himself,

080.004
Y: Or that he might receive admonition, and the teaching might profit
him?

P: Or take heed and so the reminder might avail him?

S: Or become reminded so that the reminder should profit him?

080.005
Y: As to one who regards Himself as self-sufficient,

P: As for him who thinketh himself independent,

S: As for him who considers himself free from need (of you),

080.006
Y: To him dost thou attend;

P: Unto him thou payest regard.

S: To him do you address yourself.

080.007
Y: Though it is no blame to thee if he grow not (in spiritual
understanding).

P: Yet it is not thy concern if he grow not (in grace).

S: And no blame is on you if he would not purify himself

080.008
Y: But as to him who came to thee striving earnestly,

P: But as for him who cometh unto thee with earnest purpose

S: And as to him who comes to you striving hard,

080.009
Y: And with fear (in his heart),

P: And hath fear,

S: And he fears,

080.010
Y: Of him wast thou unmindful.

P: From him thou art distracted.

S: From him will you divert yourself.

080.011
Y: By no means (should it be so)! For it is indeed a Message of
instruction:

P: Nay, but verily it is an Admonishment,

S: Nay! surely it is an admonishment.

080.012
Y: Therefore let whoso will, keep it in remembrance.

P: So let whosoever will pay heed to it,

S: So let him who pleases mind it.

080.013
Y: (It is) in Books held (greatly) in honour,

P: On honoured leaves

S: In honored books,

080.014
Y: Exalted (in dignity), kept pure and holy,

P: Exalted, purified,

S: Exalted, purified,

080.015
Y: (Written) by the hands of scribes-

P: (Set down) by scribes

S: In the hands of scribes

080.016
Y: Honourable and Pious and Just.

P: Noble and righteous.

S: Noble, virtuous.

080.017
Y: Woe to man! What hath made him reject Allah;

P: Man is (self-)destroyed: how ungrateful!

S: Cursed be man! how ungrateful is he!

080.018
Y: From what stuff hath He created him?

P: From what thing doth He create him?

S: Of what thing did He create him?

080.019
Y: From a sperm-drop: He hath created him, and then mouldeth him in due
proportions;

P: From a drop of seed. He createth him and proportioneth him,

S: Of a small seed; He created him, then He made him according to a
measure,

080.020
Y: Then doth He make His path smooth for him;

P: Then maketh the way easy for him,

S: Then (as for) the way-- He has made it easy (for him)

080.021
Y: Then He causeth him to die, and putteth him in his grave;

P: Then causeth him to die, and burieth him;

S: Then He causes him to die, then assigns to him a grave,

080.022
Y: Then, when it is His Will, He will raise him up (again).

P: Then, when He will, He bringeth him again to life.

S: Then when He pleases, He will raise him to life again.

080.023
Y: By no means hath he fulfilled what Allah hath commanded him.

P: Nay, but (man) hath not done what He commanded him.

S: Nay; but he has not done what He bade him.

080.024
Y: Then let man look at his food, (and how We provide it):

P: Let man consider his food:

S: Then let man look to his food,

080.025
Y: For that We pour forth water in abundance,

P: How We pour water in showers

S: That We pour down the water, pouring (it) down in abundance,

080.026
Y: And We split the earth in fragments,

P: Then split the earth in clefts

S: Then We cleave the earth, cleaving (it) asunder,

080.027
Y: And produce therein corn,

P: And cause the grain to grow therein

S: Then We cause to grow therein the grain,

080.028
Y: And Grapes and nutritious plants,

P: And grapes and green fodder

S: And grapes and clover,

080.029
Y: And Olives and Dates,

P: And olive-trees and palm-trees

S: And the olive and the palm,

080.030
Y: And enclosed Gardens, dense with lofty trees,

P: And garden-closes of thick foliage

S: And thick gardens,

080.031
Y: And fruits and fodder,-

P: And fruits and grasses:

S: And fruits and herbage

080.032
Y: For use and convenience to you and your cattle.

P: Provision for you and your cattle.

S: A provision for you and for your cattle.

080.033
Y: At length, when there comes the Deafening Noise,-

P: But when the Shout cometh

S: But when the deafening cry comes,

080.034
Y: That Day shall a man flee from his own brother,

P: On the day when a man fleeth from his brother

S: The day on which a man shall fly from his brother,

080.035
Y: And from his mother and his father,

P: And his mother and his father

S: And his mother and his father,

080.036
Y: And from his wife and his children.

P: And his wife and his children,

S: And his spouse and his son--

080.037
Y: Each one of them, that Day, will have enough concern (of his own) to
make him indifferent to the others.

P: Every man that day will have concern enough to make him heedless (of
others).

S: Every man of them shall on that day have an affair which will occupy
him.

080.038
Y: Some faces that Day will be beaming,

P: On that day faces will be bright as dawn,

S: (Many) faces on that day shall be bright,

080.039
Y: Laughing, rejoicing.

P: Laughing, rejoicing at good news;

S: Laughing, joyous.

080.040
Y: And other faces that Day will be dust-stained,

P: And other faces, on that day, with dust upon them,

S: And (many) faces on that day, on them shall be dust,

080.041
Y: Blackness will cover them:

P: Veiled in darkness,

S: Darkness shall cover them.

080.042
Y: Such will be the Rejecters of Allah, the doers of iniquity.

P: Those are the disbelievers, the wicked.

S: These are they who are unbelievers, the wicked.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 81:

                        AT-TAKWIR (THE OVERTHROWING)
 Total Verses: 29 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

081.001
Y: When the sun (with its spacious light) is folded up;

P: When the sun is overthrown,

S: When the sun is covered,

081.002
Y: When the stars fall, losing their lustre;

P: And when the stars fall,

S: And when the stars darken,

081.003
Y: When the mountains vanish (like a mirage);

P: And when the hills are moved,

S: And when the mountains are made to pass away,

081.004
Y: When the she-camels, ten months with young, are left untended;

P: And when the camels big with young are abandoned,

S: And when the camels are left untended,

081.005
Y: When the wild beasts are herded together (in the human habitations);

P: And when the wild beasts are herded together,

S: And when the wild animals are made to go forth,

081.006
Y: When the oceans boil over with a swell;

P: And when the seas rise,

S: And when the seas are set on fire,

081.007
Y: When the souls are sorted out, (being joined, like with like);

P: And when souls are reunited,

S: And when souls are united,

081.008
Y: When the female (infant), buried alive, is questioned -

P: And when the girl-child that was buried alive is asked

S: And when the female infant buried alive is asked

081.009
Y: For what crime she was killed;

P: For what sin she was slain,

S: For what sin she was killed,

081.010
Y: When the scrolls are laid open;

P: And when the pages are laid open,

S: And when the books are spread,

081.011
Y: When the world on High is unveiled;

P: And when the sky is torn away,

S: And when the heaven has its covering removed,

081.012
Y: When the Blazing Fire is kindled to fierce heat;

P: And when hell is lighted,

S: And when the hell is kindled up,

081.013
Y: And when the Garden is brought near;-

P: And when the Garden is brought nigh,

S: And when the garden is brought nigh,

081.014
Y: (Then) shall each soul know what it has put forward.

P: (Then) every soul will know what it hath made ready.

S: Every soul shall (then) know what it has prepared.

081.015
Y: So verily I call to witness the planets - that recede,

P: Oh, but I call to witness the planets,

S: But nay! I swear by the stars,

081.016
Y: Go straight, or hide;

P: The stars which rise and set,

S: That run their course (and) hide themselves,

081.017
Y: And the Night as it dissipates;

P: And the close of night,

S: And the night when it departs,

081.018
Y: And the Dawn as it breathes away the darkness;-

P: And the breath of morning

S: And the morning when it brightens,

081.019
Y: Verily this is the word of a most honourable Messenger,

P: That this is in truth the word of an honoured messenger,

S: Most surely it is the Word of an honored messenger,

081.020
Y: Endued with Power, with rank before the Lord of the Throne,

P: Mighty, established in the presence of the Lord of the Throne,

S: The processor of strength, having an honorable place with the Lord of
the Dominion,

081.021
Y: With authority there, (and) faithful to his trust.

P: (One) to be obeyed, and trustworthy;

S: One (to be) obeyed, and faithful in trust.

081.022
Y: And (O people!) your companion is not one possessed;

P: And your comrade is not mad.

S: And your companion is not gone mad.

081.023
Y: And without doubt he saw him in the clear horizon.

P: Surely he beheld Him on the clear horizon.

S: And of a truth he saw himself on the clear horizon.

081.024
Y: Neither doth he withhold grudgingly a knowledge of the Unseen.

P: And he is not avid of the Unseen.

S: Nor of the unseen is he a tenacious concealer.

081.025
Y: Nor is it the word of an evil spirit accursed.

P: Nor is this the utterance of a devil worthy to be stoned.

S: Nor is it the word of the cursed Shaitan,

081.026
Y: When whither go ye?

P: Whither then go ye?

S: Whither then will you go?

081.027
Y: Verily this is no less than a Message to (all) the Worlds:

P: This is naught else than a reminder unto creation,

S: It is naught but a reminder for the nations,

081.028
Y: (With profit) to whoever among you wills to go straight:

P: Unto whomsoever of you willeth to walk straight.

S: For him among you who pleases to go straight.

081.029
Y: But ye shall not will except as Allah wills,- the Cherisher of the
Worlds.

P: And ye will not, unless (it be) that Allah willeth, the Lord of
Creation.

S: And you do not please except that Allah please, the Lord of the
worlds.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 82:

                 AL-INFITAR (THE CLEAVING, BURSTING APART)
 Total Verses: 19 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

082.001
Y: When the Sky is cleft asunder;

P: When the heaven is cleft asunder,

S: When the heaven becomes cleft asunder,

082.002
Y: When the Stars are scattered;

P: When the planets are dispersed,

S: And when the stars become dispersed,

082.003
Y: When the Oceans are suffered to burst forth;

P: When the seas are poured forth,

S: And when the seas are made to flow forth,

082.004
Y: And when the Graves are turned upside down;-

P: And the sepulchres are overturned,

S: And when the graves are laid open,

082.005
Y: (Then) shall each soul know what it hath sent forward and (what it
hath) kept back.

P: A soul will know what it hath sent before (it) and what left behind.

S: Every soul shall know what it has sent before and held back.

082.006
Y: O man! What has seduced thee from thy Lord Most Beneficent?-

P: O man! What hath made thee careless concerning thy Lord, the
Bountiful,

S: O man! what has beguiled you from your Lord, the Gracious one,

082.007
Y: Him Who created thee. Fashioned thee in due proportion, and gave thee
a just bias;

P: Who created thee, then fashioned, then proportioned thee?

S: Who created you, then made you complete, then made you symmetrical?

082.008
Y: In whatever Form He wills, does He put thee together.

P: Into whatsoever form He will, He casteth thee.

S: Into whatever form He pleased He constituted you.

082.009
Y: Nay! but ye do reject Right and Judgment!

P: Nay, but ye deny the Judgment.

S: Nay! but you give the lie to the judgment day,

082.010
Y: But verily over you (are appointed angels) to protect you,-

P: Lo! there are above you guardians,

S: And most surely there are keepers over you

082.011
Y: Kind and honourable,- Writing down (your deeds):

P: Generous and recording,

S: Honorable recorders,

082.012
Y: They know (and understand) all that ye do.

P: Who know (all) that ye do.

S: They know what you do.

082.013
Y: As for the Righteous, they will be in bliss;

P: Lo! the righteous verily will be in delight.

S: Most surely the righteous are in bliss,

082.014
Y: And the Wicked - they will be in the Fire,

P: And lo! the wicked verily will be in hell;

S: And most surely the wicked are in burning fire,

082.015
Y: Which they will enter on the Day of Judgment,

P: They will burn therein on the Day of Judgment,

S: They shall enter it on the Day of Judgment.

082.016
Y: And they will not be able to keep away therefrom.

P: And will not be absent thence.

S: And they shall by no means be absent from it.

082.017
Y: And what will explain to thee what the Day of Judgment is?

P: Ah, what will convey unto thee what the Day of Judgment is!

S: And what will make you realize what the Day of Judgment is?

082.018
Y: Again, what will explain to thee what the Day of Judgment is?

P: Again, what will convey unto thee what the Day of Judgment is!

S: Again, what will make you realize what the Day of Judgment Is?

082.019
Y: (It will be) the Day when no soul shall have power (to do) aught for
another: For the command, that Day, will be (wholly) with Allah.

P: A day on which no soul hath power at all for any (other) soul. The
(absolute) command on that day is Allah's.

S: The day on which no soul shall control anything for (another) soul;
and the command on that day shall be entirely Allah's.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 83:

              AL-MUTAFFIFIN (DEFRAUDING, THE CHEATS, CHEATING)
 Total Verses: 36 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

083.001
Y: Woe to those that deal in fraud,-

P: Woe unto the defrauders:

S: Woe to the defrauders,

083.002
Y: Those who, when they have to receive by measure from men, exact full
measure,

P: Those who when they take the measure from mankind demand it full,

S: Who, when they take the measure (of their dues) from men take it
fully,

083.003
Y: But when they have to give by measure or weight to men, give less
than due.

P: But if they measure unto them or weight for them, they cause them
loss.

S: But when they measure out to others or weigh out for them, they are
deficient.

083.004
Y: Do they not think that they will be called to account?-

P: Do such (men) not consider that they will be raised again

S: Do not these think that they shall be raised again

083.005
Y: On a Mighty Day,

P: Unto an Awful Day,

S: For a mighty day,

083.006
Y: A Day when (all) mankind will stand before the Lord of the Worlds?

P: The day when (all) mankind stand before the Lord of the Worlds?

S: The day on which men shall stand before the Lord of the worlds?

083.007
Y: Nay! Surely the record of the wicked is (preserved) in Sijjin.

P: Nay, but the record of the vile is in Sijjin -

S: Nay! most surely the record of the wicked is in the Sijjin.

083.008
Y: And what will explain to thee what Sijjin is?

P: Ah! what will convey unto thee what Sijjin is! -

S: And what will make you know what the Sijjin is?

083.009
Y: (There is) a Register (fully) inscribed.

P: A written record.

S: It is a written book.

083.010
Y: Woe, that Day, to those that deny-

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters,

083.011
Y: Those that deny the Day of Judgment.

P: Those who deny the Day of Judgment

S: Who give the lie to the Day of Judgment.

083.012
Y: And none can deny it but the Transgressor beyond bounds the Sinner!

P: Which none denieth save each criminal transgressor,

S: And none gives the lie to it but every exceeder of limits, sinful one

083.013
Y: When Our Signs are rehearsed to him, he says, "Tales of the
ancients!"

P: Who, when thou readest unto him Our revelations, saith: (Mere) fables
of the men of old.

S: When Our communications are recited to him, he says: Stories of those
of yore.

083.014
Y: By no means! but on their hearts is the stain of the (ill) which they
do!

P: Nay, but that which they have earned is rust upon their hearts.

S: Nay! rather, what they used to do has become like rust upon their
hearts.

083.015
Y: Verily, from (the Light of) their Lord, that Day, will they be
veiled.

P: Nay, but surely on that day they will be covered from (the mercy of)
their Lord.

S: Nay! most surely they shall on that day be debarred from their Lord.

083.016
Y: Further, they will enter the Fire of Hell.

P: Then lo! they verily will burn in hell,

S: Then most surely they shall enter the burning fire.

083.017
Y: Further, it will be said to them: "This is the (reality) which ye
rejected as false!"

P: And it will be said (unto them): This is that which ye used to deny.

S: Then shall it be said: This is what you gave the lie to.

083.018
Y: Nay, verily the record of the Righteous is (preserved) in
'Illiyin.

P: Nay, but the record of the righteous is in 'Illiyin -

S: Nay! Most surely the record of the righteous shall be in the Iliyin.

083.019
Y: And what will explain to thee what 'Illiyun is?

P: Ah, what will convey unto thee what 'Illiyin is! -

S: And what will make you know what the highest Iliyin is?

083.020
Y: (There is) a Register (fully) inscribed,

P: A written record,

S: It is a written book,

083.021
Y: To which bear witness those Nearest (to Allah).

P: Attested by those who are brought near (unto their Lord).

S: Those who are drawn near (to Allah) shall witness it.

083.022
Y: Truly the Righteous will be in Bliss:

P: Lo! the righteous verily are in delight,

S: Most surely the righteous shall be in bliss,

083.023
Y: On Thrones (of Dignity) will they command a sight (of all things):

P: On couches, gazing,

S: On thrones, they shall gaze;

083.024
Y: Thou wilt recognise in their faces the beaming brightness of Bliss.

P: Thou wilt know in their faces the radiance of delight.

S: You will recognize in their faces the brightness of bliss.

083.025
Y: Their thirst will be slaked with Pure Wine sealed:

P: They are given to drink of a pure wine, sealed,

S: They are made to quaff of a pure drink that is sealed (to others).

083.026
Y: The seal thereof will be Musk: And for this let those aspire, who
have aspirations:

P: Whose seal is musk - for this let (all) those strive who strive for
bliss -

S: The sealing of it is (with) musk; and for that let the aspirers
aspire.

083.027
Y: With it will be (given) a mixture of Tasnim:

P: And mixed with water of Tasnim,

S: And the admixture of it is a water of Tasnim,

083.028
Y: A spring, from (the waters) whereof drink those Nearest to Allah.

P: A spring whence those brought near (to Allah) drink.

S: A fountain from which drink they who are drawn near (to Allah).

083.029
Y: Those in sin used to laugh at those who believed,

P: Lo! the guilty used to laugh at those who believed,

S: Surely they who are guilty used to laugh at those who believe.

083.030
Y: And whenever they passed by them, used to wink at each other (in
mockery);

P: And wink one to another when they passed them;

S: And when they passed by them, they winked at one another.

083.031
Y: And when they returned to their own people, they would return
jesting;

P: And when they returned to their own folk, they returned jesting;

S: And when they returned to their own followers they returned exulting.

083.032
Y: And whenever they saw them, they would say, "Behold! These are the
people truly astray!"

P: And when they saw them they said: Lo! these have gone astray.

S: And when they saw them, they said: Most surely these are in error;

083.033
Y: But they had not been sent as keepers over them!

P: Yet they were not sent as guardians over them.

S: And they were not sent to be keepers over them.

083.034
Y: But on this Day the Believers will laugh at the Unbelievers:

P: This day it is those who believe who have the laugh of disbelievers,

S: So today those who believe shall laugh at the unbelievers;

083.035
Y: On Thrones (of Dignity) they will command (a sight) (of all things).

P: On high couches, gazing.

S: On thrones, they will look.

083.036
Y: Will not the Unbelievers have been paid back for what they did?

P: Are not the disbelievers paid for what they used to do?

S: Surely the disbelievers are rewarded as they did.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 84:

                AL-INSHIQAQ (THE SUNDERING, SPLITTING OPEN)
 Total Verses: 25 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

084.001
Y: When the sky is rent asunder,

P: When the heaven is split asunder

S: When the heaven bursts asunder,

084.002
Y: And hearkens to (the Command of) its Lord, and it must needs (do
so);-

P: And attentive to her Lord in fear,

S: And obeys its Lord and it must.

084.003
Y: And when the earth is flattened out,

P: And when the earth is spread out

S: And when the earth is stretched,

084.004
Y: And casts forth what is within it and becomes (clean) empty,

P: And hath cast out all that was in her, and is empty

S: And casts forth what is in it and becomes empty,

084.005
Y: And hearkens to (the Command of) its Lord,- and it must needs (do
so);- (then will come Home the full reality).

P: And attentive to her Lord in fear!

S: And obeys its Lord and it must.

084.006
Y: O thou man! Verily thou art ever toiling on towards thy Lord-
painfully toiling,- but thou shalt meet Him.

P: Thou, verily, O man, art working toward thy Lord a work which thou
wilt meet (in His presence).

S: O man! surely you must strive (to attain) to your Lord, a hard
striving until you meet Him.

084.007
Y: Then he who is given his Record in his right hand,

P: Then whoso is given his account in his right hand

S: Then as to him who is given his book in his right hand,

084.008
Y: Soon will his account be taken by an easy reckoning,

P: He truly will receive an easy reckoning

S: He shall be reckoned with by an easy reckoning,

084.009
Y: And he will turn to his people, rejoicing!

P: And will return unto his folk in joy.

S: And he shall go back to his people joyful.

084.010
Y: But he who is given his Record behind his back,-

P: But whoso is given his account behind his back,

S: And as to him who is given his book behind his back,

084.011
Y: Soon will he cry for perdition,

P: He surely will invoke destruction

S: He shall call for perdition,

084.012
Y: And he will enter a Blazing Fire.

P: And be thrown to scorching fire.

S: And enter into burning fire.

084.013
Y: Truly, did he go about among his people, rejoicing!

P: He verily lived joyous with his folk,

S: Surely he was (erstwhile) joyful among his followers.

084.014
Y: Truly, did he think that he would not have to return (to Us)!

P: He verily deemed that he would never return (unto Allah).

S: Surely he thought that he would never return.

084.015
Y: Nay, nay! for his Lord was (ever) watchful of him!

P: Nay, but lo! his Lord is ever looking on him!

S: Yea! surely his Lord does ever see him.

084.016
Y: So I do call to witness the ruddy glow of Sunset;

P: Oh, I swear by the afterglow of sunset,

S: But nay! I swear by the sunset redness,

084.017
Y: The Night and its Homing;

P: And by the night and all that it enshroudeth,

S: And the night and that which it drives on,

084.018
Y: And the Moon in her fullness:

P: And by the moon when she is at the full,

S: And the moon when it grows full,

084.019
Y: Ye shall surely travel from stage to stage.

P: That ye shall journey on from plane to plane.

S: That you shall most certainly enter one state after another.

084.020
Y: What then is the matter with them, that they believe not?-

P: What aileth them, then, that they believe not

S: But what is the matter with them that they do not believe,

084.021
Y: And when the Qur'an is read to them, they fall not prostrate,

P: And, when the Qur'an is recited unto them, worship not (Allah)?

S: And when the Quran is recited to them they do not make obeisance?

084.022
Y: But on the contrary the Unbelievers reject (it).

P: Nay, but those who disbelieve will deny;

S: Nay! those who disbelieve give the lie to the truth.

084.023
Y: But Allah has full knowledge of what they secrete (in their breasts)

P: And Allah knoweth best what they are hiding.

S: And Allah knows best what they hide,

084.024
Y: So announce to them a Penalty Grievous,

P: So give them tidings of a painful doom,

S: So announce to them a painful punishment,

084.025
Y: Except to those who believe and work righteous deeds: For them is a
Reward that will never fail.

P: Save those who believe and do good works, for theirs is a reward
unfailing.

S: Except those who believe and do good; for them is a reward that shall
never be cut off.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 85:

           AL-BUROOJ (THE MANSIONS OF THE STARS, CONSTELLATIONS)
 Total Verses: 22 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

085.001
Y: By the sky, (displaying) the Zodiacal Signs;

P: By the heaven, holding mansions of the stars,

S: I swear by the mansions of the stars,

085.002
Y: By the promised Day (of Judgment);

P: And by the Promised Day.

S: And the promised day,

085.003
Y: By one that witnesses, and the subject of the witness;-

P: And by the witness and that whereunto he beareth testimony,

S: And the bearer of witness and those against whom the witness is
borne.

085.004
Y: Woe to the makers of the pit (of fire),

P: (Self-)destroyed were the owners of the ditch

S: Cursed be the makers of the pit,

085.005
Y: Fire supplied (abundantly) with fuel:

P: Of the fuel-fed fire,

S: Of the fire (kept burning) with fuel,

085.006
Y: Behold! they sat over against the (fire),

P: When they sat by it,

S: When they sat by it,

085.007
Y: And they witnessed (all) that they were doing against the Believers.

P: And were themselves the witnesses of what they did to the believers.

S: And they were witnesses of what they did with the believers.

085.008
Y: And they ill-treated them for no other reason than that they believed
in Allah, Exalted in Power, Worthy of all Praise!-

P: They had naught against them save that they believed in Allah, the
Mighty, the Owner of Praise,

S: And they did not take vengeance on them for aught except that they
believed in Allah, the Mighty, the Praised,

085.009
Y: Him to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth! And
Allah is Witness to all things.

P: Him unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth;
and Allah is of all things the Witness.

S: Whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is a
Witness of all things.

085.010
Y: Those who persecute (or draw into temptation) the Believers, men and
women, and do not turn in repentance, will have the Penalty of Hell:
They will have the Penalty of the Burning Fire.

P: Lo! they who persecute believing men and believing women and repent
not, theirs verily will be the doom of hell, and theirs the doom of
burning.

S: Surely (as for) those who persecute the believing men and the
believing women, then do not repent, they shall have the chastisement
of hell, and they shall have the chastisement of burning.

085.011
Y: For those who believe and do righteous deeds, will be Gardens;
beneath which rivers flow: That is the great Salvation, (the fulfilment
of all desires),

P: Lo! those who believe and do good works, theirs will be Gardens
underneath which rivers flow. That is the Great Success.

S: Surely (as for) those who believe and do good, they shall have
gardens beneath which rivers flow, that is the great achievement.

085.012
Y: Truly strong is the Grip (and Power) of thy Lord.

P: Lo! the punishment of thy Lord is stern.

S: Surely the might of your Lord is great.

085.013
Y: It is He Who creates from the very beginning, and He can restore
(life).

P: Lo! He it is Who produceth, then reproduceth,

S: Surely He it is Who originates and reproduces,

085.014
Y: And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Full of Loving-Kindness,

P: And He is the Forgiving, the Loving,

S: And He is the Forgiving, the Loving,

085.015
Y: Lord of the Throne of Glory,

P: Lord of the Throne of Glory,

S: Lord of the Arsh, the Glorious,

085.016
Y: Doer (without let) of all that He intends.

P: Doer of what He will.

S: The great doer of what He will.

085.017
Y: Has the story reached thee, of the forces-

P: Hath there come unto thee the story of the hosts

S: Has not there come to you the story of the hosts,

085.018
Y: Of Pharaoh and the Thamud?

P: Of Pharaoh and (the tribe of) Thamud?

S: Of Firon and Samood?

085.019
Y: And yet the Unbelievers (persist) in rejecting (the Truth)!

P: Nay, but those who disbelieve live in denial

S: Nay! those who disbelieve are in (the act of) giving the lie to the
truth.

085.020
Y: But Allah doth encompass them from behind!

P: And Allah, all unseen, surroundeth them.

S: And Allah encompasses them on every side.

085.021
Y: Nay, this is a Glorious Qur'an,

P: Nay, but it is a glorious Qur'an.

S: Nay! it is a glorious Quran,

085.022
Y: (Inscribed) in a Tablet Preserved!

P: On a guarded tablet.

S: In a guarded tablet.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 86:

                AT-TARIQ (THE MORNING STAR, THE NIGHTCOMER)
 Total Verses: 17 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

086.001
Y: By the Sky and the Night-Visitant (therein);-

P: By the heaven and the Morning Star

S: I swear by the heaven and the comer by night;

086.002
Y: And what will explain to thee what the Night-Visitant is?-

P: - Ah, what will tell thee what the Morning Star is!

S: And what will make you know what the comer by night is?

086.003
Y: (It is) the Star of piercing brightness;-

P: - The piercing Star!

S: The star of piercing brightness;

086.004
Y: There is no soul but has a protector over it.

P: No human soul but hath a guardian over it.

S: There is not a soul but over it is a keeper.

086.005
Y: Now let man but think from what he is created!

P: So let man consider from what he is created.

S: So let man consider of what he is created:

086.006
Y: He is created from a drop emitted-

P: He is created from a gushing fluid

S: He is created of water pouring forth,

086.007
Y: Proceeding from between the backbone and the ribs:

P: That issued from between the loins and ribs.

S: Coming from between the back and the ribs.

086.008
Y: Surely (Allah) is able to bring him back (to life)!

P: Lo! He verily is Able to return him (unto life)

S: Most surely He is able to return him (to life).

086.009
Y: The Day that (all) things secret will be tested,

P: On the day when hidden thoughts shall be searched out.

S: On the day when hidden things shall be made manifest,

086.010
Y: (Man) will have no power, and no helper.

P: Then will he have no might nor any helper.

S: He shall have neither strength nor helper.

086.011
Y: By the Firmament which returns (in its round),

P: By the heaven which giveth the returning rain,

S: I swear by the raingiving heavens,

086.012
Y: And by the Earth which opens out (for the gushing of springs or the
sprouting of vegetation),-

P: And the earth which splitteth (with the growth of trees and plants)

S: And the earth splitting (with plants);

086.013
Y: Behold this is the Word that distinguishes (Good from Evil):

P: Lo! this (Qur'an) is a conclusive word,

S: Most surely it is a decisive word,

086.014
Y: It is not a thing for amusement.

P: It is no pleasantry.

S: And it is no joke.

086.015
Y: As for them, they are but plotting a scheme,

P: Lo! they plot a plot (against thee, O Muhammad)

S: Surely they will make a scheme,

086.016
Y: And I am planning a scheme.

P: And I plot a plot (against them).

S: And I (too) will make a scheme.

086.017
Y: Therefore grant a delay to the unbelievers: Give respite to them
gently (for awhile).

P: So give a respite to the disbelievers. Deal thou gently with them for
a while.

S: So grant the unbelievers a respite: let them alone for a

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 87:

         AL-ALA (THE MOST HIGH, GLORY TO YOUR LORD IN THE HIGHEST)
 Total Verses: 19 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

087.001
Y: Glorify the name of thy Guardian-Lord Most High,

P: Praise the name of thy Lord the Most High,

S: Glorify the name of your Lord, the Most High,

087.002
Y: Who hath created, and further, given order and proportion;

P: Who createth, then disposeth;

S: Who creates, then makes complete,

087.003
Y: Who hath ordained laws. And granted guidance;

P: Who measureth, then guideth;

S: And Who makes (things) according to a measure, then guides (them to
their goal),

087.004
Y: And Who bringeth out the (green and luscious) pasture,

P: Who bringeth forth the pasturage,

S: And Who brings forth herbage,

087.005
Y: And then doth make it (but) swarthy stubble.

P: Then turneth it to russet stubble.

S: Then makes it dried up, dust-colored.

087.006
Y: By degrees shall We teach thee to declare (the Message), so thou
shalt not forget,

P: We shall make thee read (O Muhammad) so that thou shalt not forget

S: We will make you recite so you shall not forget,

087.007
Y: Except as Allah wills: For He knoweth what is manifest and what is
hidden.

P: Save that which Allah willeth. Lo! He knoweth the disclosed and that
which still is hidden;

S: Except what Allah pleases, surely He knows the manifest, and what is
hidden.

087.008
Y: And We will make it easy for thee (to follow) the simple (Path).

P: And We shall ease thy way unto the state of ease.

S: And We will make your way smooth to a state of ease.

087.009
Y: Therefore give admonition in case the admonition profits (the
hearer).

P: Therefor remind (men), for of use is the reminder.

S: Therefore do remind, surely reminding does profit.

087.010
Y: The admonition will be received by those who fear (Allah):

P: He will heed who feareth,

S: He who fears will mind,

087.011
Y: But it will be avoided by those most unfortunate ones,

P: But the most hapless will flout it,

S: And the most unfortunate one will avoid it,

087.012
Y: Who will enter the Great Fire,

P: He who will be flung to the great Fire

S: Who shall enter the great fire;

087.013
Y: In which they will then neither die nor live.

P: Wherein he will neither die nor live.

S: Then therein he shall neither live nor die.

087.014
Y: But those will prosper who purify themselves,

P: He is successful who groweth,

S: He indeed shall be successful who purifies himself,

087.015
Y: And glorify the name of their Guardian-Lord, and (lift their hearts)
in prayer.

P: And remembereth the name of his Lord, so prayeth,

S: And magnifies the name of his Lord and prays.

087.016
Y: Nay (behold), ye prefer the life of this world;

P: But ye prefer the life of the world

S: Nay! you prefer the life of this world,

087.017
Y: But the Hereafter is better and more enduring.

P: Although the Hereafter is better and more lasting.

S: While the hereafter is better and more lasting.

087.018
Y: And this is in the Books of the earliest (Revelation),-

P: Lo! This is in the former scrolls.

S: Most surely this is in the earlier scriptures,

087.019
Y: The Books of Abraham and Moses.

P: The Books of Abraham and Moses.

S: The scriptures of Ibrahim and Musa.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 88:

                  AL-GHASHIYA (THE OVERWHELMING, THE PALL)
 Total Verses: 26 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

088.001
Y: Has the story reached thee of the overwhelming (Event)?

P: Hath there come unto thee tidings of the Overwhelming?

S: Has not there come to you the news of the overwhelming calamity?

088.002
Y: Some faces, that Day, will be humiliated,

P: On that day (many) faces will be downcast,

S: (Some) faces on that day shall be downcast,

088.003
Y: Labouring (hard), weary,-

P: Toiling, weary,

S: Laboring, toiling,

088.004
Y: The while they enter the Blazing Fire,-

P: Scorched by burning fire,

S: Entering into burning fire,

088.005
Y: The while they are given, to drink, of a boiling hot spring,

P: Drinking from a boiling spring,

S: Made to drink from a boiling spring.

088.006
Y: No food will there be for them but a bitter Dhari'

P: No food for them save bitter thorn-fruit

S: They shall have no food but of thorns,

088.007
Y: Which will neither nourish nor satisfy hunger.

P: Which doth not nourish nor release from hunger.

S: Which will neither fatten nor avail against hunger.

088.008
Y: (Other) faces that Day will be joyful,

P: In that day other faces will be calm,

S: (Other) faces on that day shall be happy,

088.009
Y: Pleased with their striving,-

P: Glad for their effort past,

S: Well-pleased because of their striving,

088.010
Y: In a Garden on high,

P: In a high Garden

S: In a lofty garden,

088.011
Y: Where they shall hear no (word) of vanity:

P: Where they hear no idle speech,

S: Wherein you shall not hear vain talk.

088.012
Y: Therein will be a bubbling spring:

P: Wherein is a gushing spring,

S: Therein is a fountain flowing,

088.013
Y: Therein will be Thrones (of dignity), raised on high,

P: Wherein are couches raised

S: Therein are thrones raised high,

088.014
Y: Goblets placed (ready),

P: And goblets set at hand

S: And drinking-cups ready placed,

088.015
Y: And cushions set in rows,

P: And cushions ranged

S: And cushions set in a row,

088.016
Y: And rich carpets (all) spread out.

P: And silken carpets spread.

S: And carpets spread out.

088.017
Y: Do they not look at the Camels, how they are made?-

P: Will they not regard the camels, how they are created?

S: Will they not then consider the camels, how they are created?

088.018
Y: And at the Sky, how it is raised high?-

P: And the heaven, how it is raised?

S: And the heaven, how it is reared aloft,

088.019
Y: And at the Mountains, how they are fixed firm?-

P: And the hills, how they are set up?

S: And the mountains, how they are firmly fixed,

088.020
Y: And at the Earth, how it is spread out?

P: And the earth, how it is spread?

S: And the earth, how it is made a vast expanse?

088.021
Y: Therefore do thou give admonition, for thou art one to admonish.

P: Remind them, for thou art but an admonisher,

S: Therefore do remind, for you are only a reminder.

088.022
Y: Thou art not one to manage (men's) affairs.

P: Thou art not at all a warder over them.

S: You are not a watcher over them;

088.023
Y: But if any turn away and reject Allah,-

P: But whoso is averse and disbelieveth,

S: But whoever turns back and disbelieves,

088.024
Y: Allah will punish him with a mighty Punishment,

P: Allah will punish him with direst punishment.

S: Allah will chastise him with the greatest chastisement.

088.025
Y: For to Us will be their return;

P: Lo! unto Us is their return

S: Surely to Us is their turning back,

088.026
Y: Then it will be for Us to call them to account.

P: And Ours their reckoning.

S: Then surely upon Us is the taking of their account.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 89:

                        AL-FAJR (THE DAWN, DAYBREAK)
 Total Verses: 30 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

089.001
Y: By the break of Day

P: By the Dawn

S: I swear by the daybreak,

089.002
Y: By the Nights twice five;

P: And ten nights,

S: And the ten nights,

089.003
Y: By the even and odd (contrasted);

P: And the Even and the Odd,

S: And the even and the odd,

089.004
Y: And by the Night when it passeth away;-

P: And the night when it departeth,

S: And the night when it departs.

089.005
Y: Is there (not) in these an adjuration (or evidence) for those who
understand?

P: There surely is an oath for thinking man.

S: Truly in that there is an oath for those who possess understanding.

089.006
Y: Seest thou not how thy Lord dealt with the 'Ad (people),-

P: Dost thou not consider how thy Lord dealt with (the tribe of) A'ad,

S: Have you not considered how your Lord dealt with Ad,

089.007
Y: Of the (city of) Iram, with lofty pillars,

P: With many-columned Iram,

S: (The people of) Aram, possessors of lofty buildings,

089.008
Y: The like of which were not produced in (all) the land?

P: The like of which was not created in the lands;

S: The like of which were not created in the (other) cities;

089.009
Y: And with the Thamud (people), who cut out (huge) rocks in the
