
PREFACE OF THE EDITOR OF THE FRENCH EDITION OF 1830.

It is said that truth is generally revealed by dying lips. When men full
of health and enjoying all the pleasures of life, exert themselves
without ceasing, to excite minds and to take advantage of their
fanaticism by wearing the mask of religion, it will not be without
interest or importance to know what other men, invested with the same
ministry, have taught under the impulse of a conscience quickened by the
approach of the final hour. Their confessions are more valuable because
they carry with them the spirit of contrition. It is then that the
truth, which is no longer obscured by narrow passions and sordid
interests, presents itself in all its brilliancy, and imposes upon him
who has kept it hidden during his life, the duty, and even the
necessity, of unveiling it fully at his death. It is then that human
speech, losing in a measure its terrestrial nature, becomes persuasive
and convincing.

We know this fact of a celebrated preacher who in the beginning of the
Revolution stood in the same pulpit which we are pleased to call the
pulpit of truth, and with his hand upon his heart declared that till
then he had taught only falsehood. He did more; he implored his
parishioners to forgive him for the gross errors in which he had kept
them, and congratulated them upon having at last arrived at a period
when it was permitted to establish the empire of reason upon the ruins
of prejudice. Times have changed very much, it is true; however, so long
as the press shall be able to combat the fatal errors of religious
fanaticism, and perhaps even to some extent prevent its violence, it
will be the duty of every friend of humanity to reproduce continually
the full retractions which opposed the sincerity and conscience of the
dying to the bad faith and hypocritical avidity of the living. Guided by
this intention, and ashamed to see the human race, in a land just freed
from the yoke of prejudice, give birth to a disgraceful juggling which
will terminate in dominating authority, and associate itself with the
persecutions of which our incredulous or dissenting ancestors were the
sad victims, we believe it useful to reprint the last lessons of a
priest--an honest man--bequeathed to his fellow-citizens and to posterity.
The service we render to Philosophy will be so much the greater when we
can consider as immutable, perpetual, permanent, and ready to appear in
the hour of need, the edition which we are preparing of "COMMON SENSE,
BY THE PRIEST JEAN MESLIER, AND HIS DYING CONFESSION."

To do justice to these two works, to which we have added analytical
notes, which will greatly facilitate our researches, we will limit
ourselves by giving the imposing approbation of two philosophers of the
eighteenth century--Voltaire and d'Alembert. They certainly understood
much better the sublimity of evangelical morality, and spoke of it in a
manner more worthy of its author, than did those who deified it to
profit by its divinity, and who abused so cruelly the ignorance and
barbarity of the first centuries, to establish, in the interest of their
fortunes and power, so many base prejudices, so many puerile and
superstitious practices.

Here is what Voltaire and d'Alembert thought of the curate Meslier and
of his work. Their letters are presented here in order to excite
curiosity and convince the judgment:


VOLTAIRE TO D'ALEMBERT.

FERNEY, February, 1762.

They have printed in Holland the Testament of Jean Meslier. I trembled
with horror in reading it. The testimony of a priest, who, in dying,
asks God's pardon for having taught Christianity, must be a great weight
in the balance of Liberals. I will send you a copy of this Testament of
the anti-Christ, because you desire to refute it. You have but to tell
me by what manner it will reach you. It is written with great
simplicity, which unfortunately resembles candor.


VOLTAIRE TO THE SAME.

FERNEY, February 25, 1762.

Meslier also has the wisdom of the serpent. He sets an example for you;
the good grain was hidden in the chaff of his book. A good Swiss has
made a faithful abstract and this abstract can do a great deal of good.
What an answer to the insolent fanatics who treat philosophers like
libertines. What an answer to you, wretches that you are, this testimony
of a priest, who asks God's pardon for having been a Christian!


D'ALEMBERT'S ANSWER.

PARIS, March 31, 1762.

A misunderstanding has been the cause, my dear philosopher, that I
received but a few days since the work of Jean Meslier, which you had
sent almost a month ago. I waited till I received it to write to you. It
seems to me that we could inscribe upon the tombstone of this curate:
"Here lies a very honest priest, curate of a village in Champagne, who,
in dying, asks God's pardon for having been a Christian, and who has
proved by this, that ninety-nine sheep and one native of Champagne do
not make a hundred beasts." I suspect that the abstract of his work is
written by a Swiss, who understands French very well, though he affects
to speak it badly. This is neat, earnest, and concise, and I bless the
author of the abstract, whoever he may be. "It is of the Lord to
cultivate the vine." After all, my dear philosopher, a little longer,
and I do not know whether all these books will be necessary, and whether
man will not have enough sense to comprehend by himself that three do
not make one, and that bread is not God. The enemies of reason are
playing a very foolish part at this moment, and I believe that we can
say as in the song:

"To destroy all these people
You should let them alone."

I do not know what will become of the religion of Christ, but its
professors are in false garb. What Pascal, Nicole, and Arnaud could not
do, there is an appearance that three or four absurd and ignorant
fanatics will accomplish. The nation will give this vigorous blow
within, while she is doing so little outside, and we will put in the
abbreviated chronological pages of the year 1762: "This year France lost
all its colonies and expelled the Jesuits." I know nothing but powder,
which with so little apparent force, could produce such great results.


VOLTAIRE TO D'ALEMBERT.

DELICES, July 12, 1762.

It appears to me that the Testament of Jean Meslier has a great effect;
all those who read it are convinced; this man discusses and proves. He
speaks in the moment of death, at the moment when even liars tell the
truth fully. This is the strongest of all arguments. Jean Meslier is to
convert the world. Why is his gospel in so few hands? How lukewarm you
are at Paris! You hide your light under a bushel!


D'ALEMBERT'S ANSWER.

PARIS, July 31, 1762.

You reproach us with lukewarmness, but I believe I have told you already
that the fear of the fagot is very cooling. You would like us to print
the Testament of Jean Meslier and distribute four or five thousand
copies. The infamous fanaticism, for infamous it is, would lose little
or nothing, and we should be treated as fools by those whom we would
have converted. Man is so little enlightened to-day only because we had
the precaution or the good fortune to enlighten him little by little. If
the sun should appear all of a sudden in a cave, the inhabitants would
perceive only the harm it would do their eyes. The excess of light would
result only in blinding them.


D'ALEMBERT TO VOLTAIRE.

PARIS, July 9, 1764.

Apropos, they have lent me that work attributed to St. Evremont, and
which is said to be by Dumarsais, of which you spoke to me some time
ago; it is good, but the Testament of Meslier is still better!


VOLTAIRE TO D'ALEMBERT.

FERNEY, July 16, 1764.

The Testament of Meslier ought to be in the pocket of all honest men; a
good priest, full of candor, who asks God's pardon for deceiving
himself, must enlighten those who deceive themselves.


VOLTAIRE TO THE COUNT D'ARGENTAL.

AUX DELICES, February 6, 1762.

But no little bird told me of the infernal book of that curate, Jean
Meslier; a very important work to the angels of darkness. An excellent
catechism for Beelzebub. Know that this book is very rare; it is a
treasure!


VOLTAIRE TO THE SAME.

AUX DEUCES, May 31, 1762.

It is just that I should send you a copy of the second edition of
Meslier. In the first edition they forgot the preface, which is very
strange. You have wise friends who would not be sorry to have this book
in their secret cabinet. It is excellent to form youthful minds. The
book, which was sold in manuscript form for eight Louis-d'or, is
illegible. This little abstract is very edifying. Let us thank the good
souls who give it gratuitously, and let us pray God to extend His
benedictions upon this useful reading.


VOLTAIRE TO D'AMILAVILLE.

AUX DEUCES, February 8, 1762.

My brother shall have a Meslier soon as I shall have received the order;
it would seem that my brother has not the facts. Fifteen to twenty years
ago the manuscript of this work sold for eight Louis-d'or; it was a very
large quarto. There are more than a hundred copies in Paris. Brother
Thiriot understands the facts. It is not known who made the abstract,
but it is taken wholly, word for word, from the original. There are
still many persons who have seen the curate Meslier. It would be very
useful to make a new edition of this little work in Paris; it can be
done easily in three or four days.


VOLTAIRE TO THE SAME.

FERNEY, December 6, 1762.

But I believe there will never be another impression of the little book
of Meslier. Think of the weight of the testimony of one dying, of a
priest, of a good man.


VOLTAIRE TO THE SAME.

FERNEY, July 6, 1764.

Three hundred Mesliers distributed in a province have caused many
conversions. Ah, if I was assisted!


VOLTAIRE TO THE SAME.

FERNEY, September 29, 1764.

There are too few Mesliers and too many swindlers.


VOLTAIRE TO THE SAME.

AUX DELICES, October 8, 1764.

Names injure the cause; they awaken prejudice. Only the name of Jean
Meslier can do good, because the repentance of a good priest in the hour
of death must make a great impression. This Meslier should be in the
hands of all the world.


VOLTAIRE TO MADAM DE FLORIAN.

AUX DELICES, May 20, 1762.

My dear niece, it is very sad to be so far from you. Read and read again
Jean Meslier; he is a good curate.


VOLTAIRE TO THE MARQUIS D'ARGENCE.

March 2, 1763.

I have found a Testament of Jean Meslier, which I send you. The
simplicity of this man, the purity of his manners, the pardon which he
asks of God, and the authenticity of his book, must produce a great
effect. I will send you as many copies as you want of the Testament of
this good curate.


VOLTAIRE TO HELVETIUS.

AUX DEUCES, May 1, 1763.

They have sent me the two abstracts of Jean Meslier. It is true that it
is written in the style of a carriage-horse, but it is well suited to
the street. And what testimony! that of a priest who asks pardon in
dying, for having taught absurd and horrible things! What an answer to
the platitudes of fanatics who have the audacity to assert that
philosophy is but the fruit of libertinage!






End of Project Gutenberg's Superstition In All Ages (1732), by Jean Meslier

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUPERSTITION IN ALL AGES (1732) ***

***** This file should be named 17607.txt or 17607.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/7/6/0/17607/

Produced by Gary Klein

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.

