expresses what we term a 'Service.' The word for prayer in the ordinary
sense is 'Du'a.'

[189] It is taken from the Sirat-un-Najat, pp. 30-33.

[190] As the use of bells is unlawful a man is employed to call the people
to prayers.

[191] "God is Great."

[192] The followers of Imam As-Shafa'i and the women of all sects place the
hands upon the breast. The feet should be about four inches apart; women
stand with the feet close together.

[193] The second rak'at begins here: all that precedes is only repeated at
the first rak'at.

[194] A fixed portion is said in each rak'at during the nights of Ramazan,
which portion is then called a ruku'. (Ante. p. 57.)

[195] In a mosque the Imam says the first sentences alone; the people the
second.

[196] Women in the Sijda keep all the limbs of the body close together, and
put both feet at right angles to the body. If their face is Qibla-wards it
is sufficient.

[197] Here the Shia'hs say:--"I rise and sit by the power of God."

[198] This is said at the close of every two rak'ats.

[199] The Shia'hs stop here and omit the rest.

[200] The Shia'hs omit the Du'a and say: "Peace be on thee, O Prophet, with
the mercy of God and His blessing. Peace be on us and on God's righteous
servants."

[201] The Fatva, or decree, will be found in a note at the end of this
chapter.

[202] I am indebted to Hughes' Notes on Muhammadanism for this excellent
table.

[203] The Musalli may say five or three witr rak'ats instead of seven.

[204] Nur-ul-Hidaayat, p. 155.

[205] In countries under Muslim rule he holds a wooden sword reversed.

[206] One who says, "Allahu Akbar--God is Great."

[207] A reference to his presence with Muhammad in the cave (ghar) when
they fled from Mecca to Madina. See Sura ix. 40.

[208] Nur-ul-Hidayat, p. 153.

[209] Sirat-un-Najat, p. 40.

[210] Qiam is one of the positions in a Namaz and is here used by
synecdoche for it. In Mecca the Salat-ut-Tarawih is called with reference
to this Tradition the Salat-ul-Qiamiah.

[211] Nur-ul-Hidayat, p. 141.

[212] That is, a non-Muslim who is allowed to reside in a Musalman State on
payment of a special tax.

[213] The Shafa'ites raise the hands at the recital of each of the four
Takbirs; the other sects do so only at the first.

[214] If the deceased was a child or a mad person, they say:--

"O God, make him (or her, as the case may be) a guide for us, and make him
a cause of our gaining a future reward. O God, save him and make him an
intercessor for us."

[215] The Imam makes the Niyyat in his mind that the Salam may be on his
guardian angels, and on the worshippers who are behind him; each worshipper
makes the Niyyat that the Salam may be on his guardian angels, on his
fellow worshippers and on the Imam.

[216] _i.e._, the deceased's.

[217] Death, resurrection, judgment; &c.

[218] This contradicts verse 254 of this Sura. Muslims explain it thus. We
accept all prophets and as regards _faith_ in them make no difference,
though as regards _dignity_ we recognize the distinction indicated in the
254th verse.

[219] That is, the Jews and Christians, on whom, it is said by the Muslim
Commentators, many strict ceremonial observances were incumbent. The word
often used to express the idea of the burdensome nature of ceremonial
observance is taklilif, trouble. Practically, Muslims are not free from
these "loads," a fact which finds expression in the word used for a pious
man--a mukhallif, one who has to take trouble in the way of performing
religious duties.

[220] In Madras, a branch of the pomegranate tree is usually stuck in.

[221] The name of the mother is here inserted. The mother's name is chosen
in preference to that of the father, as there can be no doubt as to the
maternity of the child. For the same reason it is said that at the Last Day
each man will be summoned as such an one, son of such a mother. This simple
fact reveals a sad state of morals, or, at least, a disbelief in the virtue
of women.

[222] The idea is that the reward of this act is transferred to the person
on whose behalf it is made.

[223] Sura ii. 256.

[224] There are others who maintain that this is a _mukham_ statement and
cannot therefore be abrogated. They hold that it must be restricted to the
aged and to persons who have chronic diseases. Tafsir-i-Husaini, p. 30.
Tafsir-i-Faiz-ul-Karim, p. 120.

[225] Burton says that, when in the disguise of a Musalman doctor he was in
Cairo making preparations for the Hajj, he had but one patient who would
break his fast to save his life. All the others refused though death should
be the consequence.

[226] "The former are called Zakat, either because they increase a man's
store by drawing down a blessing on him and produce in his soul the virtue
of liberality, or because they purify the remaining part of one's substance
from pollution and the soul from the filth of avarice; the latter are
called Sadqa because they are a proof of a man's sincerity in the worship
of God." Sale's Preliminary Discourse, Section iv.

[227] That is food or money sufficient to provide one meal for a poor
person.

[228] The technical term is 5 wasq. A wasq is equal to 60 sa', and a sa' is
equal to 8 ratal. A ratal is equal to 1 lb; so a wasq, a load for one
camel, is about 480 lb.

[229] Mosques are usually endowed. The property thus set apart is called
waqf. This supports the various officials connected with a Mosque.

[230] The two famous disciples of Imam Abu Hanifa, Abu Yusuf and Muhammad.

[231] This ceremony is called Al-Ihram (_i.e._, making unlawful), because
now various actions and pursuits must be abstained from. The ceremony of
doffing the pilgrim's garb is called Al-Ihlal (_i.e._, making lawful), for
now the pilgrim returns to the ordinary pursuits and joys of a life in the
world.

[232] This statement of names is taken from the Nur-ul-Hidayat p. 211, and
that of the distance from Hughes' Notes on Islam; but Burton speaks of Al
Zaribah, a place 47 miles distant from Mecca as a Miqat. It was there that
he assumed the Ihram. The explanation probably is that a Haji must not
approach nearer to Mecca without the Ihram than the places named in the
text. The farther from Mecca it is assumed, provided that it be during one
of the two months preceding Zu'l-Hajja, the more meritorious is the act.

[233] Talbiyah means the repetition of "Labbaik," a phrase equivalent to "I
am here." The Talbiyah can be said in any language, though Arabic is
preferred. It usually is as follows: "Labbaik, Allahumma, Labbaik! La
Sharika laka, Labbaik! Inna-l-hamda wa-n-ni'amata laka, w'-al-mulk! La
Sharika laka, Labbaik!

[234] "The object of these minute details is that the "Truce of God" may be
kept." The five noxious creatures, however, may be slain, _viz._, a crow, a
kite, a scorpion, a rat and a biting dog." (Burton).

[235] The Musjid-ul-Haram is the large Mosque in Mecca. The K'aba (cube) is
a square stone building in the centre. This is also called the Qibla. The
Hajr-ul-Aswad is the black stone fixed in the corner of the K'aba.

[236] It is said to have been rebuilt ten times. A full description will be
found in Burton's Pilgrimage to Madina and Mecca, vol. iii. ch. 26. It is
far too long to quote, and it cannot be condensed. The following extract is
of some interest, as it states why the 'Ulama consider the K'aba so sacred
a place. They quote the verse: 'Verily the first house built for mankind
(to worship in) is that in Beccah (Mecca)--Blessed and a salvation to human
beings. Therein are manifest signs, even the standing-place of Abraham, and
he who entereth is safe.' (Sura iii. 90). The word 'therein' is said to
mean Mecca, and the "manifest signs" the K'aba, which contains such marvels
as the footprints on Abraham's platform, and is the spiritual safeguard of
all who enter it. In addition, other "signs" are the preservation of the
black stone, the miracles put forth to defend the House, the terrible death
of the sacrilegious, and the fact that in the Flood the big fish did not
eat the little fish in the Haram. Invalids recover their health by rubbing
themselves against the Kiswat (the covering of the K'aba), and the black
stone. One hundred thousand mercies descend on it every day, &c. Portions
of the Kiswat are highly valued as markers for the Quran. Waistcoats made
of it are supposed to render the combatant invulnerable in battle.

[237] The whole seven are one Usbu'.

[238] The Maqam-i-Ibrahim is a small building, supported, by six pillars
about eight feet high, four of which are surrounded from top to bottom by a
fine iron railing, while the space between the two hinder pillars is left
open; within the railing is a frame about five feet square, said to contain
the sacred stone on which Abraham sat when he built the K'aba.

[239] In the first rak'at, the chapter usually recited is Sura cix; in the
second, Sura cxii.

[240] "Many find this inconvenient and so pass on to 'Arifat during the
afternoon of the eighth day" (Burton).

[241] The following legend is current about 'Arifat. "When our parents
forfeited heaven by eating wheat, which deprived them of their primeval
purity, they were cast down upon earth. The serpent descended at Ispahan,
the peacock at Cabul, Satan at Bilbays, Eve upon 'Arifat and Adam at
Ceylon. The latter determining to seek his wife, began a journey, to which
the earth owes its present mottled appearance. Wherever he placed his
foot--which was large--a town arose; between the strides will always be
country. Wandering for many years he came to the Mountain of mercy, where
our common mother was continually calling upon his name, and their
recognition gave the place the name of 'Arifat. They lived here till death
took place." (Burton).

[242] The Shafa'i rules allow a traveller any time when on a journey of a
night and day to reduce the five Namaz to three by joining some. The Hanafi
code allows the shortened form only on this day.

[243] "The Shaitan-ul-Kabir is a dwarf buttress of rude masonry about eight
feet high, by two and a half broad, placed against a rough wall of stones."
(Burton).

[244] Most of the ceremonies connected with the Hajj, the Ihram, the
shaving of the head, the going to Safa and Marwah, the throwing of the
stones, the circuit of the K'aba, the kissing of the black stone, and the
sacrifice were all pagan ceremonies performed by the idolatrous Arabs.
Muhammad by his time-serving policy, adopted to gain the Meccans to his
side, has confirmed an idolatrous practice which otherwise would probably
have been extinct long ago. Safa and Marwah were hills held in
superstitious reverence by the Meccans. The early Muslims had some doubt
about retaining them as sacred places: then came the revelation to the
Prophet, "Safa and Marwah are among the monuments of God, whosoever then
maketh a pilgrimage to the temple or visiteth it, shall not be to blame if
he go round about them both." (Sura ii. 153).

[245] These are the letters contained in words which direct the reader when
to pause. Thus toi stands for mutlaq (slight pause), qif (pause), jim for
ja,iz (freedom to pause, or not to pause), la for no (no pause), mim for
la'zim (necessary to pause), (.) is a full stop.

[246] Persian was the foreign language with which the early Muslims were
brought most into contact; but the objection applies equally to any other
language.

[247] A concession of no practical value, as any one with the power of
speech could learn these words in a very short time.

[248] This is because by so doing it would seem to ascribe to it similarity
to human compositions.

[249] During the first ten days they are supposed to contain the bodies of
the martyrs, but now being empty the Tazias become mere ordinary frames and
can be destroyed, Qanun-i-Islam, p. 146.

[250] This feast is known in South India as the Dassara. The idol is thrown
into a tank.

[251] The Mihrab is a niche in a wall which indicates the position of
Mecca. The face is always turned to it when prayers are said; so that the
expression in the prayer means that 'Ali is to be the object toward which
the faithful look.

[252] The twelve Imams, Muhammad and Fatima.

[253] The 'Id-gah is usually built outside of the town, and consists of a
long wall of masonry with two minarets and a large raised open court. There
is a Mihrab in the wall: but no proper mimbar or pulpit, three raised steps
doing duty for it. Sometimes, however, a Mosque is used as an 'Id-gah.

[254] Tradition records that the Prophet, after the battle of Ohud, was one
day ascending a hill in a rage. The heat of his passion was such that the
mountain softened into the consistence of wax and retained, some say
eighteen; others, forty impressions of his feet. When rebuked by Gabriel
for his anger the Prophet enquired the cause of his rebuke. Gabriel told
him to look around. The Prophet seeing these impressions of his feet on the
stones was astonished. His anger instantly ceased. Qanun-i-Islam, p. 152.

[255] The Baqr-'Id is the only other feast that has an 'Arfa.

[256] Mishkat-ul-Musabih, Book vii. ch. 1.

[257] That is, his blessing or his curse takes effect. Qanun-i-Islam p.
170.

[258] This is a warning to those who may have omitted this duty.

[259] Khutbaha-i-Muhtarjam, p. 104.

[260] "Observations on the Musalmans of India." Mrs. Mir Husan 'Ali, p.
192."

[261] The opinion of the various Traditionists on this point is given in
the Nur-ul-Hidayah, vol. iv. p. 61.

[262] Still it is mustahab, or a meritorious act so to do. It is also said
that, if a minor is possessed of property, his father or his guardian may
purchase at his expense an animal and sacrifice it. The child may then eat
as much as it can. The remainder of the meat must be exchanged for
something which the child can use, such as clothes, shoes, &c.
Nur-ul-Hidayah, vol. iv. p. 60.

[263] According to the Imams Shafa'i and Malik no one must offer up the
sacrifice until the Imam who has officiated at the previous Namaz has slain
his victim. Nur-ul-Hidayah, vol. iv. p. 61.

[264] Arayish-i-Mahfil p. 144.

       *       *       *       *       *

Corrections made to printed original.

Page 29 "It is moreover the unanimous opinion" - 'moveover' in original.

Page 33 "the Imam-i-A'zam or great Imam" - Imam-i-'Azam in original,
corrected by Errata.

Page 40 "This is technically called Ilka" - Ilka in original, corrected by
Errata.

Page 91 "Sa'di in the Bustan says" - Bustun in original, corrected by
Errata.

Page 92 "the famous Maulana Jelal-ud-din Rumi" - Maolana in original,
corrected by Errata.

Page 93 "It is Fana--extinction." - Fana in original, corrected by Errata.

Page 188 "a still lower class of action which are mubah." - mubah in
original, corrected by Errata.

Page 190 "(12) the whole head must be rubbed once" - '(13)' in original.

Page 192 "A man one day came to the Prophet" - 'come' in original.

Page 218 "Islam, Hurriat (freedom) and Nisab (stock)." - Hurriat in
original, corrected by Errata.

Note 133 "Also Takmil-ul-Iman, p. 64." - Tamil-ul-Iman in original,
corrected by Errata.

