dead. The Kingdom of Heaven is the divinely ordained system of
government and dominion in all matters, temporal and spiritual; this
will be established on earth only when its rightful Head, the King of
kings, Jesus the Christ, comes to reign. His administration will be one
of order, operated through the agency of His commissioned
representatives invested with the Holy Priesthood. When Christ appears
in His glory, and not before, will be realized a complete fulfilment of
the supplication: "Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven."

The Kingdom of God has been established among men to prepare them for
the Kingdom of Heaven which shall come; and in the blessed reign of
Christ the King shall the two be made one. The relationship between them
has been revealed to the Church in this wise:

    "Hearken, and lo, a voice as of one from on high, who is mighty
    and powerful, whose going forth is unto the ends of the earth,
    yea, whose voice is unto men--Prepare ye the way of the Lord,
    make his paths straight. The keys of the kingdom of God are
    committed unto man on the earth, and from thence shall the
    gospel roll forth unto the ends of the earth, as the stone which
    is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until
    it has filled the whole earth; Yea, a voice crying--Prepare ye
    the way of the Lord, prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make
    ready for the Bridegroom; Pray unto the Lord, call upon his holy
    name, make known his wonderful works among the people; Call upon
    the Lord, that his kingdom may go forth upon the earth, that the
    inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days
    to come, in the which the Son of man shall come down in heaven,
    clothed in the brightness of his glory, to meet the kingdom of
    God which is set up on the earth; Wherefore may the kingdom of
    God go forth, that the kingdom of heaven may come, that thou, O
    God, mayest be glorified in heaven so on earth, that thy enemies
    may be subdued for thine is the honour, power and glory, for
    ever and ever. Amen."[1586]


THE MILLENNIUM.

The inauguration of Christ's reign on earth is to be the beginning of a
period that shall be distinct in many important particulars from all
precedent and subsequent time; and the Lord shall reign with His people
a thousand years. The government of individuals, communities and nations
throughout this Millennium is to be that of a perfect theocracy, with
Jesus the Christ as Lord and King. The more wicked part of the race
shall have been destroyed; and during the period Satan shall be bound
"that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years
should be fulfilled"; while the just shall share with Christ in rightful
rule and dominion. The righteous dead shall have come forth from their
graves, while the wicked shall remain unresurrected until the thousand
years be past.[1587] Men yet in the flesh shall mingle with immortalized
beings; children shall grow to maturity and then die in peace or be
changed to immortality "in the twinkling of an eye."[1588] There shall
be surcease of enmity between man and beast; the venom of serpents and
the ferocity of the brute creation shall be done away, and love shall be
the dominant power of control. Among the earliest revelations on the
subject is that given to Enoch; and in this the return of that prophet
and his righteous people with Christ in the last days was thus assured:

    "And the Lord said unto Enoch: Then shalt thou and all thy city
    meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and
    they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they
    shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other; And
    there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall
    come forth out of all the creations which I have made; and for
    the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest. And it came
    to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the Son of Man,
    in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for the
    space of a thousand years."[1589]

In these latter days the Lord has thus spoken, requiring preparation for
the Millennial era, and describing in part the glories thereof:

    "And prepare for the revelation which is to come, when the veil
    of the covering of my temple, in my tabernacle, which hideth the
    earth, shall be taken off, and all flesh shall see me together.
    And every corruptible thing, both of man, or of the beasts of
    the field, or of the fowls of the heavens, or of the fish of the
    sea, that dwell upon all the face of the earth, shall be
    consumed; And also that of element shall melt with fervent heat;
    and all things shall become new, that my knowledge and glory may
    dwell upon all the earth. And in that day the enmity of man, and
    the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease
    from before my face. And in that day whatsoever any man shall
    ask, it shall be given unto him. And in that day Satan shall not
    have power to tempt any man. And there shall be no sorrow
    because there is no death. In that day an infant shall not die
    until he is old, and his life shall be as the age of a tree, and
    when he dies he shall not sleep, (that is to say in the earth,)
    but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be
    caught up, and his rest shall be glorious. Yea, verily I say
    unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal
    all things."[1590]

The Millennium is to precede the time designated in scriptural phrase
"the end of the world." When the thousand years are passed, Satan shall
be loosed for a little season, and the final test of man's integrity to
God shall ensue. Such as are prone to impurity of heart shall yield to
temptation while the righteous shall endure to the end.[1591] A
revelation to this effect was given the Church in 1831, in part as
follows:

    "For the great Millennium, of which I have spoken by the mouth
    of my servants, shall come; For Satan shall be bound, and when
    he is loosed again, he shall only reign for a little season, and
    then cometh the end of the earth; And he that liveth in
    righteousness shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and
    the earth shall pass away so as by fire; And the wicked shall go
    away into unquenchable fire, and their end no man knoweth on
    earth, nor ever shall know, until they come before me in
    judgment. Hearken ye to these words: Behold, I am Jesus Christ,
    the Saviour of the world. Treasure these things up in your
    hearts, and let the solemnities of eternity rest upon your
    minds."[1592]


THE CELESTIAL CONSUMMATION.

The vanquishment of Satan and his hosts shall be complete. The dead,
small and great, all who have breathed the breath of life on earth,
shall be resurrected--every soul that has tabernacled in flesh, whether
good or evil--and shall stand before God, to be judged according to the
record as written in the books.[1593] So shall be brought to glorious
consummation the mission of the Christ. "Then cometh the end, when he
shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he
shall have put down all rule and all authority and power. For he must
reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death. For he hath put all things under his
feet."[1594] Then shall the Lord Jesus "deliver up the kingdom, and
present it unto the Father spotless, saying--I have overcome and have
trodden the wine-press alone, even the winepress of the fierceness of
the wrath of Almighty God. Then shall he be crowned with the crown of
his glory, to sit on the throne of his power to reign for ever and
ever."[1595] The earth shall pass to its glorified and celestialized
condition, an eternal abode for the exalted sons and daughters of
God.[1596] Forever shall they reign, kings and priests to the Most High,
redeemed, sanctified, and exalted through their Lord and God

    JESUS THE CHRIST.


NOTES TO CHAPTER 42.

1. Enoch, spoken of by Jude as "the seventh from Adam." was the father
of Methuselah. In Genesis 5:24 we read: "And Enoch walked with God; and
he was not; for God took him." From the Lord's revelation to Moses we
learn that Enoch was a mighty man, favored of God because of his
righteousness, and a leader of and revelator to his people. Through his
agency a city was built, the inhabitants of which excelled in righteous
living to such an extent that they were of one heart and one mind and
had no poor among them. It was called the City of Holiness or Zion. The
residue of the race were all corrupt in the sight of the Lord. Enoch and
his people were taken from the earth and are to return with Christ at
His coming. (P. of G.P., Moses 7:12-21, 68, 69; compare Doc. and Cov.
45:11, 12.)

2. Heathen in the First Resurrection.--"And then shall the heathen
nations be redeemed, and they that knew no law shall have part in the
first resurrection; and it shall be tolerable for them." (Doc. and Cov.
45:54.) Such is the word of the Lord with respect to those benighted
peoples who live and die in ignorance of the laws of the gospel. This
affirmation is sustained by other scriptures, and by a consideration of
the principles of true justice according to which humanity is to be
judged. Man shall be accounted blameless or guilty according to his
deeds as interpreted in the light of the law under which he is required
to live. It is inconsistent with our conception of a just God to believe
Him capable of inflicting condemnation upon any one for non-compliance
with a requirement of which the person had no knowledge. Nevertheless,
the laws of the gospel cannot be suspended even in the case of those who
have sinned in darkness and ignorance; but it is reasonable to believe
that the plan of redemption shall afford such benighted ones an
opportunity of learning the laws of God; and, as fast as they so learn,
will obedience be required on pain of the penalty. See _Articles of
Faith_, xxi:33.

3. Regeneration of the Earth.--In speaking of the graded and progressive
glories provided for His creations, and of the laws of regeneration and
sanctification, the Lord has thus spoken through revelation in the
present dispensation: "And again, verily I say unto you, the earth
abideth the law of a celestial kingdom, for it filleth the measure of
its creation, and transgresseth not the law. Wherefore it shall be
sanctified; yea, notwithstanding it shall die, it shall be quickened
again, and shall abide the power by which it is quickened, and the
righteous shall inherit it." (Doc. and Cov. 88:25, 26.) This appointed
change, by which the earth shall pass to the condition of a
celestialized world, is referred to in numerous scriptures as the
institution of "a new heaven and a new earth" (Rev. 21:1, 3, 4; B. of
M., Ether 13:9; Doc. and Cov. 29:23).

FOOTNOTES:

[1551] Acts 1:11.

[1552] Pages 713, 715, 761, and 774; see also Doc. and Cov. 110:8;
compare 36:8; 42:36; 97:15, 16; 109:5; 124:27; 133:2.

[1553] Jude 14, 15; compare Gen. 5:18; see next reference following.

[1554] P. of G.P., Moses 7:59, 60, 65. Note 1, end of chapter.

[1555] Isa. 35:4; and 40:10; see also Psalms 50:3; Mal. 3:1; 4:5, 6;
compare Note 1 on page 149 herein.

[1556] Matt. 16:27.

[1557] Mark 8:38; compare Luke 9:26.

[1558] Matt. 26:64.

[1559] Matt. 24:3; Mark 13:26; Luke 21:7; Acts 1:6; compare page 149
herein.

[1560] Matt. 24; see chapters 32 and 40 herein.

[1561] See Acts 3:20, 21; 1 Cor. 4:5; 11:26; Philip. 3:20; 1 Thess.
1:10; 2:19; 3:13; 4:15-18; 2 Thess. 2:1, 8; 1 Tim. 6:14, 15; Titus 2:13;
James 5:7, 8; 1 Peter 1:5-7; 4:13; 1 John 2:28; 3:2; Jude 14, etc.

[1562] B. of M., 3 Nephi 26:3, 4.

[1563] B. of M., 3 Nephi 28:7, 8; see also 29:2.

[1564] Doc. and Cov. 29:9-11.

[1565] Doc. and Cov. 33:17, 18.

[1566] Doc. and Cov. 34:4-8.

[1567] Doc. and Cov. 45:37-44; compare this section with Matt. 24, and
Luke 21:5-36. See also Doc. and Cov. 49:23-28.

[1568] Doc. and Cov. 64:23-25.

[1569] Matt. 24:36; compare Mark 13:32-37; see pages 575, 696 herein.

[1570] Doc. and Cov. 49:7; the context shows that the words are those of
the Father.

[1571] Thess. 5:2; 2 Peter 3:10; compare Matt. 24:43, 44; 25:13; Luke
12:39, 40; page 575 herein.

[1572] Page 573.

[1573] Doc. and Cov. 49:24, 25.

[1574] Doc. and Cov. 45:68-71.

[1575] Doc. and Cov. 133:7-14, 21-35; "Articles of Faith," xviii and
xix.

[1576] Doc. and Cov. 88:86-92.

[1577] Doc. and Cov. 110:14, 16; compare Joel 2:31; Mal. 4:5; B. of M.,
3 Nephi 25:5.

[1578] Doc and Cov. 29:11-17.

[1579] 1 Thess. 4:14-17.

[1580] B. of M., 3 Nephi 28:8; see page 738 herein.

[1581] Doc. and Cov. 88:95-98.

[1582] Note 2, end of chapter.

[1583] Doc. and Cov. 29:12.

[1584] Doc. and Cov. 29:12; compare Matt. 19:28; Luke 22:30; page 479
herein.

[1585] B. of M., 3 Nephi 27:27; compare 1 Nephi 12:9, 10; Mormon 3:18.
19.

[1586] Doc. and Cov. 65. For a fuller treatment of this subject as also
the distinction between Church and Kingdom, see "Articles of Faith,"
xx:16-26.

[1587] Rev. 20:1-6; compare Doc. and Cov. 43:18.

[1588] Doc. and Cov. 63:50-51; 101:30; compare 1 Cor. 15:51-57.

[1589] P. of G.P., Moses 7:63-65.

[1590] Doc. and Cov. 101:23-32; compare Isa. 65:17-25 and 11:6-9; see
also Doc. and Cov. 29:11, 22; 43:30; 63:51.

[1591] Rev. 20:7-15.

[1592] Doc and Cov. 43:30-34. See also "Articles of Faith," xx:27-31.

[1593] Rev. 20:11-15.

[1594] 1 Cor. 15:24-27.

[1595] Doc. and Cov. 76:107, 108.

[1596] Note 3, end of chapter.




INDEX

Aaronic Priesthood, restored by John the Baptist, 768;
  its powers, 768.

Ablutions, ceremonial, 366.

Abraham, Children of, 409.

Abraham, Christ's seniority over, 410, 411.

Aceldama, the field of blood, 643.

Adam, the first man, 18;
  his transgression, 19;
  revelation to, 44.

Adulteress brought to Christ, 405.

Adulterous generation of sign-seekers, 270, 279, 359.

Agency, free, of unembodied spirits, 8, 17;
  of man, 17, 29.

American Indians, progenitors of, 49, 56, 742, 757.

Ananias, ministers to Saul, 714.

Andrew, follows Christ, 140;
  one of the Twelve, 221.

Annas, high priest, 621, 643.

Announcement of Christ by the Father, 39, 126, 371, 725, 761;
  of Christ's birth to shepherds, 93.
  See Annunciation.

Annunciation by Gabriel, to Zacharias, 76;
  to Mary the Virgin, 79;
  by angel to shepherds, 93.

Antemortal Godship of Jesus Christ, 32.

Antemortal state, graded intelligences in, 14.

Antipas, Herod, 110, 118, 446, 635.

Antonia, tower or fortress of, 441.

Apostasy, the great, 745;
  among Nephites, 741.

Apostles, the Twelve, chosen and ordained, 217;
  individually considered, 218;
  general characteristics of, 226;
  compared with disciples, 227;
  charged and sent forth, 327, 328;
  their return, 331;
  futile attempt of to heal, 379;
  as stewards, 441, 576;
  Christ's final commission to, 695, 696;
  imprisoned, 707;
  delivered by an angel, 707;
  scourged for their testimony, 709.

Apostleship, 227, 228;
  restored in present dispensation, 769.

Apostolic ministry, the, 700;
  close of, 716.

Appearances of the risen Lord to mortals before the ascension, 699.

Archelaus, 110, 118.

Arrest of Jesus, attempted but unaccomplished, 403;
  effected through betrayal, 614.

Ascension, Christ's, 697.

Ass, Christ rides upon, 514;
  as predicted, 517.

Athanasius, creed of, 756.

Atonement, the, a vicarious sacrifice, 21.

Authority, in Holy Priesthood, 362;
  of Elias and Elijah, 375;
  of Twelve, attested, 392;
  of Christ, challenged, 530;
  Christ as one having, 249;
  Christ's ascribed to Beelzebub, 265.


Baptism, by John the Baptist, 122, 163, 531;
  of Christ by John, 125;
  enjoined upon Nephites by Christ, 725;
  mode of, 726;
  of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, 768;
  as required in the Church today, 769.

Baptist, see John the Baptist.

Barabbas, 637.

Barnabas, sponsor for Saul or Paul, 714.

Bartholomew, see Nathanael.

Bartimeus, healed of blindness, 505.

Beatitudes, the, 230.

Beelzebub, Christ's authority ascribed to, 265.

Benedictus, the, 78.

Bethany, Jesus at, 432, 448;
  the family home at, 522.

Bethesda, Pool of, 206.

Bethlehem, birthplace of Christ, 92;
  slaughter of children in, 100.

Bethphage, 512, 526.

Bethsaida, 258, 332, 346;
  Julias, 360.

Betrayal of Christ; foretold, 594;
  effected by Judas Iscariot, 614.

Betrothal, Jewish, 88.

Blasphemy, 201;
  Christ charged with, 193, 489;
  Christ falsely convicted of, 629.

Blessing of children, 485;
  among Nephites, 730.

Blindness, bodily and spiritual, 412, 416.

Bloody sweat, Christ's, 612;
  reality of affirmed, 613, 620.

Book of Mormon, original of, 742, 767.

Bountiful, Land of, 724.

Bread of Life, Jesus Christ the, 340.

Bridegroom, friend of the, 171.

Brother of Jared, 12.

Burial of Jesus, 664.


Caesar, paying tribute to, 545;
  Jews would have no king but, 641, 648.

Caesarea Philippi, coasts of, 368;
  Palestina, 631.

Caiaphas, high priest;
  his inspired utterance, 498;
  his tenure of office, 501;
  Christ before, 621;
  the apostles before, 706.

Called and chosen, 540.

Calvary, 654, 667.

Camel and needle's eye, 478, 485.

Capernaum, 181, 186;
  our Lord's last sermon in synagog at, 339.

Capitation tax, 383.

Celestial marriage, 564.

Cephas, see Peter.

Ceremonial ablutions, 366.

Child, as a little, 386;
  humility illustrated by a, 387.

Childlike and childish, distinction between, 387.

Children, precious in sight of God, 387;
  blessed by Christ, 475, 485;
  of Nephites blessed by risen Lord, 729.

Chorazin, woe decreed to, 258.

Chosen or only called, 540.

Christ, see Jesus Christ.

Christ and Messiah, significance of the titles, 36.

Christians, early persecutions of, 746.

Church discipline of individuals, 391.

Church of England, origin of, 751;
  affirms great apostasy, 753.

Church of Jesus Christ;
  foundation of, 361;
  rapid growth of Primitive, 705, 707, 712;
  name of, 736;
  among Nephites, 737;
  of Latter-day Saints, establishment of, 769.

Churches of man's making, 752.

Circumcision, 88.

Clay, applied to blind man's eyes, 413.

Clearing of the temple, the first, 153;
  the second, 527.

Cleopas, 685.

Coasts, as descriptive term, 368.

Coin, image and superscription on, 546, 563;
  in mouth of a fish, 385.

Columbus, Christopher, his mission, 754, 757.

Comforter promised, 603, 606;
  given, 702.

Commandment, the great, 549.

Common ownership, 705, 718.

Common people, attentive to hear Christ, 529.

Confession, the great, 361.

Congenital blindness healed, 413.

Consent, common, observed in Primitive Church, 702, 718;
  in the Church today, 778.

Consistency of Church's claims, 779.

Conspiracy of Pharisees and Herodians, 544.

Constantine the Great, gives state recognition to Christianity, 746.

Constitution of the United States, a necessary preliminary to the
  restoration of the gospel, 755.

Consummation, the celestial, 792.

Contention forbidden, 726.

Corban, 352, 366.

Corner stone, Jesus the chief, 535, 706.

Cost, counting the, 452.

Council, the Jewish, see Sanhedrin.

Council in Heaven, primeval, 9, 15.

Court of the Women, in temple, 407, 422.

Cowdery, Oliver, ordained with Joseph Smith, 767;
  witness of heavenly manifestations, 774.

Creator, Jesus Christ the, 33.

Creed of Athanasius, 756.

Cross, figurative, 365;
  of Christ, borne by Simon, 653.

Crucifixion, 655, 667;
  of Jesus Christ, 654;
  hour of, 668.

Cumorah, scene of last Nephite battle, 742;
  Book of Mormon plates taken from, 767.

Cups and platters, ceremonial cleansing of, 437.


Dark ages, the, 749.

Daughters of Jerusalem, Christ's lamentation over, 653, 666.

David, Son of, see Son of David.

Dead, gospel preached to, 24;
  ministered unto by Jesus Christ, 672, 673;
  missionary labor amongst, 674;
  vicarious labor for in Church today, 777.

Death, inaugurated by Satan, 20;
  overcome by the atonement of Christ, 20;
  and resurrection of Christ predicted, 381, 382,
  accomplished, 662, 678.

Decapolis, 367;
  Jesus in coasts of, 356.

Dedication, feast of, 487, 499;
  Jesus at, 487.

Defilement, things that cause, 352.

Degeneracy, bodily, incident to the fall of man, 19, 29.

Demoniacal possession, 183.

Demons, acclaim the Christ, 181, 310, 312.

Devil, Jesus charged as possessed of a, 401, 411.

Didrachm, 383.

Disciples and apostles, 227.

Disciples, instructed, 438, 461;
  requirements of, 452.

Discipline of individuals in Church, 391.

Disembodied spirits, Christ among, 670.

Dispensation of fulness of times, 777;
  ushered in, 763.

Dives and Lazarus, 483.

Divorce and marriage, 473;
  views concerning, 484.

Doctrine, test of the Lord's, 400, 421;
  Christ's, as declared to Nephites, 726.

Dogs that eat of the crumbs, 367.

Door to the sheepfold, Christ the, 417.

Dove, sign of, 126, 150.

Dust, shaking from feet as a testimony, 345.


Earth, regeneration of, 322, 793.

Eating, spiritual symbolism of, 343, 347;
  with unwashen hands, 351.

Ecce Homo, 639.

Egypt, flight into, 100;
  return from, 110.

Elders and high priests, 644.

Elias, John Baptist and, 374;
  and Elijah, 375;
  spirit and power of, 376;
  appearing of in Kirtland Temple, 775.

Elijah, and Moses at transfiguration, 371;
  and Elias, 375;
  appearance of in Kirtland Temple, 775.

Elisabeth, mother of John the Baptist, 75, 78;
  visited by Mary the Virgin, 82.

Elohim, 38.

Emmaus, Christ and two disciples journey to, 685.

Enoch, 44, 143, 793;
  promise to, relating to Christ's second coming, 790.

Enrolment at Bethlehem, 91.

Ephraim, Jesus in retirement at, 498.

Essenes, 67.

Estate of man, first and second, 7.

Eternal Father, The, a resurrected, exalted Being, 143, 151.

Eve, beguiled by Satan, 19.

Evenings, earlier and later, 346.


Faith, active, as compared with passive belief, 319;
  a gift from God, 347;
  quality of, 381;
  nothing impossible to, 395;
  in behalf of others, 395;
  as to quantity and quality, 469;
  of Nephites, strong, 733.

Fall of man 19;
  a process of bodily degeneracy, 19;
  redemption from wrought by Jesus Christ, 20, 31.

Fasting and prayer, power gained by, 381.

Father, the Eternal, proclaims the Son, Jesus Christ, 126, 371;
  to Nephites, 725;
  to Joseph Smith, 761.

Feast, of Dedication, 487, 499;
  of Tabernacles, 400, 419;
  of the Passover, 112, 167;
  the traditional Messianic, 538.

Few or many to be saved, 445.

Fig tree, 541;
  cursed, 524;
  symbol of Judaism, 527;
  and other trees, lesson from, 754;
  as a type in modern revelation, 784.

First may be last, 478.

Fishers of men, 197, 202.

Foreknowledge of God, not a determining cause, 18, 28.

Foreordination of Jesus Christ, 6.

Forgiveness, duty respecting, 391;
  unlimited requirement of, 393;
  mutual, 525.

Fox, Herod Antipas referred to as, 446, 636.

Free agency, of unembodied spirits, 8, 17;

  of man, 17, 29.


Gabriel's annunciation, of John and of Jesus, 75;
  to Mary the Virgin, 79.

Gadarenes and Gergesenes, land of, 323.

Galilean ministry, beginning of, 144;
  close of, 398.

Galileans, 68;
  slain in temple courts, 441.

Galilee, sea of, 165;
  the risen Lord appears at sea of, 691;
  appears on mountain in, 694.

Gamaliel, his advice to the council, 709;
  tutor to Saul of Tarsus, 712.

Genealogies of Christ, 85, 89.

Gennesaret, sea or lake of, 165.

Gentiles, 345;
  to become great on western continent, 733.

Gergesenes and Gadarenes, land of, 323.

Gethsemane, 620;
  Christ's agony in, 610;
  His arrest in, 614.

Goats and sheep, figurative, 584.

God's foreknowledge not a determining cause of action, 18, 28.

Godhead, three Personages in, 32.

Godship of Jesus Christ, antemortal, 32.

Golgotha, 654, 667.

Gospels, the four, 166;
  the synoptic, 166.

Graded conditions in the hereafter, 601.

Graded intelligences in antemortal state, 14.

Great commandment, the, 549.

Greeks, as Gentiles, 345;
  certain ones visit Jesus, 518.


Happiness and pleasure, 231, 247.

Heathen to be redeemed;
  their part in first resurrection, 793.

Hem of garment, 346.

Henry VIII, head of Church of England, 751.

Herder, the hireling, 417.

Herod, the Great, 97, 106;
  temple of, 73;
  Antipas, 110, 118;
  referred to as "fox," 446;
  Christ before, 635.

Herodians, 68;
  in conspiracy with Pharisees, 544.

Herodias, 259.

High Priestly Prayer, Christ's, 609.

High priests and elders, 644.

Holy Ghost, sin against, 269, 278;
  promised to apostles, 603;
  investiture of apostles by, at Pentecost, 702.

Homily against Idolatry, affirming the apostasy, 753.

Hosanna shout, 516, 523.

Hyrum Smith, martyred, 776.


I AM, 36;
  Jesus Christ, the, 411.

Image on the coin, 546, 563.

Indians, American, progenitors of, 49, 56, 742, 757.

Inquisition, court of the, 750.

Isaiah, Messianic predictions by, 46, 47.

Iscariot, see Judas Iscariot.

Israel and Judah, kingdoms of, 59.


Jacob's prophecy concerning Shiloh, 54.

Jahveh, see Jehovah.

James and John, sons of Zebedee, called, 198;
  members of the Twelve, 219;
  minister with Peter in modern days, 219, 768;
  their aspiring desire, 503;
  mother of, 521.

James, son of Alpheus, one of the Twelve, 224.

Jared, brother of; his interview with the unembodied Christ, 12.

Jaredites, 16.

Jehovah, significance of the name, 36, 41, 411.

Jeremiah, Messianic prophecies by, 47.

Jericho, 521.

Jerusalem, Christ's triumphal entry into, 513;
  destruction of, predicted, 569,
  accomplished, 586;
  the Lord's lamentation over, 560;
  daughters of, Christ's lamentation over, 653, 666.

Jesus the Christ, as Man and Christ, 1.

Jesus Christ, preexistence and foreordination of, 6;
  the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, 8, 13, 81;
  the Word, 10;
  Word of God's power, 10;
  His supremacy over Abraham, 11, 410, 411;
  His power over death, 22, 23, 418;
  antemortal Godship of, 32;
  the Creator, 33;
  names and titles of, 35;
  predicted, 42;
  annunciation of, 79;
  the Babe of Bethlehem, 91;
  birth of, 91;
  birth announced to shepherds, 93;
  circumcision and naming of, 95;
  presentation in temple, 95;
  testimony of Simeon and Anna regarding, 97;
  birth made known to Nephites, 100;
  time of birth of, 102, 109;
  boy-hood of, 111;
  in attendance at Passover when twelve years old, 113;
  with the doctors in the temple, 114;
  of Nazareth, 117;
  baptism of, 125;

  descent of Holy Ghost, upon, 126;
  temptations of, 127;
  first clearing of temple by, 154;
  an offender to many, 254, 274;
  unique status of, 384;
  His brethren, interview with, 398;
  at the feast of Tabernacles, 399;
  rejected in Samaria, 423;
  at the home in Bethany, 448;
  blesses little children, 475;
  the ennobler of woman, 484;
  at feast of Dedication, 487;
  accused of blasphemy, 489;
  in retirement at Ephraim, 498;
  predicts His death and resurrection, 363, 372, 381, 502, 518, 586;
  called Son of David, 80, 86, 320, 354, 505, 515, 529;
  triumphal entry into Jerusalem, 513;
  Prince of Peace, 517;
  visited by certain Greeks, 518;
  His second clearing of temple, 527;
  His authority challenged, 530;
  close of His public ministry, 544;
  His lamentation over Jerusalem, 560;
  His final withdrawal from temple, 562;
  specific prediction of His death, 586;
  foretells His betrayal, 594;
  His agony in Gethsemane, 610;
  His betrayal and arrest, 614;
  Jewish trial of, 621;
  falsely convicted of blasphemy, 629;
  appearance before Pilate, first, 631,
    second, 636;
  before Herod Antipas, 635;
  delivered up to be crucified, 639;
  His crucifixion, 654;
  His burial, 664;
  physical cause of death of, 668;
  after resurrection appears to Mary Magdalene and other women, 681;
  to two disciples on road to Emmaus, 685;
  to ten apostles and others, in whose presence He eats, 687;
  to Peter, 687;
  to the Eleven, 689;
  His ascension from Olivet, 697;
  His death signalized on American continent, 721;
  giver of the law to Moses, 728;
  visitations to Nephites, 724, 731, 736;
  ministers to Joseph Smith, 761, 774;
  revelations from in current dispensation, 770;
  second advent of, 780.

Jesus of Nazareth the King of the Jews, 87, 90, 657.

Jewish exclusiveness, 61.

Jews, Christ the King of, 657.

John the Baptist, birth announced, 76;
  circumcision and naming of, 78;
  the forerunner, 75, 122;
  regarded as a Nazarite, 87;
  in the wilderness, 121;
  baptizes Jesus Christ, 125;
  his testimony of Jesus, 138, 150, 164;
  his message to Jesus, 252;
  Christ's testimony concerning, 256;
  imprisonment of, 252;
  death of, 259;
  greatness of his mission, 275;
  the Elias that was to come, 257, 276;
  restores Aaronic Priesthood in modern time, 768.

John, son of Zebedee, follows Christ, 140;
  called, 198;
  one of the Twelve, 220;
  his testimony regarding the graded development of Jesus, 119;
  with Peter at sepulchre of Jesus, 679;
  to tarry in the flesh until Christ's second coming, 694;
  the Revelator, 716.

John and James, see James and John.

Joseph of Arimathea, assists in burial of Christ's body, 664.

Joseph and Mary the Virgin, espoused, 84;
  married, 85;
  genealogies of, 85, 89.

Joseph Smith, 758;
  his perplexity over sectarian strife, 759;
  his prayer for light, 760;
  visited by the Father and the Son, 761;
  persecution of, 762;
  visited by Moroni, 765;
  receives Aaronic Priesthood, 768;
  receives Melchizedek Priesthood, 768;
  again visited by the Lord Jesus Christ, 774;
  visited by Moses, Elias and Elijah, 775;
  martyred, 776.

Judah and Israel, kingdoms of, 59.

Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve, 225;
  his complaint against waste of ointment, 512;
  in conspiracy with Jewish rulers, 592;
  goes out to betray Christ, 598;
  his betrayal of Christ, 614;
  his maddening remorse and suicide, 642;
  views concerning his character, 649.

Judas Thaddeus, or Lebbeus, one of the Twelve, 224, 228;
  his inquiry, 603.

Judean and Perean ministry, 423, 449.

Judgment, the inevitable, 584.


Keys, of kingdom of heaven, 361;
  symbolical of power in Jewish literature, 362.

King of the Jews, Christ the, 87, 90, 657.

Kingdom of God and kingdom of heaven, 788.

Kirtland Temple, scene of heavenly manifestations, 773.


Lamanites and Nephites, 49, 55.

Lamanites, progenitors of American Indians, 49, 56, 742, 757;
  promise concerning, 786.

Lamentation over Jerusalem, 560.

Last may be first, 478.

Last Supper, the, 592.

Latter-day Saints, Church of Jesus Christ of, 769.

Law, the, and the gospel, 234.

Law of Moses, rabbinical divisions of, 564;
  Christ the giver of, 728;
  fulfilled, as Christ declared to Nephites, 723, 728.

Lawyer questions Christ, 429.

Lawyers and Pharisees, Christ's criticism on, 436.

Lazarus and Dives, 483.

Lazarus restored to life, 490.

Leaven, of evil, 359;
  of Pharisees and Sadducees, 359.

Leper, Simon the, 511.

Lepers, ten healed, 470.

Leprosy, 189, 199.

Levi Matthew, see Matthew.

Levirate marriages, 548.

Light of the World, Jesus the, 407.

Living water, figurative, 403.

