regarded as exercises, after the manner of lessons in the schools
[and preaching], whose design is to teach the hearers, and, while
teaching, to move some to fear or faith.

But now they feign that these ceremonies are services of God, which
merit the remission of sins for themselves and for others.  For on
this account they increase these ceremonies.  But if they would
undertake them in order to teach and exhort the hearers, brief and
pointed lessons would be of more profit than these infinite babblings.
Thus the entire monastic life is full of hypocrisy and false
opinions [against the First and Second Commandments, against Christ].
To all these this danger also is added, that those who are in these
fraternities are compelled to assent to those persecuting the truth.
There are, therefore, many important and forcible reasons which free
good men from the obligation to this kind of life.

Lastly, the canons themselves release many who either without
judgment [before they have attained a proper age] have made vows when
enticed by the tricks of the monks, or have made vows under
compulsion by friends.  Such vows not even the canons declare to be
vows.  From all these considerations it is apparent that there are
very many reasons which teach that monastic vows such as have
hitherto been made are not vows; and for this reason a sphere of life
full of hypocrisy and false opinions can be safely abandoned.

Here they present an objection derived from the Law concerning the
Nazarites, Num. 6, 2f.  But the Nazarites did not take upon
themselves their vows with the opinions which, we have hitherto said
we censure in the vows of the monks.  The rite of the Nazarites was
an exercise [a bodily exercise with fasting and certain kinds of
food] or declaration of faith before men, and did not merit the
remission of sins before God, did not justify before God.  [For they
sought this elsewhere, namely, in the promise of the blessed Seed.]
Again, just as circumcision or the slaying of victims would not be a
service of God now, so the rite of the Nazarites ought not to be
presented now as a service, but it ought to be judged simply as an
adiaphoron.  It is not right to compare monasticism, devised without
God's Word, as a service which should merit the remission of sins and
justification, with the rite of the Nazarites, which had God's Word,
and was not taught for the purpose of meriting the remission of sins,
but to be an outward exercise, just as other ceremonies of the Law.
The same can be said concerning other ceremonies prescribed in the
Law.

The Rechabites also are cited, who did not have any possessions, and
did not drink wine, as Jeremiah writes, chap. 35, 6f.  Yea, truly,
the example of the Rechabites accords beautifully with our monks,
whose monasteries excel the palaces of kings, and who live most
sumptuously!  And the Rechabites, in their poverty of all things,
were nevertheless married.  Our monks, although abounding in all
voluptuousness, profess celibacy.

Besides, examples ought to be interpreted according to the rule, i.e.,
according to certain and clear passages of Scripture, not contrary
to the rule, that is, contrary to the Scriptures.  It is very certain,
however, that our observances do not merit the remission of sins or
justification.  Therefore, when the Rechabites are praised, it is
necessary [it is certain] that these have observed their custom, not
because they believed that by this they merited remission of sins, or
that the work was itself a justifying service, or one on account of
which they obtained eternal life, instead of, by God's mercy, for the
sake of the promised Seed.  But because they had the command of their
parents, their obedience is praised, concerning which there is the
commandment of God: Honor thy father and mother.

Then, too, the custom had a particular purpose: Because they were
foreigners, not Israelites, it is apparent that their father wished
to distinguish them by certain marks from their countrymen, so that
they might not relapse into the impiety of their countrymen.  He
wished by these marks to admonish them of the [fear of God, the]
doctrine of faith and immortality.  Such an end is lawful.  But for
monasticism far different ends are taught.  They feign that the works
of monasticism are a service, they feign that they merit the
remission of sins and justification.  The example of the Rechabites
is therefore unlike monasticism; to omit here other evils which
inhere in monasticism at present.

They cite also from 1 Tim. 5, 11ff. concerning widows, who, as they
served the Church, were supported at the public expense, where it is
said: They will marry, having damnation, because they have cast off
their first faith.  First, let us suppose that the Apostle is here
speaking of vows [which, however, he is not doing]; still this
passage will not favor monastic vows, which are made concerning
godless services, and in this opinion that they merit the remission
of sins and justification.  For Paul with ringing voice condemns all
services, all laws, all works, if they are observed in order to merit
the remission of sins, or that, on account of them instead of through
mercy on account of Christ we obtain remission of sins.  On this
account the vows of widows, if there were any, must have been unlike
monastic vows.

Besides, if the adversaries do not cease to misapply the passage to
vows, the prohibition that no widow be selected who is less than
sixty years, 1 Tim. 5, 9, must be misapplied in the same way.  Thus
vows made before this age will be of no account.  But the Church did
not yet know these vows. Therefore Paul condemns widows, not because
they marry, for he commands the younger to marry; but because, when
supported at the public expense, they became wanton, and thus cast
off faith. He calls this first faith, clearly not in a monastic vow,
but in Christianity [of their Baptism, their Christian duty, their
Christianity]. And in this sense he understands faith in the same
chapter, v. 8: If any one provide not for his own, and specially for
those of his own house, he hath denied the faith. For he speaks
otherwise of faith than the sophists. He does not ascribe faith to
those who have mortal sin. He, accordingly, says that those cast off
faith who do not care for their relatives. And in the same way he
says that wanton women cast off faith.

We have recounted some of our reasons and, in passing, have explained
away the objections urged by the adversaries.  And we have collected
these matters, not only on account of the adversaries, but much more
on account of godly minds, that they may have in view the reasons why
they ought to disapprove of hypocrisy and fictitious monastic
services, all of which indeed this one saying of Christ annuls, which
reads, Matt. 15, 9: In vain they do worship Me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men.  Therefore the vows themselves and
the observances of meats, lessons, chants, vestments, sandals,
girdles are useless services in God's sight.  And all godly minds
should certainly know that the opinion is simply pharisaic and
condemned that these observances merit the remission of sins; that on
account of them we are accounted righteous, that on account of them,
and not through mercy on account of Christ, we obtain eternal life.
And the holy men who have lived in these kinds of life must
necessarily have learned, confidence in such observance having been
rejected, that they had the remission of sins freely, that for
Christ's sake through mercy they would obtain eternal life, and not
for the sake of these services [therefore godly persons who were
saved and continued to live in monastic life had finally come to this,
namely, that they despaired of their monastic life, despised all
their works as dung, condemned all their hypocritical service of God,
and held fast to the promise of grace in Christ, as in the example of
St. Bernard, saying, _Perdite vixi_, I have lived in a sinful way],
because God only approves services instituted by His Word, which
services avail when used in faith.




Part 36


Article XXVIII (XIV): _Of Ecclesiastical Power._

Here the adversaries cry out violently concerning the privileges and
immunities of the ecclesiastical estate, and they add the peroration:
All things are vain which are presented in the present article
against the immunity of the churches and priests.  This is mere
calumny; for in this article we have disputed concerning other things.
Besides, we have frequently testified that we do not find fault
with political ordinances, and the gifts and privileges granted by
princes.

But would that the adversaries would hear, on the other hand, the
complaints of the churches and of godly minds!  The adversaries
courageously guard their own dignities and wealth; meanwhile, they
neglect the condition of the churches; they do not care that the
churches are rightly taught, and that the Sacraments are duly
administered.  To the priesthood they admit all kinds of persons
indiscriminately.  [They ordain rude asses; thus the Christian
doctrine perished, because the Church was not supplied with efficient
preachers.] Afterwards they impose intolerable burdens, as though
they were delighted with the destruction of their fellowmen, they
demand that their traditions be observed far more accurately than the
Gospel.  Now, in the most important and difficult controversies,
concerning which the people urgently desire to be taught, in order
that they may have something certain which they may follow, they do
not release the minds which are most severely tortured with doubt,
they only call to arms.  Besides, in manifest matters [against
manifest truth] they present decrees written in blood, which threaten
horrible punishments to men unless they act clearly contrary to God's
command.  Here, on the other hand, you ought to see the tears of the
poor, and hear the pitiable complaints of many good men, which God
undoubtedly considers and regards, to whom one day you will render an
account of your stewardship.

But although in the Confession we have in this article embraced
various topics, the adversaries make no reply [act in true popish
fashion], except that the bishops have the power of rule and coercive
correction, in order to direct their subjects to the goal of eternal
blessedness; and that the power of ruling requires the power to judge,
to define, to distinguish and fix those things which are serviceable
or conduce to the aforementioned end.  These are the words of the
_Confutation_, in which the adversaries teach us [but do not prove]
that the bishops have the authority to frame laws [without the
authority of the Gospel] useful for obtaining eternal life.  The
controversy is concerning this article.

[Regarding this matter we submit the following:] But we must retain
in the Church this doctrine, namely, that we receive the remission of
sins freely for Christ's sake, by faith.  We must also retain this
doctrine, namely, that human traditions are useless services, and
therefore neither sin nor righteousness should be placed in meat
drink, clothing and like things, the use of which Christ wished to be
left free, since He says, Matt. 15, 11: Not that which goeth into the
mouth defileth the man; and Paul, Rom. 14, 17: The kingdom of God is
not meat and drink.  Therefore the bishops have no right to frame
traditions in addition to the Gospel, that they may merit the
remission of sins, that they may be services which God is to approve
as righteousness and which burden consciences, as though it were a
sin to omit them.  All this is taught by that one passage in Acts, 15,
9ff., where the apostles say [Peter says] that hearts are purified
by faith.  And then they prohibit the imposing of a yoke, and show
how great a danger this is, and enlarge upon the sin of those who
burden the Church.  Why tempt ye God they say.  By this thunderbolt
our adversaries are in no way terrified, who defend by violence
traditions and godless opinions.

For above they have also condemned Article XV, in which we have
stated that traditions do not merit the remission of sins, and they
here say that traditions conduce to eternal life.  Do they merit the
remission of sins?  Are they services which God approves as
righteousness?  Do they quicken hearts!  Paul to the Colossians, 2,
20ff., says that traditions do not profit with respect to eternal
righteousness and eternal life; for the reason that food, drink,
clothing and the like are things that perish with the using.  But
eternal life [which begins in this life inwardly by faith] is wrought
in the heart by eternal things, i.e., by the Word of God and the Holy
Ghost.  Therefore let the adversaries explain how traditions conduce
to eternal life.

Since, however, the Gospel clearly testifies that traditions ought
not to be imposed upon the Church in order to merit the remission of
sins; in order to be services which God shall approve as
righteousness; in order to burden consciences, so that to omit them
is to be accounted a sin, the adversaries will never be able to show
that the bishops have the power to institute such services.

Besides, we have declared in the Confession what power the Gospel
ascribes to bishops.  Those who are now bishops do not perform the
duties of bishops according to the Gospel although, indeed, they may
be bishops according to canonical polity, which we do not censure.
But we are speaking of a bishop according to the Gospel.  And we are
pleased with the ancient division of power into power of the order
and power of jurisdiction [that is the administration of the
Sacraments and the exercise of spiritual jurisdiction].  Therefore
the bishop has the power of the order, i.e., the ministry of the Word
and Sacraments; he has also the power of jurisdiction, i.e., the
authority to excommunicate those guilty of open crimes, and again to
absolve them if they are converted and seek absolution.  But their
power is not to be tyrannical, i.e., without a fixed law; nor regal,
i.e., above law; but they have a fixed command and a fixed Word of
God, according to which they ought to teach and according to which
they ought to exercise their jurisdiction.  Therefore, even though
they should have some jurisdiction, it does not follow that they are
able to institute new services.  For services pertain in no way to
jurisdiction.  And they have the Word, they have the command, how far
they ought to exercise jurisdiction, namely, if any one would do
anything contrary to that Word which they have received from Christ.
[For the Gospel does not set up a rule independently of the Gospel;
that is quite clear and certain.]

Although in the Confession we also have added how far it is lawful
for them to frame traditions, namely, not as necessary services, but
so that there may be order in the Church, for the sake of
tranquillity.  And these traditions ought not to cast snares upon
consciences, as though to enjoin necessary services; as Paul teaches
when he says, Gal. 5, 1: Stand fast, therefore, in the liberty
wherewith Christ hath made us free, and be not entangled again with
the yoke of bondage.  The use of such ordinances ought therefore to
be left free, provided that offenses be avoided, and that they be not
judged to be necessary services; just as the apostles themselves
ordained [for the sake of good discipline] very many things which
have been changed with time.  Neither did they hand them down in such
a way that it would not be permitted to change them.  For they did
not dissent from their own writings, in which they greatly labor lest
the Church be burdened with the opinion that human rites are
necessary services.

This is the simple mode of interpreting traditions, namely, that we
understand them not as necessary services, and nevertheless, for the
sake of avoiding offenses, we should observe them in the proper place.
And thus many learned and great men in the Church have held.  Nor
do we see what can be said against this.  For it is certain that the
expression Luke 10, 16: He that heareth you heareth Me, does not
speak of traditions, but is chiefly directed against traditions.  For
it is not a _mandatum cum libera_ ( a bestowal of unlimited
authority), as they call it, but it is a _cautio de rato_ (a caution
concerning something prescribed), namely, concerning the special
command [not a free, unlimited order and power, but a limited order,
namely, not to preach their own word, but God's Word and the Gospel],
i.e., the testimony given to the apostles that we believe them with
respect to the word of another, not their own.  For Christ wishes to
assure us, as was necessary, that we should know that the Word
delivered by men is efficacious, and that no other word from heaven
ought to be sought.  He that heareth you heareth Me, cannot be
understood of traditions.  For Christ requires that they teach in
such a way that [by their mouth] He Himself be heard, because He says:
He heareth Me.  Therefore He wishes His own voice, His own Word, to
be heard, not human traditions.  Thus a saying which is most
especially in our favor, and contains the most important consolation
and doctrine, these stupid men pervert to the most trifling matters,
the distinctions of food, vestments, and the like.

They quote also Heb. 13, 17: Obey them that have the rule over you.
This passage requires obedience to the Gospel.  For it does not
establish a dominion for the bishops apart from the Gospel.  Neither
should the bishops frame traditions contrary to the Gospel, or
interpret their traditions contrary to the Gospel.  And when they do
this, obedience is prohibited, according to Gal. 1, 9: If any man
preach any other gospel, let him be accursed.

We make the same reply to Matt. 23, 3: Whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe, because evidently a universal command is not
given that we should receive all things [even contrary to God's
command and Word], since Scripture elsewhere, Acts 5, 29, bids us
obey God rather than men.  When, therefore they teach wicked things,
they are not to be heard.  But these are wicked things, namely, that
human traditions are services of God that they are necessary services,
that they merit the remission of sins and eternal life.

They present, as an objection, the public offenses and commotions
which have arisen under pretext of our doctrine.  To these we briefly
reply.  If all the scandals be brought together, still the one
article concerning the remission of sins, that for Christ's sake
through faith we freely obtain the remission of sins, brings so much
good as to hide all evils.  And this, in the beginning, gained for
Luther not only our favor, but also, that of many who are now
contending against us.  "For former favor ceases, and mortals are
forgetful," says Pindar.  Nevertheless, we neither desire to desert
truth that is necessary to the Church, nor can we assent to the
adversaries in condemning it.  For we ought to obey God rather than
men.  Those who in the beginning condemned manifest truth, and are
now persecuting it with the greatest cruelty, will give an account
for the schism that has been occasioned.  Then, too, are there no
scandals among the adversaries?  How much evil is there in the
sacrilegious profanation of the Mass applied to gain!  How great
disgrace in celibacy!  But let us omit a comparison.  This is what we
hare replied to the _Confutation_ for the time being.  Now we leave
it to the judgment of all the godly whether the adversaries are right
in boasting that they have actually refuted our Concession from the
Scriptures.




Part 37


_THE END._

[As regards the slander and complaint of the adversaries at the end
of the _Confutation_, namely, that this doctrine is causing
disobedience and other scandals, this is unjustly imputed to our
doctrine.  For it is evident that by this doctrine the authority of
magistrates is most highly praised.  Moreover, it is well known that
in those localities where this doctrine is preached, the magistrates
have hitherto by the grace of God, been treated with all respect by
the subjects.

But as to the want of unity and dissension in the Church, it is well
known how these matters first happened, and who have caused the
division, namely, the sellers of indulgences, who shamelessly
preached intolerable lies, and afterwards condemned Luther for not
approving of those lies, and besides, they again and again excited
more controversies, so that Luther was induced to attack many other
errors.  But since our opponents would not tolerate the truth, and
dared to promote manifest errors by force, it is easy to judge who is
guilty of the schism.  Surely, all the world, all wisdom, all power
ought to yield to Christ and His holy Word.  But the devil is the
enemy of God, and therefore rouses all his might against Christ, to
