a plain statement of their danger a sign of ill-feeling. Try to warn a
drunkard or a profligate by telling him of the disease and misery which
will dog his sins, or by setting plainly before him God's law of purity
and sobriety, and you will find that the prophet's function still
brings with it, in many cases, the prophet's doom. But still more truly
is this the case with masses, whether nations or cities. A spurious
patriotism resents as unpatriotic the far truer love of country which
sets a trumpet to its mouth to tell the people their sins. In all
democratic communities, whether republican or regal in their form of
government, a crying evil is flattery of the masses, exalting their
virtues and foretelling their prosperity, while hiding their faults and
slurring over the requirements of morality and religion, which are the
foundations of prosperity. What did England do with her prophets? What
did America do with hers? What wages do they get to-day? The men who
dare to tell their countrymen their faults, and to preach temperance,
peace, civic purity, personal morality, are laid hold of by the Irijahs
who preside over the newspapers, and are pilloried as deserters and
half traitors at heart.

II. We see the patient, unmoved prophet. One flash of honest
indignation repels the charge of deserting, and then he is silent. 'As
a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.' It is
useless to plead before lawless violence. A silent martyr eloquently
condemns an unjust judge. So, without opposition or apparent
remonstrance, Jeremiah is cast into the foul den where he lies for
'many days,' patiently bearing his fate, and speaking his complaint to
God only. How long his imprisonment lasted does not appear; but the
context implies that during it the siege was resumed, and that there
was difficulty in procuring bread. Then the king sent for him secretly.

Zedekiah's temper at the time will be considered presently. Here we
have to do with Jeremiah's answer to his question. In it we may note,
as equally prominent and beautifully blended, respect, submission,
consciousness of peril and impending death, and unshaken boldness. He
knew that his life was at the disposal of the capricious, feeble
Zedekiah. He bows before him as his subject, and brings his
'supplication'; but not one jot of his message will he abate, nor
smooth down its terribleness an atom. He repeats as unfalteringly as
ever the assurance that the king of Babylon will take the city. He
asserts his own innocence as regards king and courtiers and people; and
he asks the scornful question what has become of all the smooth-tongued
prophets of prosperity, as if he were bidding the king look over the
city wall and see the tokens of their lies and of Jeremiah's truth in
the investing lines of the all but victorious enemy.

Such a combination of perfect meekness and perfect courage, unstained
loyalty to his king, and supreme obedience to his God, was only
possible to a man who lived in very close communion with Jehovah, and
had learned thereby to fear none less, because he feared Him so well,
and to reverence all else whom He had set in places of reverence. True
courage, of the pattern which befits God's servants, is ever gentle.
Bluster is the sign of weakness. A Christian hero--and no man will be a
Christian as he ought to be, who has not something of the hero in
him--should win by meekness. Does not the King of all such ride
prosperously 'because of truth and meekness,' and must not the armies
which follow Him do the same? Faithful witnessing to men of their sins
need not be rude, harsh, or self-asserting. But we must live much in
fellowship with the Lord of all the meek and the pattern of all patient
sufferers and faithful witnesses, if we are ever to be like Him, or
even like His pale shadow as seen in this meek prophet. The fountains
of strength and of patience spring side by side at the foot of the
cross.

III. We have the weak Zedekiah, with his pitiable vacillation. He had
been Nebuchadnezzar's nominee, and had served him for some years, and
then rebelled. His whole career indicates a feeble nature, taking the
impression of anything which was strongly laid on it. He was a king of
putty, when the times demanded one of iron. He was cowed by the
'princes.' Sometimes he was afraid to disobey Jeremiah, and then afraid
to let his masters know that he was so. Thus he sends for the prophet
stealthily, and his first question opens a depth of conflict in his
soul. He did believe that the prophet spoke the word of Jehovah, and
yet he could not muster up courage to follow his convictions and go
against the princes and the mob. He wanted another 'word' from Jehovah,
by which he meant a word of another sort than the former. He could not
bring his mind to obey the word which he had, and so he weakly hoped
that perhaps God's word might be changed into one that he would be
willing to obey. Many men are, like him, asking, 'Is there any word
from the Lord?' and meaning, 'Is there any change in the condition of
receiving His favour?'

He had interest enough in the prophet to interfere for his comfort, and
to have him put into better quarters in the palace and provided with a
'circle' (a round loaf) of bread out of Baker Street, as long as there
was any in the city--not a very long time. But why did he do so much,
and not do more? He knew that Jeremiah was innocent, and that his word
was God's; and what he should have done was to have shaken off his
masterful 'servants,' followed his conscience, and obeyed God. Why did
he not? Because he was a coward, infirm of purpose, and therefore
'unstable as water.'

He is another of the tragic examples, with which all life as well as
scripture is studded, of how much evil is possible to a weak character.
In this world, where there are so many temptations to be bad, no man
will be good who cannot strongly say 'No.' The virtue of strength of
will may be but like the rough fence round young trees to keep cattle
from browsing on them and east winds from blighting them. But the fence
is needed, if the trees are to grow. 'To be weak is to be miserable,'
and sinful too, generally. 'Whom resist' must be the motto for all
noble, God-like, and God-pleasing life.




THE LAST AGONY

'In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, came
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army against Jerusalem, and
they besieged it. 2. And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the
fourth month, the ninth day of the month, the city was broken up. 3.
And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the
middle gate, even Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarse-chim, Rab-saris,
Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all the residue of the princes of the
king of Babylon. 4. And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of
Judah saw them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth
out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate
betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain. 5. But the
Chaldeans' army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains
of Jericho; and when they had taken him, they brought him up to
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, where
he gave judgment upon him. 6. Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of
Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all
the nobles of Judah. 7. Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound
him with chains, to carry him to Babylon. 8. And the Chaldeans burned
the king's house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and brake
down the walls of Jerusalem. 9. Then Nebuzar-adan the captain of the
guard carried away captive into Babylon the remnant of the people that
remained in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to him, with
the rest of the people that remained. 10. But Nebuzar-adan the captain
of the guard left of the poor of the people, which had nothing, in the
land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same
time.'--JER. xxxix. 1-10.


Two characteristics of this account of the fall of Jerusalem are
striking,--its minute particularity, giving step by step the details of
the tragedy, and its entire suppression of emotion. The passionless
record tells the tale without a tear or a sob. For these we must go to
the Book of Lamentations. This is the history of God's judgment, and
here emotion would be misplaced. But there is a world of repressed
feeling in the long-drawn narrative, as well as in the fact that three
versions of the story are given here (chap, lii., 2 Kings xxv.). Sorrow
curbed by submission, and steadily gazing on God's judicial act, is the
temper of the narrative. It should be the temper of all sufferers. 'I
was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it.' But we may
note the three stages in the final agony which this section
distinguishes.

I. There is the entrance of the enemy. Jerusalem fell not by assault,
but by famine. The siege lasted eighteen months, and ended when 'all
the bread in the city was spent.' The pitiful pictures in Lamentations
fill in the details of misery, telling how high-born women picked
garbage from dung-heaps, and mothers made a ghastly meal of their
infants, while the nobles were wasted to skeletons, and the little
children piteously cried for bread. At length a breach was made in the
northern wall (as Josephus tells us, 'at midnight'), and through it, on
the ninth day of the fourth month (corresponding to July), swarmed the
conquerors, unresisted. The commanders of the Babylonians planted
themselves at 'the middle gate,' probably a gate in the wall between
the upper and lower city, so securing for them the control of both.

How many of these fierce soldiers are named in verse 3? At first sight
there seem to be six, but that number must be reduced by at least two,
for Rab-saris and Rab-mag are official titles, and designate the
offices (chief eunuch and chief magician) of the two persons whose
names they respectively follow. Possibly Samgar-Nebo is also to be
deducted, for it has been suggested that, as that name stands, it is
anomalous, and it has been proposed to render its first element,
_Samgar_, as meaning _cup-bearer_, and being the official title
attached to the name preceding it; while its second part, _Nebo_, is
regarded as the first element in a new name obtained by reading
_shashban_ instead of Sarsechim, and attaching that reading to Nebo.
This change would bring verse 3 into accord with verse 13, for in both
places we should then have Nebo-shashban designated as chief of the
eunuchs. However the number of the commanders is settled, and whatever
their names, the point which the historian emphasises is their presence
there. Had it come to this, that men whose very names were invocations
of false gods ('Nergal protect the king,' 'Nebo delivers me' if we read
'Nebo-shashban,' or 'Be gracious, Nebo,' if Samgar-nebo) should sit
close by the temple, and have their talons fixed in the Holy City?

These intruders were all unconscious of the meaning of their victory,
and the tragedy of their presence there. They thought that they were
Nebuchadnezzar's servants, and had captured for him, at last, an
obstinate little city, which had given more trouble than it was worth.
Its conquest was but a drop in the bucket of his victories. How little
they knew that they were serving that Jehovah whom they thought that
Nebo had conquered in their persons! How little they knew that they
were the instruments of the most solemn act of judgment in the world's
history till then!

The causes which led to the fall of Jerusalem could be reasonably set
forth as purely political without a single reference to Israel's sins
or God's judgment; but none the less was its capture the divine
punishment of its departure from Him, and none the less were
Nergal-sharezer and his fellows God's tools, the axes with which He
hewed down the barren tree. So does He work still, in national and
individual history. You may, in a fashion, account for both without
bringing Him in at all; but your philosophy of either will be partial,
unless you recognise that 'the history of the world is the judgment of
the world.' It was the same hand which set these harsh conquerors at
the middle gate of Jerusalem that sent the German armies to encamp in
the Place de la Concorde in Paris; and in neither case does the
recognition of God in the crash of a falling throne absolve the victors
from the responsibility of their deeds.

II. We have the flight and fate of Zedekiah and his evil advisers (vs.
4-7). His weakness of character shows itself to the end. Why was there
no resistance? It would have better beseemed him to have died on his
palace threshold than to have skulked away in the dark between the
shelter of the 'two walls.' But he was a poor weakling, and the curse
of God sat heavy on his soul, though he had tried to put it away.
Conscience made a coward of him; for he, at all events, knew who had
set the strangers by the middle gate. Men who harden heart and
conscience against threatened judgments are very apt to collapse, when
the threats are fulfilled. The frost breaks up with a rapid thaw.

Ezekiel (Ezek. xii. 12) prophesied the very details of the flight. It
was to be 'in the dark,' the king himself was to 'carry' some of his
valuables, they were to 'dig through' the earthen ramparts; and all
appears to have been literally fulfilled. The flight was taken in the
opposite direction from the entrance of the besiegers; two walls, which
probably ran down the valley between Zion and the temple mount,
afforded cover to the fugitives as far as to the south city wall, and
there some postern let them out to the king's garden. That is a tragic
touch. It was no time then to gather flowers. The forlorn and
frightened company seems to have scattered when once outside the city;
for there is a marked contrast in verse 4 between 'they fled' and 'he
went.' In the description of his flight Zedekiah is still called, as in
verses 1 and 2, the king; but after his capture he is only 'Zedekiah.'

Down the rocky valley of the Kedron he hurried, and had a long enough
start of his pursuers to get to Jericho. Another hour would have seen
him safe across Jordan, but the prospect of escape was only dangled
before his eyes to make capture more bitter. Probably he was too much
absorbed with his misery and fear to feel any additional humiliation
from the mighty memories of the scene of his capture; but how solemnly
fitting it was that the place which had seen Israel's first triumph,
when 'by faith the walls of Jericho fell down,' should witness the
lowest shame of the king who had cast away his kingdom by unbelief! The
conquering dead might have gathered in shadowy shapes to reproach the
weakling and sluggard who had sinned away the heritage which they had
won. The scene of the capture underscores the lesson of the capture
itself; namely, the victorious power of faith, and the defeat and shame
which, in the long-run, are the fruits of an 'evil heart of unbelief,
departing from the living God.'

That would be a sad march through all the length of the fair land that
had slipped from his slack fingers, up to far-off Riblah, in the great
valley between the Lebanon and the anti-Lebanon. Observe how, in verses
5 and 6, the king of Babylon has his royal title, and Zedekiah has not.
The crown has fallen from his head, and there is no more a king in
Judah. He who had been king now stands chained before the cruel
conqueror. Well might the victor think that Nebo had overcome Jehovah,
but better did the vanquished know that Jehovah had kept his word.

Cruelty and expediency dictated the savage massacre and mutilation
which followed. The death of Zedekiah's sons, and of the nobles who had
scoffed at Jeremiah's warnings, and the blinding of Zedekiah, were all
measures of precaution as well as of savagery. They diminished the
danger of revolt; and a blind, childless prisoner, without counsellors
or friends, was harmless. But to make the sight of his slaughtered sons
the poor wretch's last sight, was a refinement of gratuitous delight in
torturing. Thus singularly was Ezekiel's enigma solved and harmonised
with its apparent contradictions in Jeremiah's prophecies: 'Yet shall
he not see it, though he shall die there' (Ezek. xii. 13).

Zedekiah is one more instance of the evil which may come from a weak
character, and of the evil which may fall on it. He had good impulses,
but he could not hold his own against the bad men round him, and so he
stumbled on, not without misgivings, which only needed to be attended
to with resolute determination, in order to have reversed his conduct
and fate. Feeble hands can pull down venerable structures built in
happier times. It takes a David and a Solomon to rear a temple, but a
Zedekiah can overthrow it.

III. We have the completion of the conquest (vs. 8-10). The first care
of the victors was, of course, to secure themselves, and fires and
crowbars were the readiest way to that end. But the wail in the last
chapter of Lamentations hints at the usual atrocities of the sack of a
city, when brutal lust and as brutal ferocity are let loose. Chapter
lii. shows that the final step in our narrative was separated from the
capture of the city by a month, which was, no doubt, a month of
nameless agonies, horrors, and shame. Then the last drop was added to
the bitter cup, in the deportation of the bulk of the inhabitants,
according to the politic custom of these old military monarchies. What
rending of ties, what weariness and years of long-drawn-out yearning,
that meant, can easily be imagined. The residue left behind to keep the
country from relapsing into waste land was too weak to be dangerous,
and too cowed to dare anything. One knows not who had the sadder lot,
the exiles, or the handful of peasants left to till the fields that had
once been their own, and to lament their brethren gone captives to the
far-off land.

Surely the fall of Jerusalem, though all the agony is calmed ages ago,
still remains as a solemn beacon-warning that the wages of sin is
death, both for nations and individuals; that the threatenings of God's
Word are not idle, but will be accomplished to the utmost tittle; and
that His patience stretches from generation to generation, and His
judgments tarry because He is not willing that any should perish, but
that for all the long-suffering there comes a time when even divine
love sees that it is needful to say 'Now!? and the bolt falls. The
solemn word addressed to Israel has application as real to all
Christian churches and individual souls: 'You only have I known of all
the inhabitants of the earth; therefore I will punish you for your
iniquities.'




EBEDMELECH THE ETHIOPIAN

'For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the sword,
but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast put thy
trust in Me, saith the Lord.'--JER. xxxix. 18.


Ebedmelech is a singular anticipation of that other Ethiopian eunuch
whom Philip met on the desert road to Gaza. It is prophetic that on the
eve of the fall of the nation, a heathen man should be entering into
union with God. It is a picture in little of the rejection of Israel
and the ingathering of the Gentiles.

I. The identity in all ages of the bond that unites men to God.

It is a common notion that faith is peculiar to the New Testament. But
the Old Testament 'trust' is identical with the New Testament 'faith,'
and it is a great pity that the variation in translation has obscured
that identity. The fact of the prominence given to law in the Old
Testament does not affect this. For every effort to keep the law must
have led to consciousness of imperfection, and that consciousness must
have driven to the exercise of penitent trust. The difference of
degrees of revelation does not affect it, for faith is the same,
however various the contents of the creed.

Note further the personal object of Faith--'in ME.' The object of Faith
is not a proposition but a Person. That Person is the same in the Old
Testament and in the New. The Jehovah of the one is the God in Christ
of the other. Consequently faith must be more than intellectual assent,
it must be voluntary and emotional, the act of the whole man, 'the
synthesis of the reason and the will.'

II. The contrast of a formal and real union with God.

The king, prophets, priests, the whole nation, had an outward
connection with Him, but it meant nothing. And this foreigner, a slave,
perhaps not even a proselyte, a eunuch, had what the children of the
covenant had not, a true union with God through Faith.

Judaism was not an exclusive system, but was intended to bring in the
nations to share in its blessings. Outward descent gave outward place
within the covenant, but the distinction of real and formal place there
was established from the beginning. What else than this is the meaning
of all the threatenings of Deuteronomy? What else did Isaiah mean when
he called the rulers in Jerusalem 'Rulers of Sodom'? Here the fates of
Ebedmelech and of Zedekiah illustrate both sides of the truth. The
danger of trusting in outward possession and of thinking that God's
mercy is our property besets all Churches. Organisations of
Christianity are necessary, but it is impossible to tell the harm that
formal connection with them has done. There is only one bond that
unites men to God--personal trust in Him as 'in Christ reconciling the
world to Himself.'

III. The possibility of exercising uniting faith even in most
unfavourable circumstances.

This Ebedmelech had everything against him. The contemptuous exclusion
of him from any share in the covenant might well have discouraged him.
The poorest Jew treated him as a heathen dog, who had no right even to
crumbs from the table spread for the children only. He was plunged into
a sea of godlessness, and saw examples enough of utter carelessness as
to Jehovah in His professed servants to drive him away from a religion
which had so little hold on its professed adherents. The times were
gloomy, and the Jehovah whom Judah professed to worship seemed to have
small power to help His worshippers. It would have been no wonder if
the conduct of the people of Jerusalem had caused the name of Jehovah
to be blasphemed by this Gentile, nor if he had revolted from a
religion that was alleged to be the special property of one race, and
that such a race! But he listened to the cry of his own heart, and to
the words of God's prophet, and his faith pierced through all
obstacles--like the roots of some tree feeling for the water. He found
the vitalising fountain that he sought, and His name stands to all ages
as a witness that no seeking heart, that longs for God, is ever balked
in its search, and that a faith, very imperfect as to its knowledge,
may be so strong as to its substance that it unites him who exercises
it with God, while the possessors of ecclesiastical privileges and of
untarnished and full-orbed orthodox knowledge have no fellowship with
Him.

IV. The safety given by such uniting faith.

To Ebedmelech, escape from death by the besiegers' swords was promised.
To us a more blessed safety and exemption from a worse destruction are
assured. 'The life which is life indeed' may be ours, and shall
assuredly be ours, if our trust knits us to Him who is the Life, and
who has said 'He that liveth and believeth in Me shall never die.'




GOD'S PATIENT PLEADINGS

'I sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising early and sending
them, saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate.'--JER.
xliv. 4.


The long death-agony of the Jewish kingdom has come to an end. The
frivolous levity, which fed itself on illusions and would not be
sobered by facts, has been finally crushed out of the wretched people.
The dreary succession of incompetent kings--now a puppet set up by
Egypt, now another puppet set up by Babylon, has ended with the weak
Zedekiah. The throne of David is empty, and the long line of kings,
which numbered many a strong, wise, holy man, has dwindled into a
couple of captives, one of them blind and both of them paupers on an
idolatrous monarch's bounty. The country is desolate, the bulk of the
people exiles, and the poor handful, who had been left by the
conqueror, flitting like ghosts, or clinging, like domestic animals, to
their burnt homes and wasted plains, have been quarrelling and fighting
among themselves, murdering the Jewish ruler whom Babylon had left
them, and then in abject terror have fled _en masse_ across the border
into Egypt, where they are living wretched lives. What a history that
people had gone through since they had lived on the same soil before!
From Moses to Zedekiah, what a story! From Goshen till now it had been
one long tragedy which seems to have at last reached its fifth act.
Nine hundred years have passed, and this is the issue of them all!

The circumstances might well stir the heart of the prophet, whose
doleful task it had been to foretell the coming of the storm, who had
had to strip off Judah's delusions and to proclaim its certain fall,
and who in doing so had carried his life in his hand for forty years,
and had never met with recognition or belief.

Jeremiah had been carried off by the fugitives to Egypt, and there he
made a final effort to win them back to God. He passed before them the
outline of the whole history of the nation, treating it as having
accomplished one stadium--and what does he find? In all these days
since Goshen there has been one monotonous story of vain divine
pleadings and human indifference, God beseeching and Israel turning
away--and now at last the crash, long foretold, never credited, which
had been drawing nearer through all the centuries, has come, and Israel
is scattered among the people.

Such are the thoughts and emotions that speak in the exquisitely tender
words of our text. It suggests--

I. God's antagonism to sin.

II. The great purpose of all His pleadings.

III. God's tender and unwearied efforts.

IV. The obstinate resistance to His tender pleadings.

       *       *       *       *       *

I. God's antagonism to sin.

It is the one thing in the universe to which He is opposed. Sin is
essentially antagonism to God. People shrink from the thought of God's
hatred of sin, because of--

An underestimate of its gravity. Contrast the human views of its
enormity, as shown by men's playing with it, calling it by half-jocose
names and the like, with God's thought of its heinousness.

A false dread of seeming to attribute human emotions to God. But there
is in God what corresponds to our human feelings, something analogous
to the attitude of a pure human mind recoiling from evil.

The divine love must necessarily be pure, and the mightier its energy
of forth-going, the mightier its energy of recoil. God's 'hate' is Love
inverted and reverted on itself. A divine love which had in it no
necessity of hating evil would be profoundly immoral, and would be
called devilish more fitly than divine.

II. The great purpose of the divine pleadings.

To wean from sin is the main end of prophecy. It is the main end of all
revelation. God must chiefly desire to make His creatures like Himself.
Sin makes a special revelation necessary. Sin determines the form of it.

III. God's tender and unwearied efforts.

'Rising early' is a strong metaphor to express persistent effort. The
more obstinate is our indifference, the more urgent are His calls. He
raises His voice as our deafness grows. Mark, too, the tenderness of
the entreaty in this text, 'Oh, do not this abominable thing that I
hate!' His hatred of it is adduced as a reason which should touch any
heart that loves Him. He beseeches as if He, too, were saying, 'Though
I might be bold to enjoin thee' that which is fitting, 'yet for love's
sake I rather beseech thee.' The manifestation of His disapproval and
the appeal to our love by the disclosure of His own are the most
powerful, winning and compelling dehortations from sin. Not by
brandishing the whip, not by a stern law written on tables of stone,
but by unveiling His heart, does God win us from our sins.

IV. The obstinate resistance to God's tender pleadings.

The tragedy of the nation is summed up in one word, 'They hearkened
not.'

That power of neglecting God's voice and opposing God's will is the
mystery of our nature. How strange it is that a human will should be
able to lift itself in opposition to the Sovereign Will! But stranger
and more mysterious and tragic still is it that we should choose to
exercise that power and find pleasure, and fancy that we shall ever
find advantage, in refusing to listen to His entreaties and choosing to
flout His uttered will.

Such opposition was Israel's ruin. It will be ours if we persist in it.
'If God spared not the natural branches, neither will He spare thee.'




THE SWORD OF THE LORD

'O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put
up thyself into thy scabbard, rest, and be still. 7. How can it be
quiet, seeing the Lord hath given it a charge?'--JER. xlvii. 6, 7.


The prophet is here in the full tide of his prophecies against the
nations round about. This paragraph is entirely occupied with
threatenings. Bearing the cup of woes, he turns to one after another of
the ancestral enemies of Israel, Egypt and Philistia on the south and
west, Moab on the south and east, then northwards to Ammon, south to
Edom, north to Damascus, Kedar, Hagor, Elam, and finally to the great
foe--Babylon. In the hour of Israel's lowest fortunes and the foe's
proudest exultation these predictions are poured out. Jeremiah stands
as if wielding the sword of which our text speaks, and whirls and
points the flashing terror of its sharpened edge against the ring of
foes. It turns every way, like the weapon of the angelic guard before
the lost paradise, and wherever it turns a kingdom falls.

In the midst of his stern denunciations he checks himself to utter this
plaintive cry of pity and longing. A tender gleam of compassion breaks
through the heart of the thunder-cloud. It is very beautiful to note
that the point at which the irrepressible welling up of sweet waters
breaks the current of his prophecy is the prediction against Israel's
bitterest, because nearest, foe, 'these uncircumcised Philistines.' He
beholds the sea of wrath drowning the great Philistine plain, its rich
harvests trampled under foot by 'stamping of hoofs of his strong ones,'
and that desolation wrings from his heart the words of our text. I take
them to be spoken by the prophet. That, of course, is doubtful. It may
be that they are meant to give in a vivid dramatic form the effect of
the judgments on the sufferers. They recognise these as 'the sword of
the Lord.' Their only thought is an impatient longing that the
judgments would cease,--no confession of sin, no humbling of them
selves, but only--'remove Thy hand from us.'

And the answer is either the prophet's or the divine voice; spoken in
the one case to himself, in the other to the Philistines; but in either
setting forth the impossibility that the sweeping sword should rest,
since it is the instrument in God's hand, executing His charge and
fulfilling His appointment.

I. The shrinking from the unsheathed sword of the Lord.

We may deal with the words as representing very various states of mind.

They may express the impatience of sufferers. Afflictions are too often
wasted. Whatever the purpose of chastisement, the true lesson of it is
so seldom learned, even in regard to the lowest wisdom it is adapted to
teach. In an epidemic, how few people learn to take precautions, such
as cleanliness or attention to diet! In hard times commercially, how
slow most are to learn the warning against luxury, over-trading, haste
to be rich! And in regard to higher lessons, men have a dim sense
sometimes that the blow comes from God, but, like Balaam, go on their
way in spite of the angel with the sword. It does not soften, nor
restrain, nor drive to God. The main result is, impatient longing for
its removal.

The text may express the rooted dislike to the thought and the fact of
punishment as an element in divine government. This is a common phase
of feeling always, and especially so now. There is a present tendency,
good in many aspects, but excessive, to soften away the thought of
punishment; or to suppose that God's punishments must have the same
purposes as men's. We cannot punish by way of retribution, for no
balance of ours is fine enough to weigh motives or to determine
criminality. Our punishments can only be deterrent or reformatory, but
this is by reason of our weakness. He has other objects in view.

Current ideas of the love of God distort it by pitting it against His
retributive righteousness. Current ideas of sin diminish its gravity by
tracing it to heredity or environment, or viewing it as a necessary
stage in progress. The sense of God's judicial action is paralysed and
all but dead in multitudes.

All these things taken together set up a strong current of opinion
against any teaching of punitive energy in God.

The text may express the pitying reluctance of the prophet.

Jeremiah is remarkable for the weight with which 'the burden of the
Lord' pressed upon him. The true prophet feels the pang of the woes
which he is charged to announce more than his hearers do.

Unfair charges are made against gospel preachers, as if they delighted
in the thought of the retribution which they have to proclaim.

II. The solemn necessity for the unsheathing of the sword.

The judgments must go on. In the text the all-sufficient reason given
is that God has willed it so. But we must take into account all that
lies in that name of 'Lord' before we understand the message, which
brought patience to the heart of the prophet. If a Jewish prophet
believed anything, he believed that the will of the Lord was absolutely
good. Jeremiah's reason for the flashing sword is no mere beating down
human instincts, by alleging a will which is sovereign, and there an
end. We have to take into account the whole character of Him who has
willed it, and then we can discern it to be inevitable that God should
punish evil.

His character makes it inevitable. God's righteousness cannot but hate
sin and fight against it. To leave it unpunished stains His glory.

God's love cannot but draw and wield the sword. It is unsheathed in the
interests of all that is 'lovely and of good report.' If God is God at
all, and not an almighty devil, He must hate sin. The love and the
righteousness, which in deepest analysis are one, must needs issue in
punishment. There would be a blight over the universe if they did not.

The very order of the universe makes it inevitable. All things, as
coming from Him, must work for His lovers and against His enemies, as
'the stars in their courses fought against Sisera.'

The constitution of men makes it inevitable. Sin brings its own
punishment, in gnawing conscience, defiled memories, incapacity for
good, and many other penalties.

It is to be remembered that the text originally referred to retribution
on nations for national sins, and that what Jeremiah regarded as the
strokes of the Lord might be otherwise regarded as political
catastrophes. Let us not overlook that application of the principles of
the text. Scripture regards the so-called 'natural consequences' of a
nation's sins as God's judgments on them. The Christian view of the
government of the world looks on all human affairs as moved by God,
though done by men. It takes full account of the responsibility of men
the doers, but above all, recognises 'the rod and Him who hath
appointed it.' We see exemplified over and over again in the world's
history the tragic truth that the accumulated consequences of a
nation's sins fall on the heads of a single generation. Slowly, drop by
drop, the cup is filled. Slowly, moment by moment, the hand moves round
the dial, and then come the crash and boom of the hammer on the
deep-toned bell. Good men should pray not, 'Put up thyself into thy
scabbard,' but, 'Gird Thy sword on Thy thigh, O thou most mighty... on
behalf of truth and meekness and righteousness.'

III. The sheathing of the sword.

The passionate appeal in the text, which else is vain, has in large
measure its satisfaction in the work of Christ.

God does not delight in punishment. He has provided a way. Christ bears
the consequence of man's sin, the sense of alienation, the pains and
sorrows, the death. He does not bear them for Himself. His bearing them
accomplishes the ends at which punishment aims, in expressing the
divine hatred of sin and in subduing the heart. Trusting in Him, the
sword does not fall on us. In some measure indeed it still does. But it
is no longer a sword to smite, but a lancet to inflict a healing wound.
And the worst punishment does not fall on us. God's sword was sheathed
in Christ's breast. So trust in Him, then shall you have 'boldness in
the day of judgment.'




THE KINSMAN-REDEEMER

'Their Redeemer is strong; the Lord of Hosts is His name: He shall
thoroughly plead their cause.'--JER. l. 34.


Among the remarkable provisions of the Mosaic law there were some very
peculiar ones affecting the next-of-kin. The nearest living blood
relation to a man had certain obligations and offices to discharge,
under certain contingencies, in respect of which he received a special
name; which is sometimes translated in the Old Testament 'Redeemer,'
and sometimes 'Avenger' of blood. What the etymological signification
of the word may be is, perhaps, somewhat doubtful. It is taken by some
authorities to come from a word meaning 'to set free.' But a
consideration of the offices which the law prescribed for the 'Goel' is
of more value for understanding the peculiar force of the metaphor in
such a text as this, than any examination of the original meaning of
the word. Jehovah is represented as having taken upon Himself the
functions of the next-of-kin, and is the Kinsman-Redeemer of His
people. The same thought recurs frequently in the Old Testament,
especially in the second half of the prophecies of Isaiah, and it were
much to be desired that the Revised Version had adopted some means of
showing an English reader the instances, since the expression suggests
a very interesting and pathetic view of God's relation to His people.

I. Let me state briefly the qualifications and offices of the
kinsman-redeemer, _'the Goel.'_

The qualifications may be all summed up in one--that he must be the
nearest blood relation of the person whose Goel he was. He might be
brother, or less nearly related, but this was essential, that of all
living men, he was the most closely connected. That qualification has
to be kept well in mind when thinking of the transference of the office
to God in His relation to Israel, and through Israel to us.

Such being his qualification, what were his duties? Mainly three. The
first was connected with property, and is thus stated in the words of
the law, 'If thy brother be waxen poor, and sell some of his
possession, then shall his _kinsman_ that is next unto him come, and
shall redeem that which his brother hath sold' (Lev. xxv. 25, R. V.).
The Mosaic law was very jealous of large estates. The prophet
pronounced a curse upon those who joined 'land to land, and field to
field... that they may be alone in the midst of the earth.' One great
purpose steadily kept in view in all the Mosaic land-laws was the
prevention of the alienation of the land from its original holders, and
of its accumulation in a few hands. The idea underlying the law was
that of the tribal or family ownership--or rather occupancy, for God
was the owner and Israel but a tenant--and not individual possession.
That thought carries us back to a social state long since passed away,
but of which traces are still left even among ourselves. It was carried
out thoroughly in the law of Moses, however imperfectly in actual
practice. The singular institution of the year of Jubilee operated,
among other effects, to check the acquisition of large estates. It
provided that land which had been alienated was to revert to its
original occupants, and so, in substance, prohibited purchase and
permitted only the lease of land for a maximum term of fifty years. We
do not know how far its enactments were a dead letter, but their spirit
and intention were obviously to secure the land of the tribe to the
tribe for ever, to keep the territory of each distinct, to discourage
the creation of a landowning class, with its consequent landless class,
to prevent the extremes of poverty and wealth, and to perpetuate a
diffused, and nearly uniform, modest wellbeing amongst a pastoral and
agricultural community, and to keep all in mind that the land was 'not
to be sold for ever, for it is Mine,' saith the Lord.

The obligation on the next-of-kin to buy back alienated property was
quite as much imposed on him for the sake of the family as of the
individual.

The second of his duties was to buy back a member of his family fallen
into slavery. 'If a stranger or sojourner with thee be waxen rich, and
thy brother be waxen poor beside him, and sell himself unto the
stranger... after that he is sold, he may be redeemed; one of his
brethren may redeem him.' The price was to vary according to the time
which had to elapse before the year of Jubilee, when all slaves were
necessarily set free. So Hebrew slavery was entirely unlike the thing
called by the same name in other countries, and by virtue of this power
of purchase at any time, which was vested in the nearest relative,
taken along with the compulsory manumission of all 'slaves' every
fiftieth year, came to be substantially a voluntary engagement for a
fixed time, which might be ended even before that time had expired, if
compensation for the unexpired term was made to the master.

It is to be observed that this provision applied only to the case of a
Hebrew who had sold himself. No other person could sell a man into
slavery. And it applied only to the case of a Hebrew who had sold
himself to a foreigner. No Jew was allowed to hold a Jew as a slave.
'If thy brother be waxen poor with thee, and sell himself unto thee,
thou shalt not make him to serve as a bondservant: as an hired servant,
and as a sojourner, he shall be with thee.' (Lev. xxv. 39, R. V.).

The last of the offices of the kinsman-redeemer was that of avenging
the blood of a murdered relative. If a man were stricken to death, it
became a solemn obligation to exact life for life, and the blood-feud
incumbent on all the family was especially binding on the next-of-kin.
The obligation shocks a modern mind, accustomed to relegate all
punishment to the action of law which no criminal thinks of resisting.
But customs and laws are unfairly estimated when the state of things
which they regulated is forgotten or confused with that of today. The
law of blood-feud among the Hebrews was all in the direction of
restricting the wild justice of revenge, and of entrusting it to
certain chosen persons out of the kindred of the murdered man. The
savage vendetta was too deeply engrained in the national habits to be
