that the intention was to 'prevent more life escaping from him.' But
'dead' is not usually supposed to be an adjective admitting of
comparison. Others find the reason in the wish to deliver Israel from
the superstitious veneration of such things as the staff, by showing
that it was powerless. But verse 31 plainly implies that the result of
Gehazi's attempt was not what had been expected. Why need there be any
hesitation in taking the natural meaning, and supposing that Elisha
sent his servant quickly, 'if peradventure' the touch of his staff
might suffice, and followed in person, because he did not know whether
it would. There is nothing unworthy of a prophet who had just confessed
his ignorance in the supposition. His unobtrusive spirit delighted to
hide its power behind material vehicles, as is seen in most of his
miracles; and, if he remembered how he himself, in his early days, had
parted the waters with his master's cloak, he might think it possible
that his servant should work a miracle with his staff.

The Shunemite quotes his own words on that far-off day; and perhaps she
was reminded of them by perceiving the analogy of the two incidents.
But her clinging to Elisha shows her doubt of the success of the
attempt; and she was right. Why did the staff fail? Perhaps because of
its bearer. Gehazi always appears unfavourably, and Elisha's staff
loses its power in such hands. The mightiest instruments are weak when
selfishness and coldness wield them. An unworthy minister can make the
Gospel itself impotent. It is an awful thing to carry 'the rod of Thy
strength' and to hinder its exerting its energy. But possibly the
non-success of the attempt was meant to teach Elisha and us that
miracles of life-giving are not to be wrought so easily, but need the
effort of the prophet himself. We cannot delegate the work of God, and
no sending of others will do instead of going ourselves. Such things
are not achieved without much personal toil, pains, and self-sacrifice.

III. So we come to the last step, the communication of life (verses
32-37). It was noon when the child died. The mother's journey would
take three or four hours, and the return at least as much. It would
then be dark when the two reached her desolate home. She had laid the
boy on Elisha's bed, as if even that brought her some comfort. It is
difficult to say whether 'them twain' (verse 33) means him and the
mother, or him and the child; but the expression of the next verse,
'went up,' suggests that the prayer with shut door was in the lower
part of the house, and that the mother's cry was joined to the
prophet's petitions. Such prayer is the true preparation for such a
miracle. Beautiful consideration, born of sympathy, led him to shut out
curious onlookers, and then to go up alone to the little chamber where
that pale, tiny corpse lay. No eye but a mother's could have seen what
followed without profanation; and a mother's heart would have been torn
by hopes and fears if she had seen.

The actual miracle is remarkable for two peculiarities--the effort
required and the slowness of the process. Of course, there is a
profound and beautiful use to be made of the prophet's action in laying
himself upon the dead child, mouth to mouth, and hand to hand, if we
regard it as symbolic of that closeness of approach to our nature, dead
in sins, which the Lord of life makes in His incarnation and in His
continual drawing near. It is His own life which Jesus imparts, and it
is imparted because He comes near and touches us. It is the warmth of
His own heart which passes into those who live by derivation of life
from Him. And Elisha may well stand as symbol of Jesus in this miracle.
But besides that use of the narrative, which is no mere fanciful
playing with it, we should also note the difference between the prophet
and Christ in their miracles. Jesus raises the dead by His bare word.
His expressed will is all-sufficient. Elisha prays, and then puts forth
somewhat prolonged efforts, from which at first there is no effect, and
which drain him of force, so that he is obliged to pause and leave the
chamber, and gather himself together for a renewal of them. The ease of
the one sets the difficulty of the other in a strong light. And the
life which came back with a rush, in full stream, at Christ's bidding,
comes only by degrees at Elisha's prayer and work. The one worker is
the Lord of life, who speaks and it is done; the other is but the
channel of power, and the appearance of effort and gradualness in
result is owing to the narrowness of the channel, not to the inadequacy
of the power.

In all Elisha's gentleness and lowliness there is yet a certain dignity
as God's prophet; and it was not fitting that he should come from the
scene of such a miracle with the glow of it upon him, to seek for the
mother. So he summons her by Gehazi, and then, with beautiful delicacy,
leaves her to go alone into the chamber. None are to see the transports
of her joy, not even the author of it. How beautiful, too, are the
quiet words, 'Take up thy son'! She has no words; but, for all answer,
comes close to him (there is no 'in' in verse 37), and once again, but
with what different feelings, clasps his feet. Not even Gehazi, or any
other stickler for propriety, has the heart to thrust her back this
time. The story draws a curtain over that meeting in the prophet's
chamber. Sad hearts who have vainly longed for such a moment, can fancy
the rapture. But the day will come, not here, but in the upper chamber,
when parted ones shall clasp each other again; and many a mourner shall
hear Jesus say from the throne what He once said from the Cross,
'Woman, behold thy son; son, behold thy mother.'




NAAMAN'S WRATH

'And Elisha sent a messenger unto Naaman, saying, Go and wash in Jordan
seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be
clean. 11. But Naaman was wroth, and went away.'--2 KINGS v. 10,11.


These two figures are significant of much beyond themselves. Elisha the
prophet is the bearer of a divine cure. Naaman, the great Syrian noble,
is stricken with the disease that throughout the Old Testament is
treated as a parable of sin and death. He was the commander-in-chief of
the army of Damascus, high in favour at Ben-hadad's court; his
reputation and renown were on every tongue, _but_ he was a leper. There
is a 'but' in every fortune, as there is a 'but' in every character.

So he comes to the prophet's humble home in Samaria, and we find him
waiting, a suppliant at the gate, with his cavalcade of attendants, and
a present worth many thousands of pounds in our English money.

How does the prophet receive his distinguished visitor? In all the rest
of his actions we find Elisha gentle, accessible, forgetful of his
dignity. Here his conduct would be discourteous if there were not a
reason for it. He is reserved, unsympathetic, keeps the great man at
the staff-end, will not even come out to receive him as common courtesy
might have suggested; sends him a curt message of direction, with not a
word more than was necessary.

And then, naturally enough, the hot soldier begins to explode. His
pride is touched; he has not been received with due deference. If the
prophet would have come out and chanted incantations over him, and made
mystical motions of his hands above the shining patches of his leprous
skin, he could have believed in the cure. But there was nothing in the
injunction given for his superstition to lay hold of. His patriotic
susceptibilities are roused. If he is to be cleansed by bathing, are
not the crystal streams of his own city, the glory of Damascus, better
than the turbid and muddy Jordan that belongs to Israel? So he flounced
away, and would have sacrificed his hope of cure to his passion if his
servants had not brought him to common-sense by their cool
remonstrance. He would have done any great thing which he had been set
to do; he had already done a great thing in taking the long journey,
and being ready to expend all that vast amount of treasure, and so
surely there need be no difficulty in his complying, were it only as an
experiment, with the very simple and easy terms which the prophet had
enjoined.

Now, all these points may be so put as to suggest for us
characteristics of that gospel which is God's cure for our leprosy. And
the whole story shows us as in a glass what human nature would like the
gospel to be, and how we sick men quarrel with our physic, and stumble
at those very characteristics of the gospel which are its main glory
and the secret of its power. My only purpose in this sermon is to bring
out two or three of these as lying on the surface of the story before
us.

I. First, then, God's cure puts us all on one level.

Naaman wished to be treated like a great man that happened to be a
leper; Elisha treated him like a leper that happened to be a great man.
'I thought, he will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the
name of the Lord his God.' The whole question about his treatment turns
on this, Whether is the important thing his disease or his dignity? He
thought it was his dignity, the prophet thought it was his disease. And
so he served him as he would have served any one else that in similar
circumstances, and for a like necessity, had come to him.

And now, if you will generalise that, it just comes to this--that
Christianity brushes aside all the surface differences of men, and goes
in its treatment of them straight to the central likenesses, the things
which, in all mankind, are identical. There are the same wants, the
same sorrows, the same necessity for the same cleansing beneath the
queen's robes and the peer's ermine, the workman's jacket and the
beggar's rags.

Whatever differences of culture, of station, of idiosyncrasy there may
be, these are but surface and accidental. We are all alike in this,
that we 'have sinned, and come short of the glory of God'; and our
Great Physician, in His great remedy, insists upon treating us all as
patients, and not as this, that, or the other, kind of patients. The
cholera, when it lays hold of ladies and gentlemen, deals with them in
precisely the same fashion that it does when it lays hold of waifs on
the dunghill; and a wise doctor will treat the Prince of Wales just as
he will treat the Prince of Wales's stable-boy. Christianity has
nothing to say, in the first place, to the accidents that separate us
one from the other, but insists on looking at us all as standing on the
one level and partaking of the one characteristic. We may be wise or
foolish, we may be learned or ignorant, we may be rich or poor, we may
be high or low, we may be barbarian or civilised, but we are all
sinners. The leprosy runs through us all, according to the diagnosis of
Christianity, and our Elisha deals with Naaman as he deals with the
poorest footboy in Naaman's cavalcade who is afflicted with the same
disease.

Now that rubs against our self-importance; a great many of us would be
quite willing to go to heaven, but we do not like to go in a common
caravan. We want to have a compartment to ourselves, and to travel in a
manner becoming our position. We are quite willing to be healed, but we
would like to be healed with due deference. You are an educated man, a
student; you do not like to take the same place as the most unlettered,
and to feel that the common fact of sin puts you, in a very solemn
respect, upon the level of these narrow foreheads and unlettered
people. And so some of you turn away because Christianity, with such
impartiality and persistency, insists upon the identity of the fact of
sin in us all, and passes by the little diversities on which we plume
ourselves, and which part us the one from the other. Dear brethren, I
am sure that some of my audience have been kept away from the gospel by
this humbling characteristic of it, that at the very beginning it
insists on bringing us all into the one category; and I venture to ask
you to ponder with yourselves this question, Is it not wise, is it not
necessary that the physician should look only at the disease and think
nothing of all the other facts of the patient's character or life?
Surely, surely, it is a fact that we are transgressors, and surely it
is a fact that if we be transgressors that is the most important thing
about us--far more important than all these diversities of which I have
been speaking. They are skin-deep, this is the central truth, that we
have souls which ought to stand in a living relation of glad obedience
to our Father in heaven; and which, alas! do stand in an attitude often
of sulky alienation, often of indifference, and not seldom of
rebellion. If so, then it is both wise and kind to deal with that
solemn fact first. In wisdom and in mercy Christianity deals with all
men as sinners, needing chiefly to be healed of that disease. 'The
Scripture hath concluded all under sin'--shut up the whole race as in a
great chamber, that so cleansing and forgiveness might reach them all.
They are gathered together as patients in a hospital are gathered, that
their sickness may be medicined and their wounds dressed.

For this impartiality of the gospel, putting us all on one level, and
its determination to deal with us all as sinners, is but the other side
of, and the preparation for, that blessed universality of a sacrifice
for all, and a gospel for the whole world. Do not quarrel with your
physic because the Physician insists upon dealing with you as sick men.

II. Then take another of the thoughts that come out of the incident
before us. God's cure puts the messengers of the cure well away in the
background.

Naaman, heathen-like, wanted something sensuous for his confidence in
the prophet's cure to lay hold upon. If the prophet would only have
come out, and done like the sorcerers and magic-workers of whom he had
had experience; if he would have come weaving mystical incantations,
and calling upon the God whom he worshipped, but whom Naaman did not,
and making passes with his hands over the leprous places--then there
would have been something for his sense to build upon, and he would
have been ready to believe in the prophet's power to cure. But that was
the very thing which the prophet did not want him to believe in. Elisha
desired to conceal himself, and to make God's power prominent. He
wished to cure Naaman's soul of the leprosy of idolatry as well as to
cure his body; and we see, in the sequel of the story, that the very
simplicity of the means enjoined and the absence of any human agency,
which at first staggered the sensuous nature and offended the pride of
Naaman, at last led him to see and confess that there was no God in all
the earth but in Israel. Therefore the prophet keeps in the background.
His part is not to cure, but to bring God's cure. He is only a voice.
He brings the sick man and God's prescription face to face, and there
leaves him. Naaman would have liked to force him into the place of a
magician, in whom miracle-working power resided. Elisha will only take
the place of a herald who proclaims how God's power may be brought to
heal. So men have always sought to turn the messengers of God's cure
into miracle-workers. Making the ministers of God's word into priests
who by external acts convey grace and forgiveness, is a superstition
that has its roots deep in human nature. It is not that the priests
have made themselves so much as that the people have made the priests.
Here is an instance in a rude form of the tendency which has been at
work in all generations, and has been the corruption of Christianity
from the beginning, and is doing mischief every day--the tendency to
place one's confidence in a man who is supposed to be, in some
mysterious manner, the bearer of a grace that will cure and cleanse.
And the prophet's position in our story brings out very clearly the
position which all Christian ministers hold. They are nothing but
heralds, their personality disappears, they are merely a voice. All
that they have to do is to bring men into contact with God's own word
of command and promise, and then to vanish.

Christianity has no 'priests,' Christianity has no 'sacraments.'
Christianity has no external rites which bring grace or help except in
so far as by their aid the soul is brought into contact with the truth,
and by meditation and faith is thus made capable of receiving more of
Christ's Spirit. Our only commission is to bring to you God's message
of how you may be healed. When we have said, 'Wash, and be clean,' as
plainly, earnestly, and lovingly as we can, we have done all our
appointed office. We are heralds, and nothing more. Our business is to
preach, not to do rites, or minister sacraments. Our business is to
preach, not to argue. We are neither priests nor professors, but
preachers. We have to deliver the message given to us faithfully. We
have to ring out the proclamation loudly. The virtue of a town crier is
that he make people hear and understand. The virtue of a messenger is
that he repeats precisely what he was told. And a Christian minister
has to lift up his voice and not be afraid, to see to it that his
speech be plain, and that it do not overlay the message with fripperies
of ornament, or affectations, or personalities, and to plead earnestly
and lovingly with men to come to the divine Healer. John Baptist's
description of himself is true of them. With rare self-abnegation, he
would only reply to the question, 'Who art thou?' with 'I am a voice.'
His personality was nothing. His message was all. A musical string
cannot be seen as it vibrates. So the man should be lost in his
proclamation. We are heralds and nothing more, and the more we keep in
the background and the less our hearers depend on us, the better. If
you want priests who will 'call on the name of their God, and wave
their hands over the place,' and convey grace and healing to you by
anything that they do for or to you, you will have to go beyond the
limits of New Testament Christianity to find them. So men quarrel with
their medicine because their cure is purely a spiritual process,
depending on spiritual forces, and sense cries out for sacred rites and
persons to be the channels of God's healing.

III. And now, lastly, God's cure wants nothing from you but to take it.

Naaman's servants were quite right: 'My father! If the prophet had bid
thee do some great thing, wouldst thou not have done it?' Yes! Of
course he would, and the greater the better. Men will stand, as Indian
fakirs do, with their arms above their heads until they stiffen there.
They will perch themselves upon pillars, like Simeon Stylites, for
years, till the birds build their nests in their hair: they will
measure all the distance from Cape Comorin to Juggernaut's temple with
their bodies along the dusty road. They will give the fruit of their
body for the sin of their soul. They will wear hair shirts and scourge
themselves. They will fast and deny themselves. They will build
cathedrals and endow churches. They will do as many of you do, labour
by fits and starts all through your lives at the endless task of making
yourselves ready for heaven, and winning it by obedience and by
righteousness. They will do all these things and do them gladly, rather
than listen to the humbling message that says, 'You do not need to do
anything--wash!' Is it your washing, or the water, that will clean you?
Wash and be clean! Ah, my brother! Naaman's cleansing was only a test
of his obedience, and a token that it was God who cleansed him. There
was no power in Jordan's waters to take away the taint of leprosy. Our
cleansing is in that blood of Jesus Christ that has the power to take
away all sin, and to make the foulest amongst us pure and clean.

But the two commandments--that of the symbol in my text, that of the
reality in the Christian gospel--are alike in this respect, that both
the one and the other are a confession that the man himself has no part
in his own cleansing. And so Naamans, in all generations, who were
eager to do some great thing, have stumbled, and turned away from that
gospel which says, 'It is finished!' 'Not by works of righteousness
which we have done, but by His mercy He saved us.' Dear brother, you
can do nothing. You do not need to do anything. It is a hard pill for
my pride to swallow, to be indebted to absolute mercy, which I have
done nothing to bring, for all my hope, but it is a position that we
have to take. Hard to take for all of us, very hard for you who have
never looked in the face the solemn fact of your own sinfulness, and
pondered upon the consequences of that; but most blessed if only you
will open your eyes to see that the stern refusal to accept anything
from us as working out our salvation is but the other side of the great
truth that Christ's death is all-sufficient, and that in Him the
foulest may be clean.

                'Nothing in my hand I bring.'

If you bring anything you cannot grasp the Cross. Do not try to eke out
Christ's work with yours; do not build upon penitence, or feelings, or
faith, or anything, but build only upon this: 'When I had nothing to
pay He frankly forgave me all.' And build upon this: 'Christ alone has
died for me'; and Christ alone is all-sufficient. 'Wash and be clean';
accept and possess; believe and live!




NAAMAN'S IMPERFECT FAITH

'And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and came
and stood before him: and he said, Behold, now I know that there is no
God in all the earth, but in Israel: now therefore, I pray thee, take a
blessing of thy servant. 16. But he said, As the Lord liveth, before
whom I stand, I will receive none. And he urged him to take it; but he
refused. 17. And Naaman said, Shall there not then, I pray thee, be
given to thy servant two mules' burden of earth? for thy servant will
henceforth offer neither burnt-offering nor sacrifice unto other gods,
but unto the Lord. 18. In this thing the Lord pardon thy servant, that
when my master goeth into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he
leaneth on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon: when I bow
down myself in the house of Rimmon, the Lord pardon thy servant in this
thing. 19. And he said unto him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a
little way. 20. But Gehazi, the servant of Elisha the man of God, said,
Behold, my master hath spared Naaman this Syrian, in not receiving at
his hands that which he brought: but, as the Lord liveth, I will run
after him, and take somewhat of him. 21. So Gehazi followed after
Naaman: and when Naaman saw him running after him, he lighted down from
the chariot to meet him, and said, Is all well? 22. And he said, All is
well. My master hath sent me, saying, Behold, even now there be come to
me from mount Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets: give
them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and two charges of garments. 23.
And Naaman said, Be content, take two talents. And he urged him, and
bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of garments
and laid them upon two of his servants; and they bare them before him.
24. And when he came to the tower, he took them from their hand, and
bestowed them in the house: and he let the men go, and they departed.
25. But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said unto
him, Whence comest thou, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went no
whither. 26. And he said unto him, Went not mine heart with thee, when
the man turned again from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to
receive money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards, and vineyards,
and sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and maidservants? 27. The leprosy
therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed for ever.
And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.'--2 KINGS
v. 15-27.

Like the Samaritan leper healed by Jesus, Naaman came back to give
glory to God. Samaria was quite out of his road to Damascus, but
benefit melted his heart, and the pride, which had been indignant that
the prophet did not come out to him, faded before thankfulness, which
impelled him to go to the prophet. God's gifts should humble, and
gratitude is not afraid to stoop. Elisha would not see Naaman before,
for he needed to be taught; but he gladly welcomes him into his
presence now, for he has learned his lesson. Sometimes the best way to
attract is to repel, and the true servant of God consults not his own
dignity, but others' good, whichever he does.

I. The first point is the offer and refusal of the gift. The benefited
is liberal and the benefactor disinterested. Naaman was a convert to
pure monotheism. His avowal is clear and full. But what a miserable
conclusion he draws with that 'therefore'! He should have said,
'Therefore I come to trust under the shadow of His wings.' But he is
not ready to give himself, and, like some of the rest of us, thinks to
compound by giving money. When the outward giving of goods is token of
inward surrender of self, it is accepted. When it is a substitute for
that, it is rejected. No doubt, too, Naaman thought that Elisha was,
like the sorcerers of heathenism, very accessible to gifts; and if he
had come to believe in Elisha's God, he had yet to learn the
loving-kindness of the God in whom he had come to believe. He had to
learn next that 'the gift of God' was not 'purchased with money' and
the prophet's acceptance of his present would have dimmed Elisha's own
character, and that of his God, in the newly opened eyes of Naaman.

Elisha's answer begins with the solemn adjuration which we first hear
from Elijah. In its use here, it not only declares the unalterable
determination of Elisha, but reveals its grounds. To a man who feels
ever the burning consciousness that he is in the presence of God, all
earthly good dwindles into nothing. How should talents of silver and
gold, and changes of raiment, have worth in eyes before which that
awful, blessed vision flames? A candle shows black against the sun. If
we walk all the day in the light of God's countenance, we shall not see
much brightness to dazzle us in the pale and borrowed lights of earth.
The vivid realisation of God in our daily lives is the true shield
against the enticements of the world. Further, the consciousness of
being God's servant, which is implied in the expression 'before whom I
stand,' makes a man shrink from receiving wages from men. 'To his own
Master he standeth or falleth,' and will be scrupulously careful that
no taint of apparent self-seeking shall spoil his service, in the eyes
of men or in the judgment of the 'great Taskmaster.' Elisha felt that
the honour of his order, and, in some sense, of his God, in the eyes of
this half-convert, depended on his own perfect and transparent
disinterestedness. Therefore, although he made no scruple of taking the
Shunemite's gifts, and probably lived on similar offerings, he
steadfastly refused the enormous sum proffered by Naaman. 'The labourer
is worthy of his hire,' but if accepting it is likely to make people
think that he did his work for the sake of it, he must refuse it. A
hireling is not a man who is paid for his work, but one who works for
the sake of the pay. If once a professed servant of God falls under
reasonable suspicion of doing that, his power for good is ended, as it
should be.

II. The next point to notice is the alloy in the gold, or the
imperfection of Naaman's new convictions. He had been cured of his
leprosy at once, but the cure of his soul had to be more gradual. It is
unreasonable to expect clear sight, with the power of rightly
estimating magnitudes, from a man seeing for the first time. But though
Naaman's shortcomings are very natural and excusable, they are plainly
shortcomings. Note the two forms which they take,--superstition and
selfish compromise. What good would a couple of loads of soil be, and
could he not have taken that from the roadside without leave? The
connection between the two halves of verse 17 makes his object plain.
He wished the earth 'for' he would not sacrifice but to Jehovah. That
is, he meant to use it as the foundation of an altar, as if only some
of the very ground on which Jehovah had manifested Himself was sacred
enough for such a purpose. He did not, indeed, think of 'the Lord' as a
local deity of Israel, as his ample confession of faith in verse 15
proves; but neither had he reached the point of feeling that the Being
worshipped makes the altar sacred. No wonder that he did not unlearn in
an hour his whole way of thinking of religion! The reliance on
externals is too natural to us all, even with all our training in a
better faith, to allow of our wondering at or severely blaming him. A
sackful of earth from Palestine has been supposed to make a whole
graveyard a 'Campo Santo'; and, no doubt, there are many good people in
England who have carried home bottles of Jordan water for christenings.
Does not the very name of 'the Holy Land' witness to the survival of
Naaman's sentimental error?

The other tarnish on the clear mirror was of a graver kind. Notice that
he does not ask Elisha's sanction to his intended compromise, but
simply announces his intention, and hopes for forgiveness. It looks ill
when a man, in the first fervour of adopting a new faith, is casting
about for ways to reconcile it with the public profession of his old
abandoned one. We should have thought better of Naaman's monotheism, if
he had not coupled his avowal of it, where it was safe to be honest,
with the announcement that he did not intend to stand by his avowal
when it was risky. It would have required huge courage to have gone
back to Damascus and denied Rimmon; and our censure must be lenient,
but decided.

Naaman was the first preacher of a doctrine of compromise, which has
found eminent defenders and practisers, in our own and other times. To
separate the official from the man, and to allow the one to profess in
public a creed which the other disavows in private, is rank immorality,
whoever does or advocates it. The motive in this case was, perhaps, not
so much cowardice as selfish unwillingness to forfeit position and
favour at court. He wants to keep all the good things he has got; and
he tries to blind his conscience by representing the small compliance
of bowing as almost forced on him by the grasp of the bowing king, who
leaned on his hand. But was it necessary that he should be the king's
favourite? A deeper faith would have said, 'Perish court favour and
everything that hinders me from making known whose I am.' But Naaman is
an early example of the family of 'Facing-both-ways,' and of trying to
'make the best of both worlds.' But his sophistication of conscience
will not do, and his own dissatisfaction with his excuse peeps out
plainly in his petition that he may be forgiven. If his act needed
forgiveness, it should not have been done, nor thus calmly announced.
It is vain to ask forgiveness beforehand for known sin about to be
committed.

Elisha is not asked for his sanction, and he neither gives nor refuses
it. He dismissed Naaman with cold dignity, in the ordinary conventional
form of leave-taking. His silence indicated at least the absence of
hearty approval, and probably he was silent to Naaman because, as he
said about the Shunemite's trouble, the Lord had been silent to him,
and he had no authoritative decision to give. Let us hope that Naaman's
faith grew and stiffened before the time of trial came, and that he did
not lie to God in the house of Rimmon. Let us take the warning that we
are to publish on the housetops what we hear in the ear, and that, if
in anything we should be punctiliously sincere, it is in the profession
of our faith.

III. The last point is Gehazi's avarice, and what he got by it. How
differently the same sight affected the man who lived near God and the
one who lived by sense! Elisha had no desires stirred by the wealth in
Naaman's train. Gehazi's mouth watered after it. Regulate desires and
you rule conduct. The true regulation of desires is found in communion
with God. Gehazi had a sordid soul, like Judas; and, like the traitor
Apostle, he was untouched by contact with goodness and unworldliness.
Perhaps the parallel might be carried farther, and both were moved with
coarse contempt for their master's silly indifference to earthly good.
That feeling speaks in Gehazi's soliloquy. He evidently thought the
prophet a fool for having let 'this Syrian' off so easily. He was fair
game, and he had brought the wealth on purpose to leave it. Profanity
speaks in uttering a solemn oath on such an occasion. The putting side
by side of 'the Lord liveth' and 'I will run after him' would be
ludicrous if it were not horrible. How much profanity may live close
beside a prophet, and learn nothing from him but a holy name to sully
in an oath!

The after part of the story suggests that Naaman was out of sight of
the city before he saw Gehazi coming after him. The cunning liar timed
his arrival well. The courtesy of Naaman in lighting down from his
chariot to receive the prophet's servant shows how real a change had
been wrought upon him, even though there were imperfections in him.
Gehazi's story is well hung together, and has plenty of 'local colour'
to make it probable. Such glib ingenuity in lying augurs long practice
in the art. If he had been content with a small fee, he needed only to
have told the truth; but his story was required to put a fair face on
the amount of his request. And in what an amiable light it sets Elisha!
He would not take for himself, but he has nothing to give to the two
imaginary scholars, who have come from some of the schools of the
prophets in the hill-country of Ephraim, thirsting for instruction. How
sweet the picture, and what a hard heart that could refuse the request!
Truly said Paul, 'The love of money is a root of all kinds of evil.'
Any sin may come from it, and be done to gratify it. 'Honestly if you
can, but get it,' was Gehazi's principle, as it is that of many a man
in the Christian Churches of this day. Greed of gain is a sin that
seldom keeps house alone. Naaman no doubt was glad to give, both
because he was grateful, and because, like most people in high
positions, he was galled by the sense of obligation to a man beneath
him in rank. So back went Gehazi, with the two Syrian slaves carrying
his baggage for him, and he chuckling at his lucky stroke, and
pleasantly imagining how to spend his wealth.

'The tower' in verse 24 is more correctly 'the hill,' and it was
probably there where the little group would come in sight of Elisha's
house. So Gehazi gets rid of the porters before they could be seen or
speak to any one, and manages his load for a little way himself,
carefully hides it in the house, and, seeing the men safely off,
appears obsequious and innocent before Elisha. The prophet's gift of
supernatural knowledge was intermittent, as witness his ignorance of
the Shunemite's sorrow; but Gehazi must have known its occasional
action, and we can fancy that his heart sank at the ominous question,
so curt in the original, and conveying so clearly the prophet's
knowledge that he had been away from the house: 'Whence, Gehazi?' One
lie needs another to cover it, and every sin is likely to beget a
successor. So, with some tremor, but without hesitation, he tries to
hide his tracks. Did not Elisha's eye pierce the wretched hypocrite as
with a dart? and did not his voice ring like a judgment trumpet, as he
confounded the silent sinner with the conviction that the prophet
himself had been at the spot, though his body had remained in the
house? So, at last, will men be reduced to stony dumbness, when they
discover that an Eye which can see deeper than Elisha's has been gazing
on all their secret sins. The question, 'Is this a time to receive?'
etc., suggests the special reasons, in Naaman's new faith, for
conspicuous disregard of wealth, in order that he might thereby learn
the free love of Elisha's God and of Jehovah's servant, both of which
had been tarnished by Gehazi's ill-omened greed. The long enumeration
following on 'garments' includes, no doubt, the things that Gehazi had
solaced his return with the thought of buying, and so adds another
proof that his heart was turned inside out before the prophet.

His punishment is severe; but his sin was great. The leprosy was a
fitting punishment, both because it had been Naaman's, from which
obedient reliance on God had set him free, and because of its
symbolical meaning, as the type of sin. Gehazi got his coveted money,
but he got something else along with it, which he did not bargain for,
and which took all the sweetness out of it. That is always the case.
'Ill-gotten gear never prospers'; and, if a man has set his heart on
worldly good, he may succeed in amassing a fortune, but the leprosy
will cleave to him, and his soul will be all crusted and foul with that
living death. How many successful men, perhaps high in reputation in
the Church as in the world, would stand 'lepers as white as snow,' if
we had God's eyes to see them with!




SIGHT AND BLINDNESS

'Then the king of Syria warred against Israel, and took counsel with
his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp. 9. And
the man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying, Beware that them
pass not such a place; for thither the Syrians are come down. 10. And
the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told him and
warned him of, and saved himself there, not once nor twice. 11.
Therefore the heart of the king of Syria was sore troubled for this
thing; and he called his servants, and said unto them, Will ye not shew
me which of us is for the king of Israel? 12. And one of his servants
said, None, my Lord, O king: but Elisha, the prophet that is in Israel,
telleth the king of Israel the words that thou speakest in thy
bedchamber. 13. And he said, Go and spy where he is, that I may send
and fetch him. And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.
14. Therefore sent he thither horses, and chariots, and a great host:
and they came by night, and compassed the city about. 15. And when the
servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an
host compassed the city both with horses and chariots. And his servant
said unto him, Alas, my master! how shall we do? 16. And he answered,
Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with
them. 17. And Elisha prayed, and said, Lord, I pray Thee, open his
eyes, that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the young man;
and he saw: and, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots
of fire round about Elisha. 18. And when they came down to him, Elisha
prayed unto the Lord, and said, Smite this people, I pray Thee, with
blindness. And He smote them with blindness according to the word of
Elisha.'--2 KINGS vi 8-18.


The revelation of the angel guard around Elisha is the important part
of this incident, but the preliminaries to it may yield some
instruction. The first point to be noted is the friendly relations
between the king and the prophet. The king was probably Joram, who had
given up Baal worship, though still retaining the calves at Bethel and
Dan (2 Kings iii 2). The whole tone of things is changed from the
stormy days of Elijah. The prophet is frequently an inhabitant of the
capital, and a trusted counsellor. No doubt much of this improvement
was owing to Elijah's undaunted denunciation, but much, too, was due to
Elisha's gentle persuasion. We are often tempted to do injustice to the
sterner predecessors when we see how the gentler ways of their
followers seem to accomplish more than theirs did. Unless winter storms
had come first, spring sunshine would draw forth few flowers. All
honour to the heroes who begin the fight, and do not see the victory.

The Syrian king's way of warfare was not by a regular continued
invasion, but by dashes across the border on undefended places; and
time after time he found himself out in his calculations, and troops
enough to beat him off massed where he meant to strike. No wonder that
he suspected treachery. The prompt answer of his servants implies that
Elisha's intervention was well known by them, and measures the
reputation in which he stood. Let no one suppose that thwarting Syria
was an unworthy use of a supernatural gift. The preservation of Israel
and the revelation of God were worthy ends, and all that is accessory
to a worthy end is worthy. It is foolish to call anything a trifle
which serves a great purpose.

Joram had learned to obey the prophet, and his people and their enemies
had learned that Elisha was a prophet. That was much. He had no great
revelations of the deep things of God to give to his generation or to
posterity, but he gave directions as to practical life which bore on
the wellbeing of the state; and that office was not less divinely
conferred. It is a good thing when God's servants are not afraid to
make their voices heard in politics, and a safeguard for a nation when
their counsels are taken. The quiet prophet was more to Israel than an
army.

The 'great host' sent to capture Elisha shows the terror which he had
inspired, and the importance attached to getting possession of him. It
is, too, an odd instance of the inconsistency of godless men, in that
it never occurs to the Syrian king that Elisha, who knew all his
schemes, might know this one too, or that horses and chariots were of
little use against a man who had Heaven to back him. Dothan lay on an
isolated hill in a wide plain, and could easily be surrounded. A
night-march offered the chance of a surprise, which seems to have been
prevented by the unusually early rising of Elisha's servant, the young
successor of Gehazi. Apparently he had gone out of the little city
before he discovered the besiegers, and then rushed back in terror.
Note the strongly contrasted pictures of the lad and his master,--the
one representing the despair of sense, the other the confidence of
faith. The lad's passionate exclamation was most natural, and fear
darkening to bewildered helplessness is reasonable to men who only see
the material and visible dangers and enemies that beset every life. The
wonder is, not that we should sometimes be afraid, but that we should
ever be free from fear, if we look only at visible facts. Worse foes
ring us round than those whose armour glittered in the morning sunshine
at Dothan, and we are as helpless to cope with them as that frightened
youth was. Any man who calmly reflects on the possibilities and
certainties of his life will find abundant reason for a sinking heart.
So much that is dreadful and sad may come, and so much must come, that
the boldest may well shrink, and the most resourceful cry 'Alas! how
shall we do?' It is not courage, but blindness, which enables godless
men to front life so unconcernedly.

How nobly the calmness of Elisha shows beside the lad's alarm! Probably
both were now outside the city, as the immediately following verse
speaks of the mountain as the scene. If so, Elisha had gone forth to
meet the enemy, and that must have brought fresh terror to his servant.
The quiet 'Fear not!' was of little use without the assurance of the
next clause; for there is no more idle expenditure of breath than in
telling a man not to be afraid, and doing nothing to remove the grounds
of his fear. That is all that the world can do to comfort or hearten.
'Fear not?' the youth might well have said. 'It is all very easy to say
that; but look there! How can I help being afraid?' There is only one
way to help it, and that is to believe that 'they that be with us are
more than they that be with them.' The true and only conqueror of
reasonable fear is still more reasonable trust. The two parts played by
the servant and the prophet are united in the man who cleaves to Jesus
Christ as his defence. He would not cling so close to Him but for the
fear that tightens his grip. He would tremble far more but for that
grip. He who says in his heart, 'What time I am afraid, I will trust in
Thee,' will presently get to saying, 'I will trust, and not be afraid.'

Note, further, the sight seen by opened eyes. Elisha did not pray that
the heavenly guards might come; for they were there already. Nor does
it appear that he saw them; for he did not need that heightened
condition of spiritual perception which appears to be meant by the
opening of the eyes. And what a sight the trembling young man saw!
Where he had seen only barren rock or sparse vegetation, he saw that
same fiery host that had attended Elijah in his translation, now
enclosing the unarmed prophet and himself within a flaming ring. The
manifestation, not the presence, of the angel guards was the miracle.
It was a momentary unveiling of what always was, and would be after the
curtain was drawn again. I suppose that no reverent reader of Scripture
can doubt the existence of angelic beings, or their office to 'minister
to the heirs of salvation.' To us, indeed, who know Him who is the
'Head of all principalities and powers,' the doctrine of angelic
ministration is of less importance than that of Christ's divine help;
but the latter truth does not supersede the former, though its
brightness throws the other, about which we know so much less, into
comparative shadow. But we may still learn from this transient
disclosure of 'the things that are,' the permanent truth of the
ever-active presence of divinely sent helps and guards, with all who
trust in Him.

This manifestation has several features of resemblance to that given to
Jacob, in his most defenceless hour, when he saw beside his unprotected
camp of women and children 'God's host,' and, in a rapture of thankful
wonder, named the place 'Mahanaim,'--'Two Camps.' The sight teaches us
that God's messengers are ever near, and then most near when needed
most. It tells us, too, that they come in the form needed. They are
warriors when we are ringed about by foes, counsellors when we are
perplexed, comforters when we mourn. Their shapes are as varied as our
needs, and ever correspond to 'the present distress.' They come in
power sufficient to conquer. There was force enough circling the
prophet to have annihilated all the Syrians. True, they did not draw
their celestial swords, but they were there, and their presence was
enough for the triumphant faith of the guarded men. What living thing
could come through that wall of fire?

Our eyes are blinded and we need to have them cleared, if not in the
same manner as this lad's, yet in an analogous way. We look so
constantly at the things seen that we have no sight for the unseen.
Worldliness, sin, unbelief, sense and its trifles, time and its
transitoriness, blind the eyes of our mind; and we need those of sense
to be closed, that these may open. The truest vision is the vision of
faith. It is certain, direct, and conclusive. The world says, 'Seeing
is believing'; the gospel says, 'Believing is seeing.' If we would but
live near to Jesus Christ, pray to Him to touch our blind eyeballs, and
turn away from the dazzling unrealities which sense brings, we should
find Him 'the master-light of all our seeing,' and be sure of the
eternal, invisible things, with an assurance superior to that given by
the keenest sight in the brightest sunshine. When we are blind to
earth, we see earth glorified by angel presences, and fear and despair
and helplessness and sorrow flee away from our tranquil hearts. If, on
the other hand, we fix our gaze on earth and its trifles, there will
generally be more to alarm than to encourage, and we shall do well to
be afraid, if we do not see, as in such a case we shall certainly not
see, the fiery wall around us, behind which God keeps His people safe.

Note, finally, the blindness. Elisha's dealing with the advancing host
of Syria can only be rightly estimated by looking beyond the limits of
the text. His object was to carry the whole army into Samaria, that
they might there be won by giving them bread to eat and water to drink,
and so heaping coals of fire on their head. The prophet, who was in so
many points a foreshadowing of the gospel type of excellence, was the
first to show the right way to conquer. Nineteen centuries of so-called
Christianity have not brought 'Christendom' to practise Elisha's recipe
for finishing a war. It succeeded in his hands; for, after that feast
and liberation of a captured army, 'the bands of Syria came no more
into the land of Israel.' How could they, as long as the remembrance of
that kindness lasted? Pity that the same sort of treatment were not
tried to-day!

The blindness which fell on the Syrians does not seem to have been
total loss of sight,--for, if so, they could not have followed Elisha
to Samaria, nearly fifteen miles off,--but rather an ocular affection
which prevented them from recognising what they saw. It was a
supernatural impediment in any case, however far it extended. God did
'according to the word of Elisha,' a wonderful inversion of the
ordinary formula. But that was because Elisha was doing according to
the word of the Lord. The prayers which are 'according to His will' are
the answered prayers.

They who see not the angels, see nothing clearly. There is a mist over
every eye that beholds only the things of time, which prevents it from
seeing these as they are, and from recognising a prophet when he is
before them. If we would rightly estimate the objects of sense, we must
discern, shining through them, the far loftier and greater things of
eternity. That flaming background is needed to supply a scale by which
to measure the others. The flat plain of Lombardy is most beautiful
when its flatness is seen girdled by the giant Alps, where lies the
purity of the snow which feeds the rivers that fertilise the levels
below.




'IMPOSSIBLE,--ONLY I SAW IT'

'Then Elisha said, Hear ye the word of the Lord; Thus saith the Lord,
Tomorrow about this time shall a measure of fine flour he sold for a
shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of
Samaria. 2. Then a lord on whose hand the king leaned answered the man
of God, and said, Behold, if the Lord would make windows in heaven,
might this thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shalt see it with thine
eyes, but shalt not eat thereof. 3. And there were four leprous men at
the entering in of the gate: and they said one to another, Why sit we
here until we die? 4. If we say, We will enter into the city, then the
famine is in the city, and we shall die there: and if we sit still
here, we die also. Now therefore come, and let us fall unto the host of
the Syrians: if they save us alive, we shall live; and if they kill us,
we shall but die. 5. And they rose up in the twilight, to go unto the
camp of the Syrians: and when they were come to the uttermost part of
the camp of Syria, behold, there was no man there. 6. For the Lord had
made the host of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise
of horses, even the noise of a great host: and they said one to
another, Lo, the king of Israel hath hired against us the kings of the
Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us. 7. Wherefore
they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their
horses, and their asses, even the camp as it was, and fled for their
life. 8. And when these lepers came to the uttermost part of the camp,
they went into one tent, and did eat and drink, and carried thence
silver, and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it; and came again, and
