   Simply to Thy Cross I cling.'

Corrupt forms of Christianity have taken an acute measure of the worst
parts of human nature, when they have taught men that they can eke out
Christ's work by their own, and have some kind of share in their own
salvation. Dear brethren, I have to bring to you another Gospel than
that, and to say, All is done for us, and all will be done in us, and
nothing has to be done by us. Some of you do not like that. Just as a
man drowning is almost sure to try to help himself, and get his limbs
inextricably twisted round his would-be rescuer and drown them both, so
men will not, without a struggle, consent to owe everything to Jesus
Christ, and to let Him draw them out of many waters and set them on the
safe shore. But unless we do so, we have little share in His Gospel.

And another thing stands in the way--namely, that the Gospel insists
upon absolute obedience to Jesus Christ. Agrippa fancied that it was an
utterly preposterous idea that he should lower his flag, and doff his
crown, and become the servant of a Jewish peasant. A great many of us,
though we have a higher idea of our Lord than his, do yet find it quite
as hard to submit our wills to His, and to accept the condition of
absolute obedience, utter resignation to Him, and entire subjection to
His commandment. We say, 'Let my own will have a little bit of play in
a corner.' Some of us find it very hard to believe that we are to bring
all our thinking upon religious and moral subjects to Him, and to
accept His word as conclusive, settling all controversies. 'I, with my
culture; am I to accept what Christ says as the end of strife?' Yes,
absolute submission is the plainest condition of real Christianity. The
very name tells us that. We are Christians, _i.e._ Christ's men; and
unless we are, we have no right to the name. But some of us had rather
be our own masters and enjoy the miseries of independence and
self-will, and so be the slaves of our worse selves, than bow ourselves
utterly before that dear Lord, and so pass into the freedom of a
service love-inspired, and by love accepted, 'Thou wouldst fain
persuade _me_ to be a _Christian_,' is the recoil of a proud heart from
submission. Brethren, let me beseech you that it may not be yours.

III. Again, we have here an example of instinctive shrinking from the
personal application of broad truths.

Agrippa listened, half-amused and a good deal interested, to Paul as
long as he talked generalities and described his own experience. But
when he came to point the generalities and to drive them home to the
hearer's heart it was time to stop him. That question of the Apostle's,
keen and sudden as the flash of a dagger, went straight home, and the
king at once gathered himself together into an attitude of resistance.
Ah, that is what hundreds of people do! You will let me preach as long
as I like--only you will get a little weary sometimes--you will let me
preach generalities _ad libitum_. But when I come to 'And thou?' then I
am 'rude' and 'inquisitorial' and 'personal' and 'trespassing on a
region where I have no business,' and so on and so on. And so you shut
up your heart if not your ears.

And yet, brethren, what is the use of toothless generalities? What am I
here for if I am not here to take these broad, blunt truths and sharpen
them to a point, and try to get them in between the joints of your
armour? Can any man faithfully preach the Gospel who is always flying
over the heads of his hearers with universalities, and never goes
straight to their hearts with 'Thou--thou art the man!' 'Believest
_thou_?'

And so, dear friends, let me press that question upon you. Never mind
about other people. Suppose you and I were alone together and my words
were coming straight _to thee_. Would they not have more power than
they have now? They are so coming. Think away all these other people,
and this place, ay, and me too, and let the word of Christ, which deals
with no crowds but with single souls, come to you in its
individualising force: 'Believest _thou_?' You will have to answer that
question one day. Better to face it now and try to answer it than to
leave it all vague until you get yonder, where 'each one of us shall
give account of _himself_ to God.

IV. Lastly, we have here an example of a soul close to the light, but
passing into the dark.

Agrippa listens to Paul; Bernice listens; Festus listens. And what
comes of it? Only this, 'And when they were gone aside, they talked
between themselves, saying, This man hath done nothing worthy of death
or of bonds.' May I translate into a modern equivalent: And when they
were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying, 'This man
preached a very impressive sermon,' or, 'This man preached a very
wearisome sermon,' and there an end.

Agrippa and Bernice went their wicked way, and Festus went his, and
none of them knew what a fateful moment they had passed through. Ah,
brethren! there are many such in our lives when we make decisions that
influence our whole future, and no sign shows that the moment is any
way different from millions of its undistinguished fellows. It is
eminently so in regard to our relation to Jesus Christ and His Gospel.
These three had been in the light; they were never so near it again.
Probably they never heard the Gospel preached any more, and they went
away, not knowing what they had done when they silenced Paul and left
him. Now you will probably hear plenty of sermons in future. You may or
you may not. But be sure of this, that if you go away from this one,
unmelted and unbelieving, you have not done a trivial thing. You have
added one more stone to the barrier that you yourself build to shut you
out from holiness and happiness, from hope and heaven. It is not I that
ask you the question, it is not Paul that asks it, Jesus Christ Himself
says to you, as He said to the blind man, 'Dost thou believe on the Son
of God?' or as He said to the weeping sister of Lazarus, 'Believest
thou this?' O dear friends, do not answer like this arrogant bit of a
king, but cry with tears, 'Lord, I believe; help Thou mine unbelief!'



TEMPEST AND TRUST

And when the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained
their purpose, loosing thence, they sailed close by Crete. 14. But not
long after there arose against it a tempestuous wind, called
Euroclydon. 15. And when the ship was caught, and could not bear up
into the wind, we let her drive. 16. And running under a certain island
which is called Clauda, we had much work to come by the boat: 17. Which
when they had taken up, they used helps, undergirding the ship; and,
fearing lest they should fall into the quicksands, strake sail, and so
were driven. 18. And we being exceedingly tossed with a tempest, the
next day they lightened the ship; 19. And the third day we cast out
with our own hands the tackling of the ship. 20. And when neither sun
nor stars in many days appeared, and no small tempest lay on us, all
hope that we should be saved was then taken away. 21. But after long
abstinence Paul stood forth in the midst of them, and said, Sirs, ye
should have hearkened unto me, and not have loosed from Crete, and to
have gained this harm and loss. 22. And now I exhort you to be of good
cheer: for there shall be no loss of any man's life among you, but of
the ship. 23. For there stood by me this night the angel of God, whose
I am, and whom I serve, 24. Saying, Fear not, Paul; thou must be
brought before Caesar: and, lo, God hath given thee all them that sail
with thee. 25. Wherefore, sirs, be of good cheer: for I believe God,
that it shall be even as it was told me. 26. Howbeit we must be cast
upon a certain island.'--ACTS xxvii. 13-26.

Luke's minute account of the shipwreck implies that he was not a Jew.
His interest in the sea and familiarity with sailors' terms are quite
unlike a persistent Jewish characteristic which still continues. We
have a Jew's description of a storm at sea in the Book of Jonah, which
is as evidently the work of a landsman as Luke's is of one who, though
not a sailor, was well up in maritime matters. His narrative lays hold
of the essential points, and is as accurate as it is vivid. This
section has two parts: the account of the storm, and the grand example
of calm trust and cheery encouragement given in Paul's words.

I. The consultation between the captain of the vessel and the
centurion, at which Paul assisted, strikes us, with our modern notions
of a captain's despotic power on his own deck, and single
responsibility, as unnatural. But the centurion, as a military officer,
was superior to the captain of an Alexandrian corn-ship, and Paul had
already made his force of character so felt that it is not wonderful
that he took part in the discussion. Naturally the centurion was guided
by the professional rather than by the amateur member of the council,
and the decision was come to to push on as far and fast as possible.

The ship was lying in a port which gave scanty protection against the
winter weather, and it was clearly wise to reach a more secure harbour
if possible. So when a gentle southerly breeze sprang up, which would
enable them to make such a port, westward from their then position,
they made the attempt. For a time it looked as if they would succeed,
but they had a great headland jutting out in front which they must get
round, and their ability to do this was doubtful. So they kept close in
shore and weathered the point. But before they had made their harbour
the wind suddenly chopped round, as is frequent of that coast, and the
gentle southerly breeze turned into a fierce squall from the north-east
or thereabouts, sweeping down from the Cretan mountains. That began
their troubles. To make the port was impossible. The unwieldy vessel
could not 'face the wind,' and so they had to run before it. It would
carry them in a south-westerly direction, and towards a small island,
under the lee of which they might hope for some shelter. Here they had
a little breathing time, and could make things rather more ship-shape
than they had been able to do when suddenly caught by the squall. Their
boat had been towing behind them, and had to be hoisted on deck somehow.

A more important, and probably more difficult, task was to get strong
hawsers under the keel and round the sides, so as to help to hold the
timbers together. The third thing was the most important of all, and
has been misunderstood by commentators who knew more about Greek
lexicons than ships. The most likely explanation of 'lowering the gear'
(Rev. Ver.) is that it means 'leaving up just enough of sail to keep
the ship's head to the wind, and bringing down everything else that
could be got down' (Ramsay, _St. Paul_, p. 329).

Note that Luke says 'we' about hauling in the boat, and 'they' about
the other tasks. He and the other passengers could lend a hand in the
former, but not in the latter, which required more skilled labour. The
reason for bringing down all needless top-hamper, and leaving up a
little sail, was to keep the vessel from driving on to the great
quicksands off the African coast, to which they would certainly have
been carried if the wind held.

As soon as they had drifted out from the lee of the friendly little
island they were caught again in the storm. They were in danger of
going down. As they drifted they had their 'starboard' broadside to the
force of the wild sea, and it was a question how long the vessel's
sides would last before they were stove in by the hammering of the
waves, or how long she would be buoyant enough to ship seas without
foundering. The only chance was to lighten her, so first the crew
'jettisoned' the cargo, and next day, as that did not give relief
enough,'they,' or, according to some authorities, 'we'--that is
passengers and all--threw everything possible overboard.

That was the last attempt to save themselves, and after it there was
nothing to do but to wait the apparently inevitable hour when they
would all go down together. Idleness feeds despair, and despair
nourishes idleness. Food was scarce, cooking it was impossible,
appetite there was none. The doomed men spent the long idle days--which
were scarcely day, so thick was the air with mist and foam and
tempest--crouching anywhere for shelter, wet, tired, hungry, and
hopeless. So they drifted 'for many days,' almost losing count of the
length of time they had been thus. It was a gloomy company, but there
was one man there in whom the lamp of hope burned when it had gone out
in all others. Sun and stars were hidden, but Paul saw a better light,
and his sky was clear and calm.

II. A common danger makes short work of distinctions of rank. In such a
time some hitherto unnoticed man of prompt decision, resource, and
confidence, will take the command, whatever his position. Hope, as well
as timidity and fear, is infectious, and one cheery voice will revive
the drooping spirits of a multitude. Paul had already established his
personal ascendency in that motley company of Roman soldiers,
prisoners, sailors, and disciples. Now he stands forward with calm
confidence, and infuses new hope into them all. What a miraculous
change passes on externals when faith looks at them! The circumstances
were the same as they had been for many days. The wind was howling and
the waves pounding as before, the sky was black with tempest, and no
sign of help was in sight, but Paul spoke, and all was changed, and a
ray of sunshine fell on the wild waters that beat on the doomed vessel.

Three points are conspicuous in his strong tonic words. First, there is
the confident assurance of safety. A less noble nature would have said
more in vindication of the wisdom of his former advice. It is very
pleasant to small minds to say, 'Did I not tell you so? You see how
right I was.' But the Apostle did not care for petty triumphs of that
sort. A smaller man might have sulked because his advice had not been
taken, and have said to himself, 'They would not listen to me before, I
will hold my tongue now.' But the Apostle only refers to his former
counsel and its confirmation in order to induce acceptance of his
present words.

It is easy to 'bid' men 'be of good cheer,' but futile unless some
reason for good cheer is given. Paul gave good reason. No man's life
was to be lost though the ship was to go. He had previously predicted
that life, as well as ship and lading, would be lost if they put to
sea. That opinion was the result of his own calculation of
probabilities, as he lets us understand by saying that he 'perceived'
it (ver. 10). Now he speaks with authority, not from his perception,
but from God's assurance. The bold words might well seem folly to the
despairing crew as they caught them amidst the roar of tempest and
looked at their battered hulk. So Paul goes at once to tell the ground
of his confidence--the assurance of the angel of God.

What a contrast between the furious gale, the almost foundering ship,
the despair in the hearts of the sleeping company, and the bright
vision that came to Paul! Peter in prison, Paul in Caesarea and now in
the storm, see the angel form calm and radiant. God's messengers are
wont to come into the darkest of our hours and the wildest of our
tempests.

Paul's designation of the heavenly messenger as 'an angel of the God
whose I am, whom also I serve,' recalls Jonah's confession of faith,
but far surpasses it, in the sense of belonging to God, and in the
ardour of submission and of active obedience, expressed in it. What
Paul said to the Corinthians (1 Cor. vi. 19) he realised for himself:
'Ye are not your own; for ye were bought with a price.' To recognise
that we are God's, joyfully to yield ourselves to Him, and with all the
forces of our natures to serve Him, is to bring His angel to our sides
in every hour of tempest and peril, and to receive assurance that
nothing shall by any means harm us. To yield ourselves to be God's is
to make God ours. It was because Paul owned that he belonged to God,
and served Him, that the angel came to him, and he explains the vision
to his hearers by his relation to God. Anything was possible rather
than that his God should leave him unhelped at such an hour of need.

The angel's message must have included particulars unnoticed in Luke's
summary; as, for instance, the wreck on 'a certain island.' But the two
salient points in it are the certainty of Paul's own preservation, that
the divine purpose of his appearing before Caesar might be fulfilled,
and the escape of all the ship's company. As to the former, we may
learn how Paul's life, like every man's, is shaped according to a
divine plan, and how we are 'immortal till our work is done,' and till
God has done His work in and on and by us. As to the latter point, we
may gather from the word 'has _given_' the certainty that Paul had been
praying for the lives of all that sailed with him, and may learn, not
only that the prayers of God's servants are a real element in
determining God's dealings with men, but that a true servant of God's
will ever reach out his desires and widen his prayers to embrace those
with whom he is brought into contact, be they heathens, persecutors,
rough and careless, or fellow-believers. If Christian people more
faithfully discharged the duty of intercession, they would more
frequently receive in answer the lives of 'all them that sail with'
them over the stormy ocean of life.

The third point in the Apostle's encouraging speech is the example of
his own faith, which is likewise an exhortation to the hearers to
exercise the same. If God speaks by His angel with such firm promises,
man's plain wisdom is to grasp the divine assurance with a firm hand.
We must build rock upon rock. 'I believe God,' that surely is a
credence demanded by common sense and warranted by the sanest reason.
If we do so believe, and take His word as the infallible authority
revealing present duty and future blessings, then, however lowering the
sky, and wild the water, and battered the vessel, and empty of earthly
succour the gloomy horizon, and heavy our hearts, we shall 'be of good
cheer,' and in due time the event will warrant our faith in God and His
promise, even though all around us seems to make our faith folly and
our hope a mockery.



A SHORT CONFESSION OF FAITH

'...There stood by me this night the angel of God, whose I am, and whom
I serve.'--ACTS xxvii. 23.

I turn especially to those last words, 'Whose I am and whom I serve.'

A great calamity, borne by a crowd of men in common, has a wonderful
power of dethroning officials and bringing the strong man to the front.
So it is extremely natural, though it has been thought to be very
unhistorical, that in this story of Paul's shipwreck he should become
guide, counsellor, inspirer, and a tower of strength; and that
centurions and captains and all the rest of those who held official
positions should shrink into the background. The natural force of his
character, the calmness and serenity that came from his faith--these
things made him the leader of the bewildered crowd. One can scarcely
help contrasting this shipwreck--the only one in the New
Testament--with that in the Old Testament. Contrast Jonah with Paul,
the guilty stupor of the one, down 'in the sides of the ship' cowering
before the storm, with the calm behaviour and collected courage of the
other.

The vision of which the Apostle speaks does not concern us here, but in
the words which I have read there are several noteworthy points. They
bring vividly before us the essence of true religion, the bold
confession which it prompts, and the calmness and security which it
ensures. Let us then look at them from these points of view.

I. We note the clear setting forth of the essence of true religion.

Remember that Paul is speaking to heathens; that his present purpose is
not to preach the Gospel, but to make his own position clear. So he
says 'the God'--never mind who _He_ is at present--'the God to whom I
belong '--that covers all the inward life--'and whom I serve'--that
covers all the outward.

'Whose I am.' That expresses the universal truth that men belong to God
by virtue of their being the creatures of His hand. As the 100th Psalm
says, according to one, and that a probably correct reading, 'It is He
that hath made us, and _we are His_.' But the Apostle is going a good
deal deeper than any such thoughts, which he, no doubt, shared in
common with the heathen men around him, when he declares that, in a
special fashion, God had claimed him for His, and he had yielded to the
claim. 'I am Thine,' is the deepest thought of this man's mind and the
deepest feeling of his heart. And that is godliness in its purest form,
the consciousness of belonging to God. We must interpret this saying by
others of the Apostle's, such as, 'Ye are not your own, ye are bought
with a price. Therefore, glorify God in your bodies and spirits which
are His.' He traces God's possession of him, not to that fact of
creation (which establishes a certain outward relationship, but nothing
more), nor even to the continuous facts of benefits showered upon his
head, but to the one transcendent act of the divine Love, which gave
itself to us, and so acquired us for itself. For we must recognise as
the deepest of all thoughts about the relations of spiritual beings,
that, as in regard to ourselves in our earthly affections, so in regard
to our relations with God, there is only one way by which a spirit can
own a spirit, whether it be a man on the one side and a woman on the
other, or whether it be God on the one side and a man on the other, and
that one way is by the sweetness of complete and reciprocal love. He
who gives himself to God gets God for himself. So when Paul said,
'Whose I am,' he was thinking that he would never have belonged either
to God or to himself unless, first of all, God, in His own Son, had
given Himself to Paul. The divine ownership of us is only realised when
we are consciously His, because of the sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

Brethren, God does not count that a man belongs to Him simply because
He made him, if the man does not feel his dependence, his obligation,
and has not surrendered himself. He in the heavens loves you and me too
well to care for a formal and external ownership. He desires hearts,
and only they who have yielded themselves unto God, moved thereto by
the mercies of God, and especially by the encyclopaediacal mercy which
includes all the rest in its sweep, only they belong to Him, in the
estimate of the heavens.

And if you and I are His, then that involves that we have deposed from
his throne the rebel Self, the ancient Anarch that disturbs and ruins
us. They who belong to God cease to live to themselves. There are two
centres for human life, and I believe there are only two--the one is
God, the other is my wretched self. And if we are swept, as it were,
out of the little orbit that we move in, when the latter is our centre,
and are drawn by the weight and mass of the great central sun to become
its satellites, then we move in a nobler orbit and receive fuller and
more blessed light and warmth. They who have themselves for their
centres are like comets, with a wide elliptical course, which carries
them away out into the cold abysses of darkness. They who have God for
their sun are like planets. The old fable is true of these 'sons of the
morning'--they make music as they roll and they flash back His light.

And then do not let us forget that this yielding of one's self to Him,
swayed by His love, and this surrendering of will and purpose and
affection and all that makes up our complex being, lead directly to the
true possession of Him and the true possession of ourselves.

I have said that the only way by which spirit possesses spirit is by
love, and that it must needs be on both sides. So we get God for
ourselves when we give ourselves to God. There is a wonderful
alternation of giving and receiving between the loving God and his
beloved lovers; first the impartation of the divine to the human, then
the surrender of the human to the divine, and then the larger gift of
God to man, just as in some series of mirrors the light is flashed back
from the one to the other, in bewildering manifoldness and shimmering
of rays from either polished surface. God is ours when we are God's.
'And this is the covenant that I will make with them after these days,
saith the Lord. I will be their God, and they shall be My people.'

And, in like manner, we never own ourselves until we have given
ourselves to God. Each of us is like some feudatory prince, dependent
upon an overlord. His subjects in his little territory rebel, and he
has no power to subdue the insurgents, but he can send a message to the
capital, and get the army of the king, who is his sovereign and theirs,
to come down and bring them back to order, and establish his tottering
throne. So if you desire to own yourself or to know the sweetness that
you may get out of your own nature and the exercise of your powers, if
you desire to be able to govern the realm within, put yourself into
God's hands and say, 'I am Thine; hold Thou me up, and I shall be safe.'

I need not say more than just a word about the other side of Paul's
confession of faith, 'Whom I serve.' He employs the word which means
the service of a worshipper, or even of a priest, and not that which
means the service of a slave. His purpose was to represent how, as his
whole inward nature bowed in submission to, and was under the influence
of, God to whom he belonged, so his whole outward life was a life of
devotion. He was serving Him there in the ship, amidst the storm and
the squalor and the terror. His calmness was service; his confidence
was service; the cheery words that he was speaking to these people were
service. And on his whole life he believed that this was stamped, that
he was devoted to God. So _there_ is the true idea of a Christian life,
that in all its aspects, attitudes, and acts it is to be a
manifestation, in visible form, of inward devotion to, and ownership
by, God. All our work may be worship, and we may 'pray without
ceasing,' though no supplications come from our lips, if our hearts are
in touch with Him and through our daily life we serve and honour Him.
God's priests never are far away from their altar, and never are
without, somewhat to offer, as long as they have the activities of
daily duty and the difficulties of daily conflict to bring to Him and
spread before Him.

II. So let me turn for a moment to some of the other aspects of these
words to which I have already referred, I find in them, next, the bold
confession which true religion requires.

Shipboard is a place where people find out one another very quickly.
Character cannot well be hid there. And such circumstances as Paul had
been in for the last fortnight, tossing up and down in _Adria_, with
Death looking over the bulwarks of the crazy ship every moment, were
certain to have brought out the inmost secrets of character. Paul durst
not have said to these people 'the God whose I am and whom I serve' if
he had not known that he had been living day by day a consistent and
godly life amongst them.

And so, I note, first of all, that this confession of individual and
personal relationship to God is incumbent on every Christian. We do not
need to be always brandishing it before people's faces. There is very
little fear of the average Christian of this day blundering on that
side. But we need, still less, to be always hiding it away. One hears a
great deal from certain quarters about a religion that does not need to
be vocal but shows what it is, without the necessity for words. Blessed
be God! there is such a religion, but you will generally find that the
people who have most of it are the people who are least tongue-tied
when opportunity arises; and that if they have been witnessing for God
in their quiet discharge of duty, with their hands instead of their
lips, they are quite as ready to witness with their lips when it is
fitting that they should do so. And surely, surely, if a man belongs to
God, and if his whole life is to be the manifestation of the ownership
that he recognises, that which specially reveals him--viz., his own
articulate speech--cannot be left out of his methods of manifestation.

I am afraid that there are a great many professing Christian people
nowadays who never, all their lives, have said to any one, 'The God
whose I am and whom I serve.' And I beseech you, dear brethren, suffer
this word of exhortation. To say so is a far more effectual, or at
least more powerful, means of appeal than any direct invitation to
share in the blessings. You may easily offend a man by saying to him,
'Won't you be a Christian too?' But it is hard to offend if you simply
say that you are a Christian. The statement of personal experience is
more powerful by far than all argumentation or eloquence or pleading
appeals. We do more when we say, 'That which we have tasted and felt
and handled of the Word of Life, declare we unto you,' than by any
other means.

Only remember that the avowal must be backed up by a life, as Paul's
was backed up on board that vessel. For unless it is so, the profession
does far more harm than good. There are always keen critics round us,
especially if we say that we are Christians. There were keen critics on
board that ship. Do you think that these Roman soldiers, and the other
prisoners, would not have smiled contemptuously at Paul, if this had
been the first time that they had any reason to suppose that he was at
all different from them? They would have said, 'The God whose _you_ are
and whom _you_ serve? Why, you are just the same sort of man as if you
worshipped Jupiter like the rest of us!' And that is what the world has
a right to say to Christian people. The clearer our profession, the
holier must be our lives.

III. Last of all, I find in these words the calmness and security which
true religion secures.

The story, as I have already glanced at it in my introductory remarks,
brings out very wonderfully and very beautifully Paul's promptitude,
his calmness in danger, his absolute certainty of safety, and his
unselfish thoughtfulness about his companions in peril. And all these
things were the direct results of his entire surrender to God, and of
the consistency of his daily life. It needed the angel in the vision to
assure him that his life would be spared. But whether the angel had
ever come or not, and though death had been close at his hand, the
serenity and the peaceful assurance of safety which come out so
beautifully in the story would have been there all the same. The man
who can say 'I belong to God' does not need to trouble himself about
dangers. He will have to exercise his common sense, as the Apostle
shows us; he will have to use all the means that are in his power for
the accomplishment of ends that he knows to be right and legitimate.
But having done all that, he can say, 'I belong to Him,' it is His
business to look after His own property. He is not going to hold His
possessions with such a slack hand as that they shall slip between His
fingers, and be lost in the mire. 'Thou wilt not lose the souls that
are Thine in the grave, neither wilt Thou suffer the man whom Thou
lovest to see corruption.' God keeps His treasures, and the surer we
are that He is able to keep them unto that day, the calmer we may be in
all our trouble.

And the safety that followed was also the direct result of the
relationship of mutual possession and love established between God and
the Apostle. We do not know to which of the two groups of the
shipwrecked Paul belonged; whether he could swim or whether he had to
hold on to some bit of floating wreckage or other, and so got 'safe to
land.' But whichever way it was, it was neither his swimming nor the
spar to which, perhaps, he clung, that landed him safe on shore. It was
the God to whom he belonged. Faith is the true lifebelt that keeps us
from being drowned in any stormy sea. And if you and I feel that we are
His, and live accordingly, we shall be calm amid all change, serene
when others are troubled, ready to be helpers of others even when we
ourselves are in distress. And when the crash comes, and the ship goes
to pieces: 'so it will come to pass that, some on boards, and some on
broken pieces of the ship, they all come safe to land,' and when the
Owner counts His subjects and possessions on the quiet shore, as the
morning breaks, there will not be one who has been lost in the surges,
or whose name will be unanswered to when the muster-roll of the crew is
called.



A TOTAL WRECK, ALL HANDS SAVED

'And as the shipmen were about to flee out of the ship, when they had
let down the boat into the sea, under colour as though they would have
cast anchors out of the foreship, 31. Paul said to the centurion and to
the soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, ye cannot be saved. 32.
Then the soldiers cut off the ropes of the boat, and let her fall off.
33. And while the day was coming on, Paul besought them all to take
meat, saying, This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and
continued fasting, having taken nothing. 34. Wherefore I pray you to
take some meat; for this is for your health; for there shall not an
hair fall from the head of any of you. 35. And when he had thus spoken,
he took bread, and gave thanks to God in presence of them all; and when
he had broken it, he began to eat. 36. Then were they all of good
cheer, and they also took some meat. 37. And we were in all in the ship
two hundred threescore and sixteen souls. 38. And when they had eaten
enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the wheat into the sea.
39. And when it was day, they knew not the land; but they discovered a
certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded, if it were
possible, to thrust in the ship. 40. And when they had taken up the
anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the
rudder-bands, and noised up the main-sail to the wind, and made toward
shore. 41. And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the
ship aground: and the fore part stuck fast, and remained unmoveable,
but the hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves. 42. And
the soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any-of them
should swim out, and escape. 43. But the centurion, willing to save
Paul, kept them from their purpose: and commanded that they which could
swim should cast themselves first into the sea, and get to land: 44.
And the rest some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship. And
so it came to pass, that they escaped all safe to land.'--ACTS xxvii
30-44.

The Jews were not seafaring people. Their coast had no safe harbours,
and they seldom ventured on the Mediterranean. To find Paul in a ship
with its bow pointed westwards is significant. It tells of the
expansion of Judaism into a world-wide religion, and of the future
course of Christianity. The only Old Testament parallel is Jonah, and
the dissimilarities of the two incidents are as instructive as are
their resemblances.

This minute narrative is evidently the work of one of the passengers
who knew a good deal about nautical matters. It reads like a log-book.
But as James Smith has well noted in his interesting monograph on the
chapter, the writer's descriptions, though accurate, are
unprofessional, thus confirming Luke's authorship. Where had the
'beloved physician' learned so much about the sea and ships? Did the
great galleys carry surgeons as now? At all events the story is one of
the most graphic accounts ever written. This narrative begins when the
doomed ship has cast anchor, with a rocky coast close under her lee.
The one question is, Will the four anchors hold? No wonder that the
passengers longed for daylight!

The first point is the crew's dastardly trick to save themselves,
frustrated by Paul's insight and promptitude. The pretext for getting
into the boat was specious. Anchoring by the bow as well as by the
stern would help to keep the ship from driving ashore; and if once the
crew were in the boat and pulled as far as was necessary to lay out the
anchors, it would be easy, under cover of the darkness, to make good
their escape on shore and leave the landsmen on board to shift for
themselves. The boat must have been of considerable size to hold the
crew of so large a ship. It was already lying alongside, and landsmen
would not suspect what lay under the apparently brave attempt to add to
the vessel's security, but Paul did so. His practical sagacity was as
conspicuous a trait as his lofty enthusiasm. Common sense need not be
divorced from high aims or from the intensest religious self-devotion.
The idealist beat the practical centurion in penetrating the sailors'
scheme.

That must have been a great nature which combined such different
characteristics as the Apostle shows. Unselfish devotion is often
wonderfully clear-sighted as to the workings of its opposite. The
Apostle's promptitude is as noticeable as his penetration. He wastes no
time in remonstrance with the cowards, who would have been over the
side and off in the dark while he talked, but goes straight to the man
in authority. Note, too, that he keeps his place as a prisoner. It is
not his business to suggest what is to be done. That might have been
resented as presumptuous; but he has a right to point out the danger,
and he leaves the centurion to settle how to meet it. Significantly
does he say 'ye,' not 'we.' He was perfectly certain that he 'must be
brought before Caesar'; and though he believed that all on board would
escape, he seems to regard his own safety as even more certain than
that of the others.

The lesson often drawn from his words is rightly drawn. They imply the
necessity of men's action in order to carry out God's purpose. The
whole shipful are to be saved, but 'except these abide ... ye cannot be
saved,' The belief that God wills anything is a reason for using all
means to effect it, not for folding our hands and saying, 'God will do
it, whether we do anything or not.' The line between fatalism and
Christian reliance on God's will is clearly drawn in Paul's words.

Note too the prompt, decisive action of the soldiers. They waste no
words, nor do they try to secure the sailors, but out with their knives
and cut the tow-rope, and away into the darkness drifts the boat. It
might have been better to have kept it, as affording a chance of safety
for all; but probably it was wisest to get rid of it at once. Many
times in every life it is necessary to sacrifice possible advantages in
order to secure a more necessary good. The boat has to be let go if the
passengers in the ship are to be saved. Misused good things have
sometimes to be given up in order to keep people from temptation.

The next point brings Paul again to the front. In the night he had been
the saviour of the whole shipload of people. Now as the twilight is
beginning, and the time for decisive action will soon be here with the
day, he becomes their encourager and counsellor. Again his saving
common sense is shown. He knew that the moment for intense struggle was
at hand, and so he prepares them for it by getting them to eat a
substantial breakfast. It was because of his faith that he did so. His
religion did not lead him to do as some people would have done--begin
to talk to the soldiers about their souls--but he looked after their
bodies. Hungry, wet, sleepless, they were in no condition to scramble
through the surf, and the first thing to be done was to get some food
into them. Of course he does not mean that they had eaten absolutely
nothing for a fortnight, but only that they had had scanty nourishment.
But Paul's religion went harmoniously with his care for men's bodies.
He 'gave thanks to God in presence of them all'; and who shall say that
that prayer did not touch hearts more deeply than religious talk would
have done? Paul's calmness would be contagious; and the root of it, in
his belief in what his God had told him, would be impressively
manifested to all on board. Moods are infectious; so 'they were all of
good cheer,' and no doubt things looked less black after a hearty meal,

A little point may be noticed here, namely, the naturalness of the
insertion of the numbers on board at this precise place in the
narrative. There would probably be a muster of all hands for the meal,
and in view of the approaching scramble, in order that, if they got to
shore, there might be certainty as to whether any were lost. So here
the numbers come in. They were still not without hope of saving the
ship, though Paul had told them it would be lost; and so they jettison
the cargo of wheat from Alexandria. By this time it is broad day and
something must be done.

The next point is the attempt to beach the vessel. 'They knew not the
land,' that is, the part of the coast where they had been driven; but
they saw that, while for the most part it was iron-bound, there was a
shelving sandy bay at one point on to which it might be possible to run
her ashore. The Revised Version gives a much more accurate and
seaman-like account than the Authorised Version does. The anchors were
not taken on board, but to save time and trouble were 'left in the
sea,' the cables being simply cut. The 'rudder-bands'--that is, the
lashings which had secured the two paddle-like rudders, one on either
beam, which had been tied up to be out of the way when the stern
anchors were put out--are loosed, and the rudders drop into place. The
foresail (not 'mainsail,' as the Authorised Version has it) is set to
help to drive the ship ashore. It is all exactly what we should expect
to be done.

But an unexpected difficulty met the attempt, which is explained by the
lie of the coast at St. Paul's Bay, Malta, as James Smith fully
describes in his book. A little island, separated from the mainland by
a channel of not more than one hundred yards in breadth, lies off the
north-east point of the bay, and to a beholder at the entrance to the
bay looks as if continuous with it. When the ship got farther in, they
would see the narrow channel, through which a strong current sets and
makes a considerable disturbance as it meets the run of the water in
the bay. A bank of mud has been formed at the point of meeting. Thus
not only the water shoals, but the force of the current through the
narrows would hinder the ship from getting past it to the beach. The
two things together made her ground, 'stem on' to the bank; and then,
of course, the heavy sea running into the bay, instead of helping her
to the shore, began to break up the stern which was turned towards it.

Common peril makes beasts of prey and their usual victims crouch
together. Benefits received touch generous hearts. But the legionaries
on board had no such sentiments. Paul's helpfulness was forgotten. A
still more ignoble exhibition of the instinct of self-preservation than
the sailors had shown dictated that cowardly, cruel suggestion to kill
the prisoners. Brutal indifference to human life, and Rome's iron
discipline holding terror over the legionaries' heads, are vividly
illustrated in the 'counsel,' So were Paul's kindnesses requited! It is
hard to melt rude natures even by kindness; and if Paul had been
looking for gratitude he would have been disappointed, as we so often
are. But if we do good to men because we expect requital, even in
thankfulness, we are not pure in motive. 'Looking for nothing again' is
the spirit enforced by God's pattern and by experience.

The centurion had throughout, like most of his fellows in Scripture,
been kindly disposed, and showed more regard for Paul than the rank and
file did. He displays the good side of militarism, while they show its
bad side; for he is collected, keeps his head in extremities, knows his
own mind, holds the reins in a firm hand, even in that supreme moment,
has a quick eye to see what must be done, and decision to order it at
once. It was prudent to send first those who could swim; they could
then help the others. The distance was short, and as the bow was
aground, there would be some shelter under the lee of the vessel, and
shoal water, where they could wade, would be reached in a few minutes
or moments.

'And so it came to pass, that they all escaped safe to the land.' So
Paul had assured them they would. God needs no miracles in order to
sway human affairs. Everything here was perfectly 'natural,' and yet
His hand wrought through all, and the issue was His fulfilment of His
promises. If we rightly look at common things, we shall see God working
in them all, and believe that He can deliver us as truly without
miracles as ever He did any by miracles. Promptitude, prudence, skill,
and struggle with the waves, saved the whole two hundred and
seventy-six souls in that battered ship; yet it was God who saved them
all. Whether Paul was among the party that could swim, or among the
more helpless who had to cling to anything that would float, he was
held up by God's hand, and it was He who 'sent from above, took him,
and drew him out of many waters.'



AFTER THE WRECK

'And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called
Melita. 2. And the barbarous people showed us no little kindness: for
they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the present
rain, and because of the cold. 3. And when Paul had gathered a bundle
of sticks, and laid them on the fire, there came a viper out of the
heat, and fastened on his hand. 4. And when the barbarians saw the
venomous beast hang on his hand, they said among themselves, No doubt
this man is a murderer, whom, though he hath escaped the sea, yet
vengeance suffereth not to live. 5. And he shook off the beast into the
fire, and felt no harm. 6. Howbeit they looked when he should have
swollen, or fallen down dead suddenly: but after they had looked a
great while, and saw no harm come to him, they changed their minds, and
said that he was a god. 7. In the same quarters were possessions of the
chief man of the island, whose name was Publius: who received us, and
lodged us three days courteously. 8. And it came to pass, that the
father of Publius lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody flux: to whom
Paul entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him, and healed him.
9. So when this was done, others also, which had diseases in the
island, came, and were healed: 10. Who also honoured us with many
honours: and when we departed, they laded us with such things as were
necessary. 11. And after three months we departed in a ship of
Alexandria, which had wintered in the isle, whose sign was Castor and
Pollux. 12. And landing at Syracuse, we tarried there three days. 13.
And from thence we fetched a compass, and came to Rhegium: and after
one day the south wind blew, and we came the next day to Puteoli; 14.
Where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven
days: and so we went toward Rome. 15. And from thence, when the
brethren heard of us, they came to meet us as far as Appii Forum, and
The three taverns: whom when Paul saw, he thanked God, and took
courage. 16. And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the
prisoners to the captain of the guard: but Paul was suffered to dwell
by himself with a soldier that kept him.'--ACTS xxviii. 1-16.

'They _all_ escaped safe to land,' says Luke with emphasis, pointing to
the verification of Paul's assurance that there should be no loss of
life. That two hundred and seventy-six men on a wreck should all be
saved was very improbable, but the angel had promised, and Paul had
believed that it should be 'even so as it had been spoken unto him.'
Therefore the improbable came to pass, and every man of the ship's
company stood safe on the shore. Faith which grasps God's promise
'laughs at impossibilities' and brings them into the region of facts.

Wet, cold, weary, and anxious, the rescued men huddled together on the
shore in the early morning, and no doubt they were doubtful what
reception they would have from the islanders who had been attracted to
the beach. Their first question was, 'Where are we?' so completely had
they lost their reckoning. Some of the inhabitants could speak Greek or
Latin, and could tell them that they were on Melita, but the most part
