But morally, this plea, however sincerely urged, is more or less
unconscious self-deception. The person who says 'Suffer me first' is
usually hoodwinking conscience, and covering over, if not a
determination not to do, at least a reluctance to determine to do, the
postponed duty. And although we may think ourselves quite resolved in
spirit, and only needing the fitting vacant space to show that we are
ready to act, in the majority of cases the man who says 'Suffer me
first' means, though he often does not know it, 'I do not think I will
do it, after all, even then.' Now there are a great many good people
who, when urged to some of the plain duties of discipleship--such as
Christian work, Christian beneficence, the consecration of themselves to
the service of their Master--have always something else very important,
and of immediate, pressing urgency, that has to be done first. And then
and then, ay? and then,--something else, and then--something else. And
so some of you go on, and will go on, unless by God's grace you shake
off the evil habit, to the end of your days, fancying yourselves
disciples, and yet all the while delaying really to follow the Master
until the close. And 'all your yesterdays will be but lighting you, with
unfulfilled purposes, to dusty death.'

II. Now look at the apparently harsh and unreasonable refusal of this
reasonable request.

It is extremely unlike Jesus Christ in substance and in tone. It is
unlike Him to put any barrier in the way of a son's yielding to the
impulses of his heart and attending to the last duties to his father. It
is extremely unlike Him to couch His refusal in words that sound, at
first hearing, so harsh and contemptuous, and that seem to say, 'Let the
dead world go as it will; never you mind it, do you not go after it at
all or care about it.'

But if we remember that it is Jesus Christ, who came to bring life into
the dead world, who says this, then, I think, we shall understand better
what He means. I do not need to explain, I suppose, that by the one
'dead' here is meant the physical and natural 'dead,' and by the other
the morally and religiously 'dead'; and that what Christ says, in the
picturesque way that He so often affected in order to bring great truths
home in concrete form to sluggish understandings, is in effect, 'Nay!
For the men in the world that are separated from God, and so are dead in
their selfhood and their sin, burying other dead people is appropriate
work. But your business, as living by Me, is to carry life, and let the
burying alone, to be done by the dead people that can do nothing else.'

Now the spirit of our Lord's answer may be put thus:--It must always be
Christ first, and every one else second; and it must therefore sometimes
be Christ _only_, and no one else. 'Let me bury my father and then I
will come.' 'No,' says Christ; 'first your duty to Me': first in order
and time, because first in order of importance. And this is His habitual
tone, 'He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of
Me.'

Did you ever think of what a strange claim that is for a _man_ to make
upon others? This Jesus Christ comes to you and me, and to every man,
and says, 'I demand, and I have a right to demand, thy supreme affection
and thy first obedience. All other relations are subordinate to thy
relation to Me. All other persons ought to be less dear to thee than I
am. No other duty can be so imperative as the duty of following Me.'
What right has He to speak thus to us? On what does such a tremendous
claim rest? Who is it that fronts humanity and says, 'He that loveth
father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me'? He had a right to
say it, because He is more than they, and has done more than they,
because He is the Son of God manifest in the flesh, and because on the
Cross He has died for all men. Therefore all other claims dwindle and
sink into nothingness before His. Therefore His will is supreme, and our
relation to Him is the dominant fact in our whole moral and religious
character. He must be first, whoever comes second, and between the first
and the second there is a great gulf fixed.

Remember that this postponing of all other duties, relationships, and
claims to Christ's claims and relationships, and to our duties to Him,
lifts them up, and does not lower them; exalts, and does not degrade,
the earthly affections. They are nobler and loftier, being second, than
when perversely, and, in the literal sense, _preposterously_, they
assume to be first. The little hills in the foreground are never so
green and fair as when they are looked at in connection with the great
white Alps that tower behind them; and all earthly loves and
relationships catch a tinge of more ethereal beauty, and are lifted into
a loftier region, when they are rigidly subordinated to our love to Him.
Being second, they are more than when they bragged that they were first.

Again, if it must be Christ first, and everybody and everything besides
second, then to carry that out, it will often have to be Christ only,
and no one else. There will come in every man's life the need for a
sharp decision between conflicting allegiances. Life is full of harsh
alternatives, and it is of no use to kick against the pricks. The
divine order is Jesus first and all things second. But we sometimes
break that order, and then it comes to be, 'Very well, then, if you
cannot keep the lower in their right places, you must learn to do
without them altogether; and if you will not have Him first and them
second, you must not have them at all.' 'If thine eye offend thee, pluck
it out,' it would be far better for thee to keep it without offence. 'If
thine hand offend thee,' put it down on the block, and take the cleaver
in the other hand, and off with it, it would be better for thee to go
into life whole than maimed, but it is better to go into life maimed,
than to go into destruction whole. The abandonment of the father's bier
is second best; but it is sometimes imperative. When you find a taste, a
pursuit, a study, an occupation, a recreation coming between you and
Jesus Christ--when you do not know how it is, but, somehow or other, the
sky that was blue a minute or two ago has a doleful veil of grey
creeping all over it, be sure that something or other which ought to be
under has got topmost, and you will have to get rid of it in order to
come right again. If this man would certainly have come back had Jesus
let him go, he would have been let go; but because Jesus knew that he
would not come back, therefore He said, 'You must deny your natural
affection, because it is coming between you and Me.'

So, dear brethren, when we find that earthly duties, pursuits,
occupations of any kind, affections, pure and beautiful as in themselves
they may be, are hindering our following the Master, then, if they are
things of which we can denude ourselves, though it be at a distinct
sacrifice, we are bound to do so; or else we are not loving the Master
more than all besides.

Let me remind you in closing of the variation in this story which the
evangelist Luke gives us. He interprets Christ's commandment, 'Follow
Me,' and expands it into 'preach the Gospel,' which was involved in it.
There are many of you who are busily engaged in legitimate occupations,
and devoting yourselves in various degrees to various forms of
beneficence touching the secular condition of the people around us. May
I hint to such, 'Let the dead bury their dead; preach thou the gospel?'
A Christian man's first business is to witness for Jesus Christ, and no
amount of diligence in legitimate occupations or in work for the good
of others will absolve him from the charge of having turned duties
upside down, if he says, 'I cannot witness for Jesus Christ, for I am so
busy about these other things.' This command has a special application
to us ministers. There are hosts of admirable things that we are tempted
to engage in nowadays, with the enlarged opportunities that we have of
influencing men, socially, politically, intellectually, and it wants
rigid concentration for us to keep out of the paths which might hinder
our usefulness, or, at all events, dissipate our strength. Let us hear
that ringing voice ringing always in our ears, 'Preach thou the gospel
of the kingdom.'


THE PEACE-BRINGER IN THE NATURAL WORLD

     'And when He was entered into a ship, His disciples followed Him.
     24. And, behold, there arose a great tempest in the sea, insomuch
     that the ship was covered with the waves; but He was asleep. 25.
     And His disciples came to Him, and awoke Him, saying, Lord, save
     us: we perish. 26. And He saith unto them, Why are ye fearful, O ye
     of little faith? Then he arose, and rebuked the winds and the sea,
     and there was a great calm. 27. But the men marvelled, saying, What
     manner of man la this, that even the winds and the sea obey
     him!'--MATT. viii. 23-27.

The second group of miracles in these chapters shows us Christ as the
Prince of Peace, and that in three regions--the material, the
superhuman, and the moral. He stills the tempest, casts out demons, and
forgives sins, thus quieting nature, spirit, and conscience.

Mountain-girdled lakes are exposed to sudden storms from the wind
sweeping down the glens. Such a one comes roaring down as the little
boat, probably belonging to James and John, is labouring across the six
or seven miles to the eastern side. Matthew describes the boat as it
would appear from shore, as being 'covered' and lost to sight by the
breaking waves. Mark, who is Peter's mouthpiece, describes the desperate
plight as one on board knew it, and says the boat was 'filling.' It must
have been a serious gale which frightened a crew who had spent all their
lives on the lake.

Note Christ's sleep in the storm. His calm slumber is contrasted with
the hurly-burly of the tempest and the alarm of the crew. It was the
sleep of physical exhaustion after a hard day's work. He was too tired
to keep awake, or to be disturbed by the tumult. His fatigue is a sign
of His true manhood, of His toil up to the very edge of His strength; a
characteristic of His life of service, which we do not make as prominent
in our thoughts as we should. It is also a sign of His calm conscience
and pure heart. Jonah slept through the storm because his conscience was
stupefied; but Christ, as a tired child laying its head on its mother's
lap.

That sleep may have a symbolical meaning for us. Though Christ is
present, the storm comes, and He sleeps through it. Lazarus dies, and He
makes no sign of sympathy. Peter lies in prison, and not till the
hammers of the carpenters putting up the gibbet for to-morrow are heard,
does deliverance come. He delays His help, that He may try our faith and
quicken our prayers. The boat may be covered with the waves, and He
sleeps on, but He will wake before it sinks. He sleeps, but He never
over-sleeps, and there are no too-lates with Him.

Note next the awaking cry of fear. The broken abruptness of their appeal
reveals the urgency of the case in the experienced eyes of these
fishermen. Their summons is a curious mixture of fear and faith. 'Save
us' is the language of faith; 'we perish' is that of fear. That strange
blending of opposites is often repeated by us. The office of faith is to
suppress fear. But the origin of faith is often in fear, and we are
driven to trust just because we are so much afraid. A faith which does
not wholly suppress fear may still be most real; and the highest faith
has ever the consciousness that unless Christ help, and that speedily,
we perish.

So note next the gentle remonstrance. There is something very majestic
in the tranquillity of our Lord's awaking, and, if we follow Matthew's
order, in His addressing Himself first to the disciples' weakness, and
letting the storm rage on. It can do no harm, and for the present may
blow as it listeth, while He gives the trembling disciples a lesson.
Observe how lovingly our Lord meets an imperfect faith. He has no rebuke
for their rude awaking of Him. He does not find fault with them for
being 'fearful,' but for being 'so fearful' as to let fear cover faith,
just as the waves were doing the boat. He pityingly recognises the
struggle in their souls, and their possession of some spark of faith
which He would fain blow into a flame. He shows them and us the reason
for overwhelming fear as being a deficiency in faith. And He casts all
into the form of a question, thus softening rebuke, and calming their
terrors by the appeal to their common sense. Fear is irrational if we
can exercise faith. It is mere bravado to say 'I will not be afraid,'
for this awful universe is full of occasions for just terror; but it is
the voice of sober reason which says 'I will trust, and not be afraid.'
Christ answers His own question in the act of putting it,--ye are of
little faith, that is why ye are so fearful.

Note, next, the word that calms the storm. Christ yields to the cry of
an imperfect faith, and so strengthens it. If He did not, what would
become of any of us? He does not quench the dimly burning wick, but
tends it and feeds it with oil--by His inward gifts and by His answers
to prayer--till it burns up clear and smokeless, a faith without fear.
Even smoke needs but a higher temperature to flame; and fear which is
mingled with faith needs but a little more heat to be converted into
radiance of trust. That is precisely what Christ does by this miracle.
His royal word is all-powerful. We see Him rising in the stern of the
fishing-boat, and sending His voice into the howling darkness, and wind
and waves cower at His feet like dogs that know their master. As in the
healing of the centurion's servant, we have the token of divinity in
that His bare word is able to produce effects in the natural realm. As
He lay asleep He showed the weakness of manhood; but He woke to manifest
the power of indwelling divinity. So it is always in His life, where,
side by side with the signs of humiliation and participation in man's
weakness, we ever have tokens of His divinity breaking through the veil.
All this power is put forth at the cry of timid men. The storm was meant
to move to terror; terror was meant to evoke the miracle--the result was
complete and immediate. No after-swell disturbed the placid waters when
the wind dropped. There had been 'a great tempest,' and now there was 'a
great calm,' as the fishermen floated peacefully to their landing-place
beneath the shadow of the hills. The wilder the tempest, the profounder
the subsequent repose.

All this is a true symbol of our individual lives, as well as of the
history of the Church. Storms will come, and He may seem to be heedless.
He is ever awakened by our cry, which needs not to be pure faith in
order to bring the answer, but may be strangely intertwined of faith and
fear. 'The Lord will help ... and that right early,' and the peace that
He brings is peace indeed. So it may be with us amid the struggles of
life. So may it be with us when the voyage on this storm-tossed sea of
time is done! 'They cry unto the Lord in their trouble. He maketh the
storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad
because they be quiet; so He bringeth them unto their desired haven.'


THE PEACE-BRINGER IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD

     'And when He was come to the other side into the country of the
     Gergesenes, there met Him two possessed with devils, coming out of
     the tombs, exceeding fierce, so that no man might pass by that way.
     29. And, behold, they cried out, saying, What have we to do with
     Thee, Jesus, thou Son of God? art Thou come hither to torment us
     before the time? 30. And there was a good way off from them an herd
     of many swine feeding. 31. So the devils besought Him, saying, If
     Thou cast us out, suffer us to go away into the herd of swine. 32.
     And He said unto them, Go. And when they were come out, they went
     into the herd of swine: and, behold, the whole herd of swine ran
     violently down a steep place into the sea, and perished in the
     waters. 33. And they that kept them fled, and went their ways into
     the city, and told every thing, and what was befallen to the
     possessed of the devils. 34. And, behold, the whole city came out
     to meet Jesus: and when they saw Him, they besought Him that He
     would depart out of their coasts.'--MATT. viii. 28-34.

Matthew keeps to chronological order in the first and second miracles of
the second triplet, but probably His reason for bringing them together
was rather similarity in their contents than proximity in their time.
For one cannot but feel that the stilling of the storm, which manifested
Jesus as the Peace-bringer in the realm of the Natural, is fitly
followed by the casting out of demons, which showed Him as the Lord of
still wider and darker realms, and the Peace-bringer to spirits tortured
and torn by a mysterious tyranny. His meek power sways all creatures;
His 'word runneth very swiftly.' Winds and seas and demons hearken and
obey. Cheap ridicule has been plentifully flung at this miracle, and
some defenders of the Gospels have tried to explain it away, and have
almost apologised for it, but, while it raises difficult problems in its
details, the total effect of it is to present a sublime conception of
Jesus and of His absolute, universal authority. The conception is
heightened in sublimity when the two adjacent miracles are contemplated
in connection.

There is singular variation in the readings of the name of the scene of
the miracle in the three evangelists. According to the reading of the
Authorised Version, Matthew locates it in the 'country of the
Gergesenes'; Mark and Luke, in the 'country of the Gadarenes'; whereas
the Revised Version, following the general consensus of textual critics,
reads 'Gadarenes' in Matthew and 'Gerasenes' in Mark and Luke. Now,
Gadara is over six miles from the lake, and the deep gorge of a river
lies between, so that it is out of the question as the scene of the
miracle. But the only Gerasa known, till lately, is even more
impossible, for it is far to the east of the lake. But some years since,
Thomson found ruins bearing the name of Khersa or Gersa, 'at the only
portion of that coast on which the steep hills come down to the shore'
(Smith, Historical Geography of the Holy Land, p. 459). This is probably
the site of the miracle, and may have been included in the territory
dependent on Gadara, and so have been rightly described as in 'the
country of the Gadarenes.'

Matthew again abbreviates, omitting many of the most striking and solemn
features of the narrative as given by the other two evangelists, and he
also diverges from them in mentioning two demoniacs instead of one. That
is not contradiction, for if there were two, there was one, but it is
divergence, due to more accurate information. Whether they were meant so
or no, the abbreviations have the striking result that Jesus speaks but
one word, the permissive 'Go,' and that thus His simple presence is the
potent spell before which the demons cower and flee. They know Him as
'the Son of God'; a name which, on their lips, must be taken in its full
significance. If demoniacal possession is a fact, there is no difficulty
in accounting for the name here given to Jesus, nor for the sudden
change from the fierce purpose of barring an intruder's path to abject
submission. If it is not a fact, to make a plausible explanation of
either circumstance will be a task needing many contortions, as is seen
by the attempts to achieve it. For example, we are told that the
demoniacs were afraid of Jesus, because He 'was not afraid of them,' and
they knew Him, because 'men with shattered reason also felt the spell,
while the wise and the strong-minded often used their intellect, under
the force of passion or prejudice, to resist the force of truth.'
Possibly the last clause goes as far to explain some critics'
non-recognition of demoniacal possession as the first does to explain
the demoniacs' recognition of Jesus!

To the demonic nature Christ's coming brought torture, as the sunbeam,
which gives life to many, also gives death to ugly creatures that crawl
and swarm in the dark. Turn up a stone, and the creeping things hurry
out of the penetrating glare so unwelcome. 'What maketh heaven, that
maketh hell,' and the same presence is life or death, joy or agony. The
dear perception of divine purity and the shuddering recoil of impotent
hatred from it are surely of the very essence of the demonic nature, and
every man, who looks into the depths of his own spirit, knows that the
possibilities of such a state are in him.

Our Lord discriminated between healing the sick and casting out demons.
He distinguished between forms of disease due to possession and the same
diseases when dissociated from it, as, for example, cases of dumbness.
His whole attitude, both in His actual dealing with the possessed and in
His referring to the subject, gave His complete adhesion to the reality
of the awful thing. It is vain to say that He humoured the delusions of
insanity in order to cure them. That theory does not adequately explain
any of the facts and does not touch some of them. It is perilous to try
to weaken the force of the narrative by saying that the evangelists were
under the influence of popular notions (which are quietly assumed to
have been wrong), and hence that their prepossessions coloured their
representations. If the mirror was so distorted, what reliance can be
placed on any part of its reflection of Jesus? There can be no doubt
that the Gospel narrative asserts and assumes the reality of demoniacal
possession, and if the representation that Jesus also assumed it is due
to the evangelists, what trust can be reposed in authorities which
misrepresent Him in such a matter? On the other hand, if they do not
misrepresent Him, and He blundered, confounding mere insanity with
possession by a demon, what reliance can be reposed in Him as our
Teacher of the Unseen World? The issues involved are very grave and
far-reaching, and raillery or sarcasm is out of place.

But the question is pertinent: By what right do we allege that
demoniacal possession is an exploded figment and an impossibility? Do we
know ourselves or our fellows so thoroughly as to be warranted in
denying that deep down in the mysterious 'subliminal consciousness'
there is a gate through which spiritual beings may come into contact
with human personalities? He would be bold, to the verge of presumption
or somewhat further, who should take up such a position. And have we any
better right to assume that we know so much of the universe as to be
sure that there are no evil spirits there, who can come into contact
with human spirits and wield an alien tyranny over them? The Christian
attitude is not that of such far-reaching denial which outruns our
knowledge, but that of calm belief that Jesus is the head of all
principality and power, and that to Him all are subject. It is taken for
granted that the supposed possession is insanity. But may it not rather
be that to-day some of the supposed insanity is possession? Be that as
it may--and perhaps those who have the widest experience of 'lunatics'
would be the least ready to dismiss the possibility,--Jesus recognised
the reality that there were souls oppressed by a real personality, which
had settled itself in the house of life, and none of us has wide and
deep enough knowledge to contradict Him. Might it not be better to
accept His witness in this, as in other matters beyond our ken, as true,
and to ponder it?

The demons' petition, according to the Received Text, takes the form,
'Suffer us to go,' while the reading adopted by most modern editors is
'Send us.' The former reading seems to be taken from Luke (viii. 32),
while Mark has 'Send' (not the same word as now read in Matthew). But
Mark goes on to say, not that Jesus sent them, but that He 'suffered
them' or 'gave them leave' (the same word as in Matthew, according to
the Received Text). Thus, Jesus' part in the transaction is simply
permissive, and the one word which He speaks is authoritative indeed in
its curtness, and means simply 'away,' or 'begone.' It casts them out
but does not send them in. He did not send them into the herd, but out
of the men, and did not prevent their entrance into the swine. It should
further be noted that nothing in the narrative suggests that the
destruction of the herd was designed even by the demons, much less by
Jesus. The maddened brutes rushed straight before them, not knowing why
or where; the steep slope was in front, and the sea was at its foot, and
their terrified, short gallop ended there. The last thing the demons
would have done would have been to banish themselves, as the death of
the swine did banish them, from their new shelter. There is no need,
then, to invent justifications for Christ's destroying the herd, for He
did not destroy it. No doubt, keeping swine was a breach of Jewish law;
no doubt the two demoniacs and the bystanders would be more convinced of
the reality of the exorcism by the fate of the swine, but these
apologies are needless.

The narrative suggests some affinity between the demoniac and the animal
nature, and though it is easy to ridicule, it is impossible to disprove,
the suggestion. We know too little about either to do that, and what we
cannot disprove it is somewhat venturesome hardily to deny. There are
depths in the one nature, which we cannot fathom though its possessors
are close to us; the other is removed from our investigation altogether.
Where we are so utterly ignorant we had better neither affirm nor deny.
But we may take a homiletical use out of that apparent affinity, and
recognise that a spirit in rebellion against God necessarily gravitates
downwards, and becomes more or less bestialised.

No wonder that the swineherds fled, but, surely, it is a wonder that
eagerness to be rid of Jesus was the sole result of the miracle. Perhaps
the reason was the loss of the swine, which would bulk largest in their
keepers' excited story; perhaps the reason was a fear that He would find
out and rebuke other instances of breach of strict Jewish propriety,
perhaps it was simply the shrinking from any close contact with the
heavenly, or apparently supernatural, which is so instinctive in us, and
witnesses to a dormant consciousness of discord with Heaven. 'Depart
from me, for I am a sinful man,' is the cry of the roused conscience.
And, alas! it has power to send away Him whom we need, and who comes to
us, just because we are sinful, and just that He may deliver us from our
sin.


END OF VOL. I






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture
by Alexander Maclaren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE ***

***** This file should be named 15836.txt or 15836.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/8/3/15836/

Produced by Charles Franks, Don Kretz and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
