
Obj. 2: Further, each of the above bears the same relation to one
venial sin as to all. If therefore, by means of one of them, some
venial sin is remitted, it follows that in like manner all are
remitted, so that by beating his breast once, or by being sprinkled
once with holy water, a man would be delivered from all his venial
sins, which seems unreasonable.

Obj. 3: Further, venial sins occasion a debt of some punishment,
albeit temporal; for it is written (1 Cor. 3:12, 15) of him that
builds up "wood, hay, stubble" that "he shall be saved, yet so as by
fire." Now the above things whereby venial sins are said to be taken
away, contain either no punishment at all, or very little. Therefore
they do not suffice for the full remission of venial sins.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in _De Poenitentia_ [*Hom. 30 inter
1; Ep. cclxv] that "for our slight sins we strike our breasts, and
say: Forgive us our trespasses," and so it seems that striking one's
breast, and the Lord's Prayer cause the remission of venial sins: and
the same seems to apply to the other things.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), no infusion of fresh grace
is required for the forgiveness of a venial sin, but it is enough to
have an act proceeding from grace, in detestation of that venial sin,
either explicit or at least implicit, as when one is moved fervently
to God. Hence, for three reasons, certain things cause the remission
of venial sins: first, because they imply the infusion of grace,
since the infusion of grace removes venial sins, as stated above (A.
2); and so, by the Eucharist, Extreme Unction, and by all the
sacraments of the New Law without exception, wherein grace is
conferred, venial sins are remitted. Secondly, because they imply a
movement of detestation for sin, and in this way the general
confession [*i.e. the recital of the Confiteor or of an act of
contrition], the beating of one's breast, and the Lord's Prayer
conduce to the remission of venial sins, for we ask in the Lord's
Prayer: "Forgive us our trespasses." Thirdly, because they include a
movement of reverence for God and Divine things; and in this way a
bishop's blessing, the sprinkling of holy water, any sacramental
anointing, a prayer said in a dedicated church, and anything else of
the kind, conduce to the remission of venial sins.

Reply Obj. 1: All these things cause the remission of venial sins, in
so far as they incline the soul to the movement of penance, viz., the
implicit or explicit detestation of one's sins.

Reply Obj. 2: All these things, so far as they are concerned, conduce
to the remission of all venial sins: but the remission may be
hindered as regards certain venial sins, to which the mind is still
actually attached, even as insincerity sometimes impedes the effect
of Baptism.

Reply Obj. 3: By the above things, venial sins are indeed taken away
as regards the guilt, both because those things are a kind of
satisfaction, and through the virtue of charity whose movement is
aroused by such things.

Yet it does not always happen that, by means of each one, the whole
guilt of punishment is taken away, because, in that case, whoever
was entirely free from mortal sin, would go straight to heaven if
sprinkled with holy water: but the debt of punishment is remitted by
means of the above, according to the movement of fervor towards God,
which fervor is aroused by such things, sometimes more, sometimes
less.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 87, Art. 4]

Whether Venial Sin Can Be Taken Away Without Mortal Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that venial sin can be taken away without
mortal sin. For, on John 8:7: "He that is without sin among you, let
him first cast a stone at her," a gloss says that "all those men were
in a state of mortal sin: for venial offenses were forgiven them
through the legal ceremonies." Therefore venial sin can be taken away
without mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, no infusion of grace is required for the remission
of venial sin, but it is required for the forgiveness of mortal sin.
Therefore venial sin can be taken away without mortal sin.

Obj. 3: Further, a venial sin differs from a mortal sin more than
from another venial sin. But one venial sin can be pardoned without
another, as stated above (A. 3, ad 2; Q. 87, A. 3). Therefore a
venial sin can be taken away without a mortal sin.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Matt. 5:26): "Amen I say to thee,
thou shalt not go out from thence," viz., from the prison, into which
a man is cast for mortal sin, "till thou repay the last farthing," by
which venial sin is denoted. Therefore a venial sin is not forgiven
without mortal sin.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 87, A. 3), there is no remission
of any sin whatever except by the power of grace, because, as the
Apostle declares (Rom. 4:8), it is owing to God's grace that He does
not impute sin to a man, which a gloss on that passage expounds as
referring to venial sin. Now he that is in a state of mortal sin is
without the grace of God. Therefore no venial sin is forgiven him.

Reply Obj. 1: Venial offenses, in the passage quoted, denote the
irregularities or uncleannesses which men contracted in accordance
with the Law.

Reply Obj. 2: Although no new infusion of habitual grace is requisite
for the remission of venial sin, yet it is necessary to exercise some
act of grace, which cannot be in one who is a subject of mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 3: Venial sin does not preclude every act of grace whereby
all venial sins can be removed; whereas mortal sin excludes
altogether the habit of grace, without which no sin, either mortal or
venial, is remitted. Hence the comparison fails.
_______________________

QUESTION 88

OF THE RETURN OF SINS WHICH HAVE BEEN TAKEN AWAY BY PENANCE
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the return of sins which have been taken away by
Penance: under which head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether sins which have been taken away by Penance return simply
through a subsequent sin?

(2) Whether more specially as regards certain sins they return, in a
way, on account of ingratitude?

(3) Whether the debt of punishment remains the same for sins thus
returned?

(4) Whether this ingratitude, on account of which sins return, is a
special sin?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 88, Art. 1]

Whether Sins Once Forgiven Return Through a Subsequent Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sins once forgiven return through a
subsequent sin. For Augustine says (De Bapt. contra Donat. i, 12):
"Our Lord teaches most explicitly in the Gospel that sins which have
been forgiven return, when fraternal charity ceases, in the example
of the servant from whom his master exacted the payment of the debt
already forgiven, because he had refused to forgive the debt of his
fellow-servant." Now fraternal charity is destroyed through each
mortal sin. Therefore sins already taken away through Penance, return
through each subsequent mortal sin.

Obj. 2: Further, on Luke 11:24, "I will return into my house, whence
I came out," Bede says: "This verse should make us tremble, we should
not endeavor to explain it away lest through carelessness we give
place to the sin which we thought to have been taken away, and become
its slave once more." Now this would not be so unless it returned.
Therefore a sin returns after once being taken away by Penance.

Obj. 3: Further, the Lord said (Ezech. 18:24): "If the just man turn
himself away from his justice, and do iniquity . . . all his justices
which he hath done, shall not be remembered." Now among the other
"justices" which he had done, is also his previous penance, since it
was said above (Q. 85, A. 3) that penance is a part of justice.
Therefore when one who has done penance, sins, his previous penance,
whereby he received forgiveness of his sins, is not imputed to him.
Therefore his sins return.

Obj. 4: Further, past sins are covered by grace, as the Apostle
declares (Rom. 4:7) where he quotes Ps. 31:1: "Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered." But a
subsequent mortal sin takes away grace. Therefore the sins committed
previously, become uncovered: and so, seemingly, they return.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 11:29): "The gifts and the
calling of God are without repentance." Now the penitent's sins are
taken away by a gift of God. Therefore the sins which have been taken
away do not return through a subsequent sin, as though God repented
His gift of forgiveness.

Moreover, Augustine says (Lib. Resp. Prosperi i [*Cf. Prosper,
Responsiones ad Capitula Gallorum ii]): "When he that turns away from
Christ, comes to the end of this life a stranger to grace, whither
does he go, except to perdition? Yet he does not fall back into that
which had been forgiven, nor will he be condemned for original sin."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 86, A. 4), mortal sin contains
two things, aversion from God and adherence to a created good. Now,
in mortal sin, whatever attaches to the aversion, is, considered in
itself, common to all mortal sins, since man turns away from God by
every mortal sin, so that, in consequence, the stain resulting from
the privation of grace, and the debt of everlasting punishment are
common to all mortal sins. This is what is meant by what is written
(James 2:10): "Whosoever . . . shall offend in one point, is become
guilty of all." On the other hand, as regards their adherence they
are different from, and sometimes contrary to one another. Hence it
is evident, that on the part of the adherence, a subsequent mortal
sin does not cause the return of mortal sins previously dispelled,
else it would follow that by a sin of wastefulness a man would be
brought back to the habit or disposition of avarice previously
dispelled, so that one contrary would be the cause of another, which
is impossible. But if in mortal sins we consider that which attaches
to the aversion absolutely, then a subsequent mortal sin [causes the
return of that which was comprised in the mortal sins before they
were pardoned, in so far as the subsequent mortal sin] [*The words in
brackets are omitted in the Leonine edition.] deprives man of grace,
and makes him deserving of everlasting punishment, just as he was
before. Nevertheless, since the aversion of mortal sin is [in a way,
caused by the adherence, those things which attach to the aversion
are*] diversified somewhat in relation to various adherences, as it
were to various causes, so that there will be a different aversion, a
different stain, a different debt of punishment, according to the
different acts of mortal sin from which they arise; hence the
question is moved whether the stain and the debt of eternal
punishment, as caused by acts of sins previously pardoned, return
through a subsequent mortal sin.

Accordingly some have maintained that they return simply even in this
way. But this is impossible, because what God has done cannot be
undone by the work of man. Now the pardon of the previous sins was a
work of Divine mercy, so that it cannot be undone by man's subsequent
sin, according to Rom. 3:3: "Shall their unbelief make the faith of
God without effect?"

Wherefore others who maintained the possibility of sins returning,
said that God pardons the sins of a penitent who will afterwards sin
again, not according to His foreknowledge, but only according to His
present justice: since He foresees that He will punish such a man
eternally for his sins, and yet, by His grace, He makes him righteous
for the present. But this cannot stand: because if a cause be placed
absolutely, its effect is placed absolutely; so that if the remission
of sins were effected by grace and the sacraments of grace, not
absolutely but under some condition dependent on some future event,
it would follow that grace and the sacraments of grace are not the
sufficient causes of the remission of sins, which is erroneous, as
being derogatory to God's grace.

Consequently it is in no way possible for the stain of past sins and
the debt of punishment incurred thereby, to return, as caused by
those acts. Yet it may happen that a subsequent sinful act virtually
contains the debt of punishment due to the previous sin, in so far as
when a man sins a second time, for this very reason he seems to sin
more grievously than before, as stated in Rom. 2:5: "According to thy
hardness and impenitent heart, thou treasurest up to thyself wrath
against the day of wrath," from the mere fact, namely, that God's
goodness, which waits for us to repent, is despised. And so much the
more is God's goodness despised, if the first sin is committed a
second time after having been forgiven, as it is a greater favor for
the sin to be forgiven than for the sinner to be endured.

Accordingly the sin which follows repentance brings back, in a sense,
the debt of punishment due to the sins previously forgiven, not as
caused by those sins already forgiven but as caused by this last sin
being committed, on account of its being aggravated in view of those
previous sins. This means that those sins return, not simply, but in
a restricted sense, viz., in so far as they are virtually contained
in the subsequent sin.

Reply Obj. 1: This saying of Augustine seems to refer to the return
of sins as to the debt of eternal punishment considered in itself,
namely, that he who sins after doing penance incurs a debt of eternal
punishment, just as before, but not altogether for the same _reason._
Wherefore Augustine, after saying (Lib. Resp. Prosperi i [*Cf.
Prosper, Responsiones ad Capitula Gallorum ii]) that "he does not
fall back into that which was forgiven, nor will he be condemned for
original sin," adds: "Nevertheless, for these last sins he will be
condemned to the same death, which he deserved to suffer for the
former," because he incurs the punishment of eternal death which he
deserved for his previous sins.

Reply Obj. 2: By these words Bede means that the guilt already
forgiven enslaves man, not by the return of his former debt of
punishment, but by the repetition of his act.

Reply Obj. 3: The effect of a subsequent sin is that the former
"justices" are not remembered, in so far as they were deserving of
eternal life, but not in so far as they were a hindrance to sin.
Consequently if a man sins mortally after making restitution, he does
not become guilty as though he had not paid back what he owed; and
much less is penance previously done forgotten as to the pardon of
the guilt, since this is the work of God rather than of man.

Reply Obj. 4: Grace removes the stain and the debt of eternal
punishment simply; but it covers the past sinful acts, lest, on their
account, God deprive man of grace, and judge him deserving of eternal
punishment; and what grace has once done, endures for ever.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 88, Art. 2]

Whether Sins That Have Been Forgiven, Return Through Ingratitude
Which Is Shown Especially in Four Kinds of Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that sins do not return through
ingratitude, which is shown especially in four kinds of sin, viz.,
hatred of one's neighbor, apostasy from faith, contempt of confession
and regret for past repentance, and which have been expressed in the
following verse:

"Fratres odit, apostata fit, spernitque, fateri,
Poenituisse piget, pristina culpa redit."

For the more grievous the sin committed against God after one has
received the grace of pardon, the greater the ingratitude. But there
are sins more grievous than these, such as blasphemy against God, and
the sin against the Holy Ghost. Therefore it seems that sins already
pardoned do not return through ingratitude as manifested in these
sins, any more than as shown in other sins.

Obj. 2: Further, Rabanus says: "God delivered the wicked servant to
the torturers, until he should pay the whole debt, because a man will
be deemed punishable not only for the sins he commits after Baptism,
but also for original sin which was taken away when he was baptized."
Now venial sins are reckoned among our debts, since we pray in their
regard: "Forgive us our trespasses (_debita_)." Therefore they too
return through ingratitude; and, in like manner seemingly, sins
already pardoned return through venial sins, and not only through
those sins mentioned above.

Obj. 3: Further, ingratitude is all the greater, according as one
sins after receiving a greater favor. Now innocence whereby one
avoids sin is a Divine favor, for Augustine says (Confess. ii):
"Whatever sins I have avoided committing, I owe it to Thy grace." Now
innocence is a greater gift, than even the forgiveness of all sins.
Therefore the first sin committed after innocence is no less an
ingratitude to God, than a sin committed after repentance, so that
seemingly ingratitude in respect of the aforesaid sins is not the
chief cause of sins returning.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory says (Moral. xviii [*Cf. Dial. iv]): "It
is evident from the words of the Gospel that if we do not forgive
from our hearts the offenses committed against us, we become once
more accountable for what we rejoiced in as forgiven through
Penance": so that ingratitude implied in the hatred of one's brother
is a special cause of the return of sins already forgiven: and the
same seems to apply to the others.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), sins pardoned through
Penance are said to return, in so far as their debt of punishment, by
reason of ingratitude, is virtually contained in the subsequent sin.
Now one may be guilty of ingratitude in two ways: first by doing
something against the favor received, and, in this way, man is
ungrateful to God in every mortal sin whereby he offends God Who
forgave his sins, so that by every subsequent mortal sin, the sins
previously pardoned return, on account of the ingratitude. Secondly,
one is guilty of ingratitude, by doing something not only against the
favor itself, but also against the form of the favor received. If
this form be considered on the part of the benefactor, it is the
remission of something due to him; wherefore he who does not forgive
his brother when he asks pardon, and persists in his hatred, acts
against this form. If, however, this form be taken in regard to the
penitent who receives this favor, we find on his part a twofold
movement of the free-will. The first is the movement of the free-will
towards God, and is an act of faith quickened by charity; and against
this a man acts by apostatizing from the faith. The second is a
movement of the free-will against sin, and is the act of penance.
This act consists first, as we have stated above (Q. 85, AA. 2, 5) in
man's detestation of his past sins; and against this a man acts when
he regrets having done penance. Secondly, the act of penance consists
in the penitent purposing to subject himself to the keys of the
Church by confession, according to Ps. 31:5: "I said: I will confess
against myself my injustice to the Lord: and Thou hast forgiven the
wickedness of my sin": and against this a man acts when he scorns to
confess as he had purposed to do.

Accordingly it is said that the ingratitude of sinners is a special
cause of the return of sins previously forgiven.

Reply Obj. 1: This is not said of these sins as though they were more
grievous than others, but because they are more directly opposed to
the favor of the forgiveness of sin.

Reply Obj. 2: Even venial sins and original sin return in the way
explained above, just as mortal sins do, in so far as the favor
conferred by God in forgiving those sins is despised. A man does not,
however, incur ingratitude by committing a venial sin, because by
sinning venially man does not act against God, but apart from Him,
wherefore venial sins nowise cause the return of sins already
forgiven.

Reply Obj. 3: A favor can be weighed in two ways. First by the
quantity of the favor itself, and in this way innocence is a greater
favor from God than penance, which is called the second plank after
shipwreck (cf. Q. 84, A. 6). Secondly, a favor may be weighed with
regard to the recipient, who is less worthy, wherefore a greater
favor is bestowed on him, so that he is the more ungrateful if he
scorns it. In this way the favor of the pardon of sins is greater
when bestowed on one who is altogether unworthy, so that the
ingratitude which follows is all the greater.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 88, Art. 3]

Whether the Debt of Punishment That Arises Through Ingratitude in
Respect of a Subsequent Sin Is As Great As That of the Sins
Previously Pardoned?

Objection 1: It would seem that the debt of punishment arising
through ingratitude in respect of a subsequent sin is as great as
that of the sins previously pardoned. Because the greatness of the
favor of the pardon of sins is according to the greatness of the sin
pardoned, and so too, in consequence, is the greatness of the
ingratitude whereby this favor is scorned. But the greatness of the
consequent debt of punishment is in accord with the greatness of the
ingratitude. Therefore the debt of punishment arising through
ingratitude in respect of a subsequent sin is as great as the debt of
punishment due for all the previous sins.

Obj. 2: Further, it is a greater sin to offend God than to offend
man. But a slave who is freed by his master returns to the same state
of slavery from which he was freed, or even to a worse state. Much
more therefore he that sins against God after being freed from sin,
returns to the debt of as great a punishment as he had incurred
before.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Matt. 18:34) that "his lord being
angry, delivered him" (whose sins returned to him on account of his
ingratitude) "to the torturers, until he paid all the debt." But this
would not be so unless the debt of punishment incurred through
ingratitude were as great as that incurred through all previous sins.
Therefore an equal debt of punishment returns through ingratitude.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Deut. 25:2): "According to the
measure of the sin shall the measure also of the stripes be," whence
it is evident that a great debt of punishment does not arise from a
slight sin. But sometimes a subsequent mortal sin is much less
grievous than any one of those previously pardoned. Therefore the
debt of punishment incurred through subsequent sins is not equal to
that of sins previously forgiven.

_I answer that,_ Some have maintained that the debt of punishment
incurred through ingratitude in respect of a subsequent sin is equal
to that of the sins previously pardoned, in addition to the debt
proper to this subsequent sin. But there is no need for this,
because, as stated above (A. 1), the debt of punishment incurred by
previous sins does not return on account of a subsequent sin, as
resulting from the acts of the subsequent sin. Wherefore the amount
of the debt that returns must be according to the gravity of the
subsequent sin.

It is possible, however, for the gravity of the subsequent sin to
equal the gravity of all previous sins. But it need not always be so,
whether we speak of the gravity which a sin has from its species
(since the subsequent sin may be one of simple fornication, while the
previous sins were adulteries, murders, or sacrileges); or of the
gravity which it incurs through the ingratitude connected with it.
For it is not necessary that the measure of ingratitude should be
exactly equal to the measure of the favor received, which latter is
measured according to the greatness of the sins previously pardoned.
Because it may happen that in respect of the same favor, one man is
very ungrateful, either on account of the intensity of his scorn for
the favor received, or on account of the gravity of the offense
committed against the benefactor, while another man is slightly
ungrateful, either because his scorn is less intense, or because his
offense against the benefactor is less grave. But the measure of
ingratitude is proportionately equal to the measure of the favor
received: for supposing an equal contempt of the favor, or an equal
offense against the benefactor, the ingratitude will be so much the
greater, as the favor received is greater.

Hence it is evident that the debt of punishment incurred by a
subsequent sin need not always be equal to that of previous sins; but
it must be in proportion thereto, so that the more numerous or the
greater the sins previously pardoned, the greater must be the debt of
punishment incurred by any subsequent mortal sin whatever.

Reply Obj. 1: The favor of the pardon of sins takes its absolute
quantity from the quantity of the sins previously pardoned: but the
sin of ingratitude does not take its absolute quantity from the
measure of the favor bestowed, but from the measure of the contempt
or of the offense, as stated above: and so the objection does not
prove.

Reply Obj. 2: A slave who has been given his freedom is not brought
back to his previous state of slavery for any kind of ingratitude,
but only when this is grave.

Reply Obj. 3: He whose forgiven sins return to him on account of
subsequent ingratitude, incurs the debt for all, in so far as the
measure of his previous sins is contained proportionally in his
subsequent ingratitude, but not absolutely, as stated above.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 88, Art. 4]

Whether the Ingratitude Whereby a Subsequent Sin Causes the Return of
Previous Sins, Is a Special Sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that the ingratitude, whereby a subsequent
sin causes the return of sins previously forgiven, is a special sin.
For the giving of thanks belongs to counterpassion which is a
necessary condition of justice, as the Philosopher shows (Ethic. v,
5). But justice is a special virtue. Therefore this ingratitude is a
special sin.

Obj. 2: Further, Tully says (De Inv. Rhet. ii) that thanksgiving is a
special virtue. But ingratitude is opposed to thanksgiving. Therefore
ingratitude is a special sin.

Obj. 3: Further, a special effect proceeds from a special cause. Now
ingratitude has a special effect, viz. the return, after a fashion,
of sins already forgiven. Therefore ingratitude is a special sin.

_On the contrary,_ That which is a sequel to every sin is not a
special sin. Now by any mortal sin whatever, a man becomes ungrateful
to God, as evidenced from what has been said (A. 1). Therefore
ingratitude is not a special sin.

_I answer that,_ The ingratitude of the sinner is sometimes a special
sin; and sometimes it is not, but a circumstance arising from all
mortal sins in common committed against God. For a sin takes its
species according to the sinner's intention, wherefore the
Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 2) that "he who commits adultery in order
to steal is a thief rather than an adulterer."

If, therefore, a sinner commits a sin in contempt of God and of the
favor received from Him, that sin is drawn to the species of
ingratitude, and in this way a sinner's ingratitude is a special sin.
If, however, a man, while intending to commit a sin, e.g. murder or
adultery, is not withheld from it on account of its implying contempt
of God, his ingratitude will not be a special sin, but will be drawn
to the species of the other sin, as a circumstance thereof. And, as
Augustine observes (De Nat. et Grat. xxix), not every sin implies
contempt of God in His commandments. Therefore it is evident that the
sinner's ingratitude is sometimes a special sin, sometimes not.

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections: for the first
(three) objections prove that ingratitude is in itself a special sin;
while the last objection proves that ingratitude, as included in
every sin, is not a special sin.
_______________________

QUESTION 89

OF THE RECOVERY OF VIRTUE BY MEANS OF PENANCE
(In Six Articles)

We must now consider the recovery of virtues by means of Penance,
under which head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether virtues are restored through Penance?

(2) Whether they are restored in equal measure?

(3) Whether equal dignity is restored to the penitent?

(4) Whether works of virtue are deadened by subsequent sin?

(5) Whether works deadened by sin revive through Penance?

(6) Whether dead works, i.e. works that are done without charity, are
quickened by Penance?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 89, Art. 1]

Whether the Virtues Are Restored Through Penance?

Objection 1: It would seem that the virtues are not restored through
penance. Because lost virtue cannot be restored by penance, unless
penance be the cause of virtue. But, since penance is itself a
virtue, it cannot be the cause of all the virtues, and all the more,
since some virtues naturally precede penance, viz., faith, hope, and
charity, as stated above (Q. 85, A. 6). Therefore the virtues are not
restored through penance.

Obj. 2: Further, Penance consists in certain acts of the penitent.
But the gratuitous virtues are not caused through any act of ours:
for Augustine says (De Lib. Arb. ii, 18: In Ps. 118) that "God forms
the virtues in us without us." Therefore it seems that the virtues
are not restored through Penance.

Obj. 3: Further, he that has virtue performs works of virtue with
ease and pleasure: wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 8) that
"a man is not just if he does not rejoice in just deeds." Now many
penitents find difficulty in performing deeds of virtue. Therefore
the virtues are not restored through Penance.

_On the contrary,_ We read (Luke 15:22) that the father commanded his
penitent son to be clothed in "the first robe," which, according to
Ambrose (Expos. in Luc. vii), is the "mantle of wisdom," from which
all the virtues flow together, according to Wis. 8:7: "She teacheth
temperance, and prudence, and justice, and fortitude, which are such
things as men can have nothing more profitable in life." Therefore
all the virtues are restored through Penance.

_I answer that,_ Sins are pardoned through Penance, as stated above
(Q. 86, A. 1). But there can be no remission of sins except through
the infusion of grace. Wherefore it follows that grace is infused
into man through Penance. Now all the gratuitous virtues flow from
grace, even as all the powers result from the essence of the soul; as
stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 110, A. 4, ad 1). Therefore all
the virtues are restored through Penance.

Reply Obj. 1: Penance restores the virtues in the same way as it
causes grace, as stated above (Q. 86, A. 1). Now it is a cause of
grace, in so far as it is a sacrament, because, in so far as it is a
virtue, it is rather an effect of grace. Consequently it does not
follow that penance, as a virtue, needs to be the cause of all the
other virtues, but that the habit of penance together with the habits
of the other virtues is caused through the sacrament of Penance.

Reply Obj. 2: In the sacrament of Penance human acts stand as matter,
while the formal power of this sacrament is derived from the power of
the keys. Consequently the power of the keys causes grace and virtue
effectively indeed, but instrumentally; and the first act of the
penitent, viz., contrition, stands as ultimate disposition to the
reception of grace, while the subsequent acts of Penance proceed from
the grace and virtues which are already there.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 86, A. 5), sometimes after the
first act of Penance, which is contrition, certain remnants of sin
remain, viz. dispositions caused by previous acts, the result being
that the penitent finds difficulty in doing deeds of virtue.
Nevertheless, so far as the inclination itself of charity and of the
other virtues is concerned, the penitent performs works of virtue
with pleasure and ease, even as a virtuous man may accidentally find
it hard to do an act of virtue, on account of sleepiness or some
indisposition of the body.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 89, Art. 2]

Whether, After Penance, Man Rises Again to Equal Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that, after Penance, man rises again to
equal virtue. For the Apostle says (Rom. 8:28): "To them that love
God all things work together unto good," whereupon a gloss of
Augustine says that "this is so true that, if any such man goes
astray and wanders from the path, God makes even this conduce to his
good." But this would not be true if he rose again to lesser virtue.
Therefore it seems that a penitent never rises again to lesser virtue.

Obj. 2: Further, Ambrose says [*Cf. Hypognosticon iii, an anonymous
work falsely ascribed to St. Augustine] that "Penance is a very good
thing, for it restores every defect to a state of perfection." But
this would not be true unless virtues were recovered in equal
measure. Therefore equal virtue is always recovered through Penance.

Obj. 3: Further, on Gen. 1:5: "There was evening and morning, one
day," a gloss says: "The evening light is that from which we fall;
the morning light is that to which we rise again." Now the morning
light is greater than the evening light. Therefore a man rises to
greater grace or charity than that which he had before; which is
confirmed by the Apostle's words (Rom. 5:20): "Where sin abounded,
grace did more abound."

_On the contrary,_ Charity whether proficient or perfect is greater
than incipient charity. But sometimes a man falls from proficient
charity, and rises again to incipient charity. Therefore man always
rises again to less virtue.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 86, A. 6, ad 3; Q. 89, A. 1, ad
2), the movement of the free-will, in the justification of the
ungodly, is the ultimate disposition to grace; so that in the same
instant there is infusion of grace together with the aforesaid
movement of the free-will, as stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q.
113, AA. 5, 7), which movement includes an act of penance, as stated
above (Q. 86, A. 2). But it is evident that forms which admit of
being more or less, become intense or remiss, according to the
different dispositions of the subject, as stated in the Second Part
(I-II, Q. 52, AA. 1, 2; Q. 66, A. 1). Hence it is that, in Penance,
according to the degree of intensity or remissness in the movement of
the free-will, the penitent receives greater or lesser grace. Now the
intensity of the penitent's movement may be proportionate sometimes
to a greater grace than that from which man fell by sinning,
sometimes to an equal grace, sometimes to a lesser. Wherefore the
penitent sometimes arises to a greater grace than that which he had
before, sometimes to an equal, sometimes to a lesser grace: and the
same applies to the virtues, which flow from grace.

Reply Obj. 1: The very fact of falling away from the love of God by
sin, does not work unto the good of all those who love God, which is
evident in the case of those who fall and never rise again, or who
rise and fall yet again; but only to the good of "such as according
to His purpose are called to be saints," viz. the predestined, who,
however often they may fall, yet rise again finally. Consequently
good comes of their falling, not that they always rise again to
greater grace, but that they rise to more abiding grace, not indeed
on the part of grace itself, because the greater the grace, the more
abiding it is, but on the part of man, who, the more careful and
humble he is, abides the more steadfastly in grace. Hence the same
gloss adds that "their fall conduces to their good, because they rise
more humble and more enlightened."

Reply Obj. 2: Penance, considered in itself, has the power to bring
all defects back to perfection, and even to advance man to a higher
state; but this is sometimes hindered on the part of man, whose
movement towards God and in detestation of sin is too remiss, just as
in Baptism adults receive a greater or a lesser grace, according to
the various ways in which they prepare themselves.

Reply Obj. 3: This comparison of the two graces to the evening and
morning light is made on account of a likeness of order, since the
darkness of night follows after the evening light, and the light of
day after the light of morning, but not on account of a likeness of
greater or lesser quantity. Again, this saying of the Apostle refers
to the grace of Christ, which abounds more than any number of man's
sins. Nor is it true of all, that the more their sins abound, the
more abundant grace they receive, if we measure habitual grace by the
quantity. Grace is, however, more abundant, as regards the very
notion of grace, because to him who sins more a more _gratuitous_
favor is vouchsafed by his pardon; although sometimes those whose
sins abound, abound also in sorrow, so that they receive a more
abundant habit of grace and virtue, as was the case with Magdalen.

To the argument advanced in the contrary sense it must be replied
that in one and the same man proficient grace is greater than
incipient grace, but this is not necessarily the case in different
men, for one begins with a greater grace than another has in the
state of proficiency: thus Gregory says (Dial. ii, 1): "Let all, both
now and hereafter, acknowledge how perfectly the boy Benedict turned
to the life of grace from the very beginning."
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 89, Art. 3]

Whether, by Penance, Man Is Restored to His Former Dignity?

Objection 1: It would seem that man is not restored by Penance to his
former dignity: because a gloss on Amos 5:2, "The virgin of Israel is
cast down," observes: "It is not said that she cannot rise up, but
that the virgin of Israel shall not rise; because the sheep that has
once strayed, although the shepherd bring it back on his shoulder,
has not the same glory as if it had never strayed." Therefore man
does not, through Penance, recover his former dignity.

Obj. 2: Further, Jerome says: "Whoever fail to preserve the dignity
of the sacred order, must be content with saving their souls; for it
is a difficult thing to return to their former degree." Again, Pope
Innocent I says (Ep. vi ad Agapit.) that "the canons framed at the
council of Nicaea exclude penitents from even the lowest orders of
clerics." Therefore man does not, through Penance, recover his former
dignity.

Obj. 3: Further, before sinning a man can advance to a higher sacred
order. But this is not permitted to a penitent after his sin, for it
is written (Ezech. 44:10, 13): "The Levites that went away . . . from
Me . . . shall never [Vulg.: 'not'] come near to Me, to do the office
of priest": and as laid down in the Decretals (Dist. 1, ch. 52), and
taken from the council of Lerida: "If those who serve at the Holy
Altar fall suddenly into some deplorable weakness of the flesh, and
by God's mercy do proper penance, let them return to their duties,
yet so as not to receive further promotion." Therefore Penance does
not restore man to his former dignity.

_On the contrary,_ As we read in the same Distinction, Gregory
writing to Secundinus (Regist. vii) says: "We consider that when a
man has made proper satisfaction, he may return to his honorable
position": and moreover we read in the acts of the council of Agde:
"Contumacious clerics, so far as their position allows, should be
corrected by their bishops, so that when Penance has reformed them,
they may recover their degree and dignity."

_I answer that,_ By sin, man loses a twofold dignity, one in respect
of God, the other in respect of the Church. In respect of God he
again loses a twofold dignity. One is his principal dignity, whereby
he was counted among the children of God, and this he recovers by
Penance, which is signified (Luke 15) in the prodigal son, for when
he repented, his father commanded that the first garment should be
restored to him, together with a ring and shoes. The other is his
secondary dignity, viz. innocence, of which, as we read in the same
chapter, the elder son boasted saying (Luke 15:29): "Behold, for so
many years do I serve thee, and I have never transgressed thy
commandments": and this dignity the penitent cannot recover.
Nevertheless he recovers something greater sometimes; because as
Gregory says (Hom. de centum Ovibus, 34 in Evang.), "those who
acknowledge themselves to have strayed away from God, make up for
their past losses, by subsequent gains: so that there is more joy in
heaven on their account, even as in battle, the commanding officer
thinks more of the soldier who, after running away, returns and
bravely attacks the foe, than of one who has never turned his back,
but has done nothing brave."

By sin man loses his ecclesiastical dignity, because thereby he
becomes unworthy of those things which appertain to the exercise of
the ecclesiastical dignity. This he is debarred from recovering:
first, because he fails to repent; wherefore Isidore wrote to the
bishop Masso, and as we read in the Distinction quoted above (Obj.
3): "The canons order those to be restored to their former degree,
who by repentance have made satisfaction for their sins, or have made
worthy confession of them. On the other hand, those who do not mend
their corrupt and wicked ways are neither allowed to exercise their
order, nor received to the grace of communion."

Secondly, because he does penance negligently, wherefore it is
written in the same Distinction (Obj. 3): "We can be sure that those
who show no signs of humble compunction, or of earnest prayer, who
avoid fasting or study, would exercise their former duties with great
negligence if they were restored to them."

Thirdly, if he has committed a sin to which an irregularity is
attached; wherefore it is said in the same Distinction (Obj. 3),
quoting the council of Pope Martin [*Martin, bishop of Braga]: "If a
man marry a widow or the relict of another, he must not be admitted
to the ranks of the clergy: and if he has succeeded in creeping in,
he must be turned out. In like manner, if anyone after Baptism be
guilty of homicide, whether by deed, or by command, or by counsel, or
in self-defense." But this is in consequence not of sin, but of
irregularity.

Fourthly, on account of scandal, wherefore it is said in the same
Distinction (Obj. 3): "Those who have been publicly convicted or
caught in the act of perjury, robbery, fornication, and of such like
crimes, according to the prescription of the sacred canons must be
deprived of the exercise of their respective orders, because it is a
scandal to God's people that such persons should be placed over them.
But those who commit such sins occultly and confess them secretly to
a priest, may be retained in the exercise of their respective orders,
with the assurance of God's merciful forgiveness, provided they be
careful to expiate their sins by fasts and alms, vigils and holy
deeds." The same is expressed (Extra, De Qual. Ordinand.): "If the
aforesaid crimes are not proved by a judicial process, or in some
other way made notorious, those who are guilty of them must not be
hindered, after they have done penance, from exercising the orders
they have received, or from receiving further orders, except in cases
of homicide."

Reply Obj. 1: The same is to be said of the recovery of virginity as
of the recovery of innocence which belongs to man's secondary dignity
in the sight of God.

Reply Obj. 2: In these words Jerome does not say that it is
impossible, but that it is difficult, for man to recover his former
dignity after having sinned, because this is allowed to none but
those who repent perfectly, as stated above. To those canonical
statutes, which seem to forbid this, Augustine replies in his letter
to Boniface (Ep. clxxxv): "If the law of the Church forbids anyone,
after doing penance for a crime, to become a cleric, or to return to
his clerical duties, or to retain them the intention was not to
deprive him of the hope of pardon, but to preserve the rigor of
discipline; else we should have to deny the keys given to the Church,
of which it was said: 'Whatsoever you shall loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven.'" And further on he adds: "For holy David did
penance for his deadly crimes, and yet he retained his dignity; and
Blessed Peter by shedding most bitter tears did indeed repent him of
having denied his Lord, and yet he remained an apostle. Nevertheless
we must not deem the care of later teachers excessive, who without
endangering a man's salvation, exacted more from his humility,
having, in my opinion, found by experience, that some assumed a
pretended repentance through hankering after honors and power."

Reply Obj. 3: This statute is to be understood as applying to those
who do public penance, for these cannot be promoted to a higher
order. For Peter, after his denial, was made shepherd of Christ's
sheep, as appears from John 21:21, where Chrysostom comments as
follows: "After his denial and repentance Peter gives proof of
greater confidence in Christ: for whereas, at the supper, he durst
not ask Him, but deputed John to ask in his stead, afterwards he was
placed at the head of his brethren, and not only did not depute
another to ask for him, what concerned him, but henceforth asks the
Master instead of John."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 89, Art. 4]

Whether Virtuous Deeds Done in Charity Can Be Deadened?

Objection 1: It would seem that virtuous deeds done in charity cannot
be deadened. For that which is not cannot be changed. But to be
deadened is to be changed from life to death. Since therefore
virtuous deeds, after being done, are no more, it seems that they
cannot afterwards be deadened.

Obj. 2: Further, by virtuous deeds done in charity, man merits
eternal life. But to take away the reward from one who has merited it
is an injustice, which cannot be ascribed to God. Therefore it is not
possible for virtuous deeds done in charity to be deadened by a
subsequent sin.

Obj. 3: Further, the strong is not corrupted by the weak. Now works
of charity are stronger than any sins, because, as it is written
(Prov. 10:12), "charity covereth all sins." Therefore it seems that
deeds done in charity cannot be deadened by a subsequent mortal sin.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ezech. 18:24): "If the just man
turn himself away from his justice . . . all his justices which he
hath done shall not be remembered."

_I answer that,_ A living thing, by dying, ceases to have vital
operations: for which reason, by a kind of metaphor, a thing is said
to be deadened when it is hindered from producing its proper effect
or operation.

Now the effect of virtuous works, which are done in charity, is to
bring man to eternal life; and this is hindered by a subsequent
mortal sin, inasmuch as it takes away grace. Wherefore deeds done in
charity are said to be deadened by a subsequent mortal sin.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as sinful deeds pass as to the act but remain as
to guilt, so deeds done in charity, after passing, as to the act,
remain as to merit, in so far as they are acceptable to God. It is in
this respect that they are deadened, inasmuch as man is hindered from
receiving his reward.

Reply Obj. 2: There is no injustice in withdrawing the reward from
him who has deserved it, if he has made himself unworthy by his
subsequent fault, since at times a man justly forfeits through his
own fault, even that which he has already received.

Reply Obj. 3: It is not on account of the strength of sinful deeds
that deeds, previously done in charity, are deadened, but on account
of the freedom of the will which can be turned away from good to evil.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 86, Art. 5]

Whether Deeds Deadened by Sin, Are Revived by Penance?

Objection 1: It would seem that deeds deadened by sin are not revived
by Penance. Because just as past sins are remitted by subsequent
Penance, so are deeds previously done in charity, deadened by
subsequent sin. But sins remitted by Penance do not return, as stated
above (Q. 88, AA. 1, 2). Therefore it seems that neither are dead
deeds revived by charity.

Obj. 2: Further, deeds are said to be deadened by comparison with
animals who die, as stated above (A. 4). But a dead animal cannot be
revived. Therefore neither can dead works be revived by Penance.

Obj. 3: Further, deeds done in charity are deserving of glory
according to the quantity of grace or charity. But sometimes man
arises through Penance to lesser grace or charity. Therefore he does
not receive glory according to the merit of his previous works; so
that it seems that deeds deadened by sin are not revived.

_On the contrary,_ on Joel 2:25, "I will restore to you the years,
which the locust . . . hath eaten," a gloss says: "I will not suffer
to perish the fruit which you lost when your soul was disturbed." But
this fruit is the merit of good works which was lost through sin.
Therefore meritorious deeds done before are revived by Penance.

_I answer that,_ Some have said that meritorious works deadened by
subsequent sin are not revived by the ensuing Penance, because they
deemed such works to have passed away, so that they could not be
revived. But that is no reason why they should not be revived:
because they are conducive to eternal life (wherein their life
consists) not only as actually existing, but also after they cease to
exist actually, and as abiding in the Divine acceptance. Now, they
abide thus, so far as they are concerned, even after they have been
deadened by sin, because those works, according as they were done,
will ever be acceptable to God and give joy to the saints, according
to Apoc. 3:11: "Hold fast that which thou hast, that no man take thy
crown." That they fail in their efficacy to bring the man, who did
them, to eternal life, is due to the impediment of the supervening
sin whereby he is become unworthy of eternal life. But this
impediment is removed by Penance, inasmuch as sins are taken away
thereby. Hence it follows that deeds previously deadened, recover,
through Penance, their efficacy in bringing him, who did them, to
eternal life, and, in other words, they are revived. It is therefore
evident that deadened works are revived by Penance.

Reply Obj. 1: The very works themselves of sin are removed by
Penance, so that, by God's mercy, no further stain or debt of
punishment is incurred on their account: on the other hand, works
done in charity are not removed by God, since they abide in His
acceptance, but they are hindered on the part of the man who does
them; wherefore if this hindrance, on the part of the man who does
those works, be removed, God on His side fulfills what those works
deserved.

Reply Obj. 2: Deeds done in charity are not in themselves deadened,
as explained above, but only with regard to a supervening impediment
on the part of the man who does them. On the other hand, an animal
dies in itself, through being deprived of the principle of life: so
that the comparison fails.

Reply Obj. 3: He who, through Penance, arises to lesser charity, will
receive the essential reward according to the degree of charity in
which he is found. Yet he will have greater joy for the works he had
done in his former charity, than for those which he did in his
subsequent charity: and this joy belongs to the accidental reward.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 89, Art. 6]

Whether the Effect of Subsequent Penance Is to Quicken Even Dead
Works?

Objection 1: It would seem that the effect of subsequent Penance is
to quicken even dead works, those, namely, that were not done in
charity. For it seems more difficult to bring to life that which has
been deadened, since this is never done naturally, than to quicken
that which never had life, since certain living things are engendered
naturally from things without life. Now deadened works are revived by
Penance, as stated above (A. 5). Much more, therefore, are dead works
revived.

Obj. 2: Further, if the cause be removed, the effect is removed. But
the cause of the lack of life in works generically good done without
charity, was the lack of charity and grace, which lack is removed by
Penance. Therefore dead works are quickened by charity.

Obj. 3: Further, Jerome in commenting on Agg. i, 6: "You have sowed
much," says: "If at any time you find a sinner, among his many evil
deeds, doing that which is right, God is not so unjust as to forget
the few good deeds on account of his many evil deeds." Now this seems
to be the case chiefly when past evil deeds are removed by Penance.
Therefore it seems that through Penance, God rewards the former deeds
done in the state of sin, which implies that they are quickened.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 13:3): "If I should
distribute all my goods to feed the poor, and if I should deliver my
body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing."
But this would not be true, if, at least by subsequent Penance, they
were quickened. Therefore Penance does not quicken works which before
were dead.

_I answer that,_ A work is said to be dead in two ways: first,
effectively, because, to wit, it is a cause of death, in which sense
sinful works are said to be dead, according to Heb. 9:14: "The blood
of Christ . . . shall cleanse our conscience from dead works." These
dead works are not quickened but removed by Penance, according to
Heb. 6:1: "Not laying again the foundation of Penance from dead
works." Secondly, works are said to be dead privatively, because, to
wit, they lack spiritual life, which is founded on charity, whereby
the soul is united to God, the result being that it is quickened as
the body by the soul: in which sense too, faith, if it lack charity,
is said to be dead, according to James 2:20: "Faith without works is
dead." In this way also, all works that are generically good, are
said to be dead, if they be done without charity, inasmuch as they
fail to proceed from the principle of life; even as we might call the
sound of a harp, a dead voice. Accordingly, the difference of life
and death in works is in relation to the principle from which they
proceed. But works cannot proceed a second time from a principle,
because they are transitory, and the same identical deed cannot be
resumed. Therefore it is impossible for dead works to be quickened by
Penance.

Reply Obj. 1: In the physical order things whether dead or deadened
lack the principle of life. But works are said to be deadened, not in
relation to the principle whence they proceeded, but in relation to
an extrinsic impediment; while they are said to be dead in relation
to a principle. Consequently there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 2: Works generically good done without charity are said to
be dead on account of the lack of grace and charity, as principles.
Now the subsequent Penance does not supply that want, so as to make
them proceed from such a principle. Hence the argument does not prove.

Reply Obj. 3: God remembers the good deeds a man does when in a state
of sin, not by rewarding them in eternal life, which is due only to
living works, i.e. those done from charity, but by a temporal reward:
thus Gregory declares (Hom. de Divite et Lazaro, 41 in Evang.) that
"unless that rich man had done some good deed, and had received his
reward in this world, Abraham would certainly not have said to him:
'Thou didst receive good things in thy lifetime.'" Or again, this may
mean that he will be judged less severely: wherefore Augustine says
(De Patientia xxvi): "We cannot say that it would be better for the
schismatic that by denying Christ he should suffer none of those
things which he suffered by confessing Him; but we must believe that
he will be judged with less severity, than if by denying Christ, he
had suffered none of those things. Thus the words of the Apostle, 'If
I should deliver my body to be burned and have not charity, it
profiteth me nothing,' refer to the obtaining of the kingdom of
heaven, and do not exclude the possibility of being sentenced with
less severity at the last judgment."
_______________________

QUESTION 90

OF THE PARTS OF PENANCE, IN GENERAL
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider the parts of Penance: (1) in general;
(2) each one in particular.

Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Penance has any parts?

(2) Of the number of its parts;

(3) What kind of parts are they?

(4) Of its division into subjective parts.
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 90, Art. 1]

Whether Penance Should Be Assigned Any Parts?

Objection 1: It would seem that parts should not be assigned to
Penance. For it is the Divine power that works our salvation most
secretly in the sacraments. Now the Divine power is one and simple.
Therefore Penance, being a sacrament, should have no parts assigned
to it.

Obj. 2: Further, Penance is both a virtue and a sacrament. Now no
parts are assigned to it as a virtue, since virtue is a habit, which
is a simple quality of the mind. In like manner, it seems that parts
should not be assigned to Penance as a sacrament, because no parts
are assigned to Baptism and the other sacraments. Therefore no parts
at all should be assigned to Penance.

Obj. 3: Further, the matter of Penance is sin, as stated above (Q.
84, A. 2). But no parts are assigned to sin. Neither, therefore,
should parts be assigned to Penance.

_On the contrary,_ The parts of a thing are those out of which the
whole is composed. Now the perfection of Penance is composed of
several things, viz. contrition, confession, and satisfaction.
Therefore Penance has parts.

_I answer that,_ The parts of a thing are those into which the whole
is divided materially, for the parts of a thing are to the whole,
what matter is to the form; wherefore the parts are reckoned as a
kind of material cause, and the whole as a kind of formal cause
(Phys. ii). Accordingly wherever, on the part of matter, we find a
kind of plurality, there we shall find a reason for assigning parts.

Now it has been stated above (Q. 84, AA. 2, 3), that, in the
sacrament of Penance, human actions stand as matter: and so, since
several actions are requisite for the perfection of Penance, viz.,
contrition, confession, and satisfaction, as we shall show further on
(A. 2), it follows that the sacrament of Penance has parts.

Reply Obj. 1: Every sacrament is something simple by reason of the
Divine power, which operates therein: but the Divine power is so
great that it can operate both through one and through many, and by
reason of these many, parts may be assigned to a particular sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: Parts are not assigned to penance as a virtue: because
the human acts of which there are several in penance, are related to
the habit of virtue, not as its parts, but as its effects. It
follows, therefore, that parts are assigned to Penance as a
sacrament, to which the human acts are related as matter: whereas in
the other sacraments the matter does not consist of human acts, but
of some one external thing, either simple, as water or oil, or
compound, as chrism, and so parts are not assigned to the other
sacraments.

Reply Obj. 3: Sins are the remote matter of Penance, inasmuch, to
wit, as they are the matter or object of the human acts, which are
the proper matter of Penance as a sacrament.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 90, Art. 2]

Whether Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction Are Fittingly
Assigned As Parts of Penance?

Objection 1: It would seem that contrition, confession, and
satisfaction are not fittingly assigned as parts of Penance. For
contrition is in the heart, and so belongs to interior penance; while
confession consists of words, and satisfaction in deeds; so that the
two latter belong to interior penance. Now interior penance is not a
sacrament, but only exterior penance which is perceptible by the
senses. Therefore these three parts are not fittingly assigned to the
sacrament of Penance.

Obj. 2: Further, grace is conferred in the sacraments of the New Law,
as stated above (Q. 62, AA. 1, 3). But no grace is conferred in
satisfaction. Therefore satisfaction is not part of a sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, the fruit of a thing is not the same as its part.
But satisfaction is a fruit of penance, according to Luke 3:8: "Bring
forth . . . fruits worthy of penance." Therefore it is not a part of
Penance.

Obj. 4: Further, Penance is ordained against sin. But sin can be
completed merely in the thought by consent, as stated in the Second
Part (I-II, Q. 72, A. 7): therefore Penance can also. Therefore
confession in word and satisfaction in deed should not be reckoned as
parts of Penance.

_On the contrary,_ It seems that yet more parts should be assigned to
Penance. For not only is the body assigned as a part of man, as being
the matter, but also the soul, which is his form. But the aforesaid
three, being the acts of the penitent, stand as matter, while the
priestly absolution stands as form. Therefore the priestly absolution
should be assigned as a fourth part of Penance.

_I answer that,_ A part is twofold, essential and quantitative. The
essential parts are naturally the form and the matter, and logically
the genus and the difference. In this way, each sacrament is divided
into matter and form as its essential parts. Hence it has been said
above (Q. 60, AA. 5, 6) that sacraments consist of things and words.
But since quantity is on the part of matter, quantitative parts are
parts of matter: and, in this way, as stated above (A. 1), parts are
assigned specially to the sacrament of Penance, as regards the acts
of the penitent, which are the matter of this sacrament.

Now it has been said above (Q. 85, A. 3, ad 3) that an offense is
atoned otherwise in Penance than in vindictive justice. Because, in
vindictive justice the atonement is made according to the judge's
decision, and not according to the discretion of the offender or of
the person offended; whereas, in Penance, the offense is atoned
according to the will of the sinner, and the judgment of God against
Whom the sin was committed, because in the latter case we seek not
only the restoration of the equality of justice, as in vindictive
justice, but also and still more the reconciliation of friendship,
which is accomplished by the offender making atonement according to
the will of the person offended. Accordingly the first requisite on
the part of the penitent is the will to atone, and this is done by
contrition; the second is that he submit to the judgment of the
priest standing in God's place, and this is done in confession; and
the third is that he atone according to the decision of God's
minister, and this is done in satisfaction: and so contrition,
confession, and satisfaction are assigned as parts of Penance.

Reply Obj. 1: Contrition, as to its essence, is in the heart, and
belongs to interior penance; yet, virtually, it belongs to exterior
penance, inasmuch as it implies the purpose of confessing and making
satisfaction.

Reply Obj. 2: Satisfaction confers grace, in so far as it is in man's
purpose, and it increases grace, according as it is accomplished,
just as Baptism does in adults, as stated above (Q. 68, A. 2; Q. 69,
A. 8).

Reply Obj. 3: Satisfaction is a part of Penance as a sacrament, and a
fruit of penance as a virtue.

Reply Obj. 4: More things are required for good, "which proceeds from
a cause that is entire," than for evil, "which results from each
single defect," as Dionysius states (Div. Nom. iv). And thus,
although sin is completed in the consent of the heart, yet the
perfection of Penance requires contrition of the heart, together with
confession in word and satisfaction in deed.

The Reply to the Fifth Objection is clear from what has been said.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 90, Art. 3]

Whether These Three Are Integral Parts of Penance?

Objection 1: It would seem that these three are not integral parts of
Penance. For, as stated above (Q. 84, A. 3), Penance is ordained
against sin. But sins of thought, word, and deed are the subjective
and not integral parts of sin, because sin is predicated of each one
of them. Therefore in Penance also, contrition in thought, confession
in word, and satisfaction in deed are not integral parts.

Obj. 2: Further, no integral part includes within itself another that
is condivided with it. But contrition includes both confession and
satisfaction in the purpose of amendment. Therefore they are not
integral parts.

Obj. 3: Further, a whole is composed of its integral parts, taken at
the same time and equally, just as a line is made up of its parts.
But such is not the case here. Therefore these are not integral parts
of Penance.

_On the contrary,_ Integral parts are those by which the perfection
of the whole is integrated. But the perfection of Penance is
integrated by these three. Therefore they are integral parts of
Penance.

_I answer that,_ Some have said that these three are subjective parts
of Penance. But this is impossible, because the entire power of the
whole is present in each subjective part at the same time and
equally, just as the entire power of an animal, as such, is assured
to each animal species, all of which species divide the animal genus
at the same time and equally: which does not apply to the point in
question. Wherefore others have said that these are potential parts:
yet neither can this be true, since the whole is present, as to the
entire essence, in each potential part, just as the entire essence of
the soul is present in each of its powers: which does not apply to
the case in point. Therefore it follows that these three are integral
parts of Penance, the nature of which is that the whole is not
present in each of the parts, either as to its entire power, or as to
its entire essence, but that it is present to all of them together at
the same time.

Reply Obj. 1: Sin forasmuch as it is an evil, can be completed in one
single point, as stated above (A. 2, ad 4); and so the sin which is
completed in thought alone, is a special kind of sin. Another species
is the sin that is completed in thought and word: and yet a third
species is the sin that is completed in thought, word, and deed; and
the quasi-integral parts of this last sin, are that which is in
thought, that which is in word, and that which is in deed. Wherefore
these three are the integral parts of Penance, which is completed in
them.

Reply Obj. 2: One integral part can include the whole, though not as
to its essence: because the foundation, in a way, contains virtually
the whole building. In this way contrition includes virtually the
whole of Penance.

Reply Obj. 3: All integral parts have a certain relation of order to
one another: but some are only related as to position, whether in
sequence as the parts of an army, or by contact, as the parts of a
heap, or by being fitted together, as the parts of a house, or by
continuation, as the parts of a line; while some are related, in
addition, as to power, as the parts of an animal, the first of which
is the heart, the others in a certain order being dependent on one
another: and thirdly some are related in the order of time: as the
parts of time and movement. Accordingly the parts of Penance are
related to one another in the order of power and time, since they are
actions, but not in the order of position, since they do not occupy a
place.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 90, Art. 4]

Whether Penance Is Fittingly Divided into Penance Before Baptism,
Penance for Mortal Sins, and Penance for Venial Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that penance is unfittingly divided into
penance before Baptism, penance for mortal, and penance for venial
sins. For Penance is the second plank after shipwreck, as stated
above (Q. 84, A. 6), while Baptism is the first. Therefore that which
precedes Baptism should not be called a species of penance.

Obj. 2: Further, that which can destroy the greater, can destroy the
lesser. Now mortal sin is greater than venial; and penance which
regards mortal sins regards also venial sins. Therefore they should
not be considered as different species of penance.

Obj. 3: Further, just as after Baptism man commits venial and mortal
sins, so does he before Baptism. If therefore penance for venial sins
is distinct from penance for mortal sins after Baptism, in like
manner they should be distinguished before Baptism. Therefore penance
is not fittingly divided into these species.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in _De Poenitentia_ [*Cf. Hom. 30
inter 1] that these three are species of Penance.

_I answer that,_ This is a division of penance as a virtue. Now it
must be observed that every virtue acts in accordance with the time
being, as also in keeping with other due circumstances, wherefore the
virtue of penance has its act at this time, according to the
requirements of the New Law.

Now it belongs to penance to detest one's past sins, and to purpose,
at the same time, to change one's life for the better, which is the
end, so to speak, of penance. And since moral matters take their
species from the end, as stated in the Second Part (I-II, Q. 1, A. 3;
Q. 18, AA. 4, 6), it is reasonable to distinguish various species of
penance, according to the various changes intended by the penitent.

Accordingly there is a threefold change intended by the penitent. The
first is by regeneration unto a new life, and this belongs to that
penance which precedes Baptism. The second is by reforming one's past
life after it has been already destroyed, and this belongs to penance
for mortal sins committed after Baptism. The third is by changing to
a more perfect operation of life, and this belongs to penance for
venial sins, which are remitted through a fervent act of charity, as
stated above (Q. 87, AA. 2, 3).

Reply Obj. 1: The penance which precedes Baptism is not a sacrament,
but an act of virtue disposing one to that sacrament.

Reply Obj. 2: The penance which washes away mortal sins, washes away
venial sins also, but the converse does not hold. Wherefore these two
species of penance are related to one another as perfect and
imperfect.

Reply Obj. 3: Before Baptism there are no venial sins without mortal
sins. And since a venial sin cannot be remitted without mortal sin,
as stated above (Q. 87, A. 4), before Baptism, penance for mortal
sins is not distinct from penance for venial sins.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Summa Theologica, Part III (Tertia
Pars), by Thomas Aquinas

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUMMA THEOLOGICA, PART III ***

***** This file should be named 19950.txt or 19950.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/9/5/19950/

Produced by Sandra K. Perry, with corrections and
supplementation by David McClamrock


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

