is that a Christian man is to be an echo of the Lord's good confession,
and is to keep within the lines of it, and to be sure that all of it is
echoed in his life. Christ has told us what to say, and we are here to
say it over again. Christ has witnessed; we are to confess. Our relation
to that truth is different from His. We hear it; He speaks it. We accept
it; He reveals it. We are influenced by it; He _is_ it. He brings it to
the world on His own authority; we are to carry it to the world on His.

Be sure that you Christian men are echoes of your Master. Be sure that
you reverberate the note that He struck. Be sure that all its music is
repeated by you And take care that you neither fall short of it, nor go
beyond it, in your faith and in your profession. Echoes of Christ--that
is the highest conception of a Christian life.

But though there is all the difference between the Witness and the
confessors, do not let us forget that, if we are truly Christian, there
is a very deep and blessed sense in which we, too, may witness what we
have seen and heard. A Christian preacher of any sort--and by that I
mean, not merely a man who stands in a pulpit, as I do, but all
Christian people, in their measure and degree--will do nothing by
professing the best profession, unless that profession sounds like the
utterance of a man who speaks that he knows, and who can say, 'that
which our eyes have beheld, that which we have handled, of the Word of
life, we make known unto you.' And so, by the power of personal
experience speaking out in our lives, and by the power of it alone, as I
believe, will victories be won, and the witness of Jesus Christ be
repeated in the world. Christian men and women, the old saying which was
addressed by a prophet to Israel is more true, more solemnly true of us,
and presses on us with a heavier weight of obligation, as well as lifts
us up into a position of greater blessedness: 'Ye are my witnesses,
saith the Lord.' That is what you and I are here for--to bear witness,
different and yet like to, the witness borne by the Lord. We have all to
do that, by words, though not only by them. That is the obligation that
a great many Christian people take very lightly. That yoke of Jesus
Christ many of us slip our necks out of. If He has witnessed, you have
to confess. But some of you carry your Christianity in secret, and
button your coats over the cockade that should tell whose soldiers you
are, and are ashamed, or too shy, or too nervous, or too afraid of
ridicule, or not sufficiently sure of your own grip of the Master, to
confess Him before men. I beseech you remember that a Christian man is
no Christian unless 'with the mouth confession is made unto salvation,'
as well as 'with the heart' belief is exercised unto righteousness.

III. Lastly, we have here the practical issue of all this.

'I charge thee before God, who quickeneth all things, and before Jesus
Christ, that thou keep the commandment without spot.' The 'commandment,'
of course, may be used in a specific sense, referring to what has just
been enjoined, but more probably we are to regard the same thing which,
considered in its relation to Jesus Christ, is His testimony, as being,
in its relation to us, His commandment. For all Christ's gospel of
revelation that He has made of Himself to the world, is meant to
influence, not only belief and feeling, but conduct and character as
well. All the New Testament, in so far as it is a record of what Christ
is, and thereby a declaration of what God is, is also for us an
injunction as to what we ought to be. The whole Gospel is law, and the
testimony is commandment, and we have to keep it, as well as to confess
it. Let me put the few things that I have to say, under this last
division of my subject, the practical issue, into the shape of three
exhortations, not for the sake of seeming to arrogate any kind of
superiority, but for the sake of point and emphasis.

Let the life bear witness to the confession. What is the use of
Timothy's standing there, and professing himself a Christian before many
witnesses if, when he goes out into the world, his conduct gives the lie
to his creed, and he lives like the men that are not Christians? Back up
your confession by your conduct, and when you say 'I believe in Jesus
Christ,' let your life be as true an echo of His life as your confession
is of His testimony. Else we shall come under the condemnation, 'Nothing
but leaves,' and shall fall under the punishment of the continuance of
unfruitfulness, which is our crime as well as our punishment. There is a
great deal more done by consistent living for, and by inconsistent
living against, the truth of the Gospel, than by all the words of all
the preachers in the world. Your faults go further, and tell more, than
my sermons, and your Christian characters will go further than all the
eloquence of the most devoted preachers. 'There is no voice nor
language, where their sound is not heard. Their line is gone out into
all the earth, and their words to the end of the world.'

Again, let the thought of the Great Witness stimulate us. He, too, took
His place by our sides, though with the differences that I have pointed
out, yet with resemblances which bring Him very near us. He, too; knew
what it was to stand amongst those who shrugged their shoulders, and
knit their brows at His utterances, and turned away from Him, calling
Him sometimes 'dreamer,' sometimes 'revolutionary,' sometimes
'blasphemer,' and now and then a messenger of good tidings and a
preacher of the gospel of peace. He knows all our hesitations, all our
weaknesses, all our temptations. He was the first of the martyrs, in the
narrower sense of the word. He is the leader of the great band of
witnesses for God. Let us stand by His side, and be like Him in our
bearing witness in this world.

Again, let the thought of the great tribunal stimulate us. 'I give thee
charge before God, who quickeneth all things--and who therefore will
quicken you--and before Jesus Christ, that thou keep this commandment.'
Jesus, who witnessed to the truth, witnesses, in the sense of beholding
and watching, us, knowing our weakness and ready to help us. 'The
faithful witness, and the first begotten from the dead, and the Prince
of the kings of the earth,' is by us, as we witness for Him. And so,
though we are compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, the
saints in the past who have witnessed for God, and been witnessed to by
Him, we have to turn away from them, and 'look off' from all others,
'unto Jesus.' And we may, like the first of the noble army of martyrs,
see the heavens opened, and Jesus 'standing'--started to His feet, to
see and to help Stephen--'at the right hand of God.'

Brethren, let us listen to His witness, let us accept it, setting to our
seals that God is true. Then let us try to echo it back by word, and to
attest our confession by our conduct, and then we may comfort ourselves
with the great word, 'He that confesseth Me before men, Him will I also
confess before My Father which is in Heaven.'




THE CONDUCT THAT SECURES THE REAL LIFE

          'Laying up in store for themselves a good
          foundation against the time to come, that they may
          lay hold on eternal life.'--1 TIM. vi. 19.


In the first flush of the sense of brotherhood, the Church of Jerusalem
tried the experiment of having all things in common. It was not a
success, it was soon abandoned, it never spread. In the later history of
the Church, and especially in these last Pauline letters, we see clearly
that distinctions of pecuniary position were very definitely marked
amongst the believers. There were 'rich men' in the churches of which
Timothy had charge. No doubt they were rich after a very modest fashion,
for Paul's standard of opulence is not likely to have been a very high
one, seeing that he himself ministered with his own hands to his
necessities, and had only one cloak to keep him warm in winter time. But
great or small as were the resources of these men, they were rich in
comparison with some of their brethren. The words of my text are the
close of the very plain things which Paul commands Timothy to tell them.
He assures them that if they will be rich in good works, and ready to
distribute, they will lay up for themselves a good 'foundation against
the time to come.'

The teaching in the text is, of course, a great deal wider than any
specific application of it. It is very remarkable, especially as coming
from Paul. 'Lay up a good foundation'--has he not said, 'Other
foundation can no man lay than that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ'? 'That they may lay hold on eternal life'--has he not said, 'The
_gift_ of God is eternal life'? Is he not going dead in the teeth of his
own teaching, 'Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but by
His mercy He saved us'? I think not. Let us see what he does say.

I. First, then, he says that the real life is the future life.

Those of you who use the Revised Version will see that it makes an
alteration in the last clause of our text, and instead of 'eternal
life' it reads 'the life which is life indeed,' the true life; not
simply designating it as eternal, but designating it as being the only
thing that is worth calling by the august name of life.

Now it is quite clear that Paul here is approximating very closely to
the language of his brother John, and using this great word 'life' as
being, in substance, equivalent to his own favourite word of
'salvation,' as including in one magnificent generalisation all that is
necessary for the satisfaction of man's needs, the perfection of his
blessedness, and the glorifying of his nature. Paul's notion of life,
like John's, is that it is the one all-comprehensive good which men need
and seek.

And here he seems to relegate that 'life which is life indeed' to the
region of the future, because he contemplates it as being realised 'in
the time to come,' and as being the result of the conduct which is here
enjoined. But you will find that substantially the same exhortation is
given in the 12th verse of this chapter, 'Fight the good fight of faith;
lay hold on the life eternal'--where the process of grasping this
'life,' and therefore the possession of it, are evidently regarded as
possible here, and the duty of every Christian man in this present
world. That is to say, there is a double aspect of this august
conception of the 'life which is life indeed.' In one aspect it is
present, may be and ought to be ours, here and now; in another aspect it
lies beyond the flood, and is the inheritance reserved in the heavens.
That double aspect is parallel with the way in which the New Testament
deals with the other cognate conception of salvation, which it sometimes
regards as past, sometimes as present, sometimes as future. The complete
idea is that the life of the Christian soul here and yonder, away out
into the furthest extremities of eternity, and up to the loftiest climax
of perfectness, is in essence one, whilst yet the differences between
the degree in which its germinal possession here and its full-fruited
enjoyment hereafter differ is so great as that, in comparison with the
completion that is waiting the Christian soul beyond the grave, all of
the same life that is here enjoyed dwindles into nothingness. It appears
to me that these two sides of the truth, the essential identity of the
life of the Christian soul beyond and here, and the all but infinite
differences and progresses which separate the two, are both needful,
very needful, to be kept in view by us.

There is here on earth, amidst all our imperfections and weakness and
sin, a root in the heart that trusts in Christ, which only needs to be
transplanted into its congenial soil to blossom and burgeon into
undreamed of beauty, and to bear fruit the savour of which no mortal
lips can ever taste. The dwarfed rhododendrons in our shrubberies have
in them the same nature as the giants that adorn the slopes of the
Himalayas. Transplant these exotics to their native soil, and you would
see what it was in them to be. Think of the life that is now at its
best; its weakness, its blighted hopes, its thwarted aims, its foiled
endeavours; think of its partings, its losses, its conflicts. Think of
its disorders, its sins, and consequent sufferings; think of the shadow
at its close, which flings long trails of blackness over many preceding
years. Think of its swift disappearance, and then say if such a poor,
fragmentary thing is worthy of the name of life, if that were all that
the man was for.

But it is not all. There is a 'life which is life indeed,' over which
no shadow can pass, nor any sorrow darken the blessed faces or clog the
happy hearts of those who possess it. They 'have all and abound.' They
know all and are at rest. They dread nothing, and nothing do they
regret. They leave nothing behind as they advance, and of their serenity
and their growth there is no end. That is worth calling life. It lies
beyond this dim spot of earth. It is 'hid with Christ in God.'

II. Secondly, notice that conduct here determines the possession of the
true life.

Paul never cares whether he commits the rhetorical blunder of mixing up
metaphors or not. That matters very little, except to a pedant and a
rhetorician. In his impetuous way he blends three here, and has no time
to stop to disentangle them. They all mean substantially the same thing
which I have stated in the words that conduct here determines the
possession of life hereafter; but they put it in three different
figurative fashions which we may separate and look at one by one.

The first of them is this, that by our actions here we accumulate
treasure hereafter. 'Laying up in store for themselves' is one word in
the original, and it contains even more than is expressed in our
paraphrase, for it is really 'treasuring off.' And the idea is that the
rich man is bade to take a portion of his worldly goods, and, by using
these for beneficent purposes, out of them to store a treasure beyond
the grave. What is employed thus, and from the right motives and in the
right way, is not squandered, but laid up in store. You remember the old
epitaph,

          'What I spent I lost;
           What I gave I have.'

Now that is Christ's teaching, for did He not say: 'Sell all that thou
hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven'? Did
He not say: 'Lay not up for yourselves treasures on earth, . . . but lay
up treasures in heaven'? And if anybody's theology finds it difficult to
incorporate these solemn teachings of our Lord with the rest of it, so
much the worse for the theology.

I have no doubt at all that Christianity has yet a great deal to teach
the Christian Church and the world about the acquisition of money and
the disposal of money; and, though I do not want to dwell now upon that
specific application of the general principle of my text, I cannot help
reminding you, dear friends, that for a very large number of us, almost
the most important influence shaping our characters is the attitude that
we take in regard to these things--the getting and the distribution of
worldly wealth. For the bulk of Christian people there are few things
more important as sharp tests of the reality of their religion, or more
effective in either ennobling or degrading their whole character, than
what they do about these two plain matters.

But then my text goes a great deal further than that; and whilst it
applies unflinchingly this principle to the one specific case, it
invites us to apply it all round the circumference of our earthly
conduct. What you are doing here is piling up for you, on the other side
of the wall, what you will have to live with, and either get good or
evil out of, through all eternity. A man who is going to Australia pays
some money into a bank here, and when he gets to Melbourne it is
punctually paid out to him across the counter. That is what we are doing
here, lodging money on this side that we are going to draw on that. And
it is this which gives to the present its mystical significance and
solemnity, that all our actions are piling up for us future possessions:
'treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath'; or, contrariwise,
'glory, immortality, honour, eternal life.' We are like men digging a
trench on one side of a hedge and flinging the spadefuls over to the
other. They are all being piled up behind the barrier, and when we go
round the end of it we shall find them all waiting for us.

Then the Apostle superimposes upon this another metaphor. He does not
care to unravel it. 'Laying up in store for themselves a store,' he
would have said if he had been a pedant, 'which is also a good
foundation.' Now I take it that that does not mean a basis for hope, or
anything of that sort, but that it conveys this thought, that our
actions here are putting in the foundations on which the eternal
building of our future life shall be reared. When a man excavates and
lays the first courses of the stones of his building, he thereby
determines every successive stage of it, until the headstone is brought
forth with rejoicing. We are laying foundations in that profound sense
in this world. Our nature takes a set here, and I fail to see any reason
cognisable by us why that ply of the nature should ever be taken out of
it in any future. I do not dogmatise; but it seems to me that all that
we do know of life and of God's dealings in regard to man leads us to
suppose that the next world is a world of continuations, not of
beginnings; that it is the second volume of the book, and hangs
logically and necessarily upon the first that was finished when a man
died. Our lives here and hereafter appear to me to be like some
geometrical figure that wants two sheets of paper for its completion:
on the first the lines run up to the margin, and on the second they are
carried on in the direction which was manifest in the section that was
visible here.

And so, dear friends, let us remember that this is the reason why our
smallest acts are so tremendous that by our actions we are making
character, and that character is destiny, here and hereafter. You are
putting in the foundations of the building that you have to live in; see
that they are of such a sort as will support a house eternal in the
heavens.

The last of the metaphors under which the Apostle suggests the one idea
is that our conduct here determines our capacity to lay hold of the
prize. It seems to me that the same allusion is lingering in his mind
which is definitely stated in the previous verse to which I have already
referred, where the eternal life which Timothy is exhorted to lay hold
of is regarded as being the prize of the good fight of faith, which he
is exhorted to fight. And so the third metaphor here is that which is
familiar in Paul's writings, where eternal life is regarded as a garland
or prize, given to the victor in race or arena. It is exactly the same
notion as he otherwise expresses when he says that he follows after if
that he may 'lay hold of that for which also he is laid hold of by Jesus
Christ.' This is the underlying thought, that according to a Christian
man's acts here is his capacity of receiving the real life yonder.

That is not given arbitrarily. Each man gets as much of it when he goes
home as he can hold. The tiniest vessel is filled, the largest vessel is
filled. But the little vessel may, and will, grow bigger if that which
is deposited in it be rightly employed. Let us lay this to heart, that
Christian men dare not treat it as a matter of indifference whether to
the full they live lives consistent with their profession, and do the
will of their Master or no. It is not all the same, and it will not be
all the same yonder, whether we have adorned the teaching, or whether
our lives have habitually and criminally fallen beneath the level of our
professions. Brethren, we are too apt to forget that there is such a
thing as being 'saved, yet so as by fire'; and that there is such a
thing as 'having an entrance ministered abundantly into the Kingdom.' Be
you sure of this, that if the hands of your spirits are ever to be
capable of grasping the prize, it must be as the result of conduct here
on earth, which has been treasuring up treasures yonder, and laying a
foundation on which the incorruptible house may solidly rest.

III. And now the last word that I have to say is that these principles
are perfectly compatible with the great truth of salvation by faith.

For observe to whom the text is spoken. It is to men who have professed
to be believers, and it is on the ground of their faith that these rich
men in Timothy's churches are exhorted to this conduct. There is no
incompatibility between the doctrine that eternal life is the gift of
God, and the placing of those who have received that gift under a strict
law of recompense.

That is the teaching of the whole New Testament. It was to _Christian_
men that it was said: 'Be not deceived; God is not mocked, whatsoever a
man soweth that shall he also reap.' It is the teaching of Jesus Christ
Himself.

But there is a dreadful danger that we, with our partial vision, shall
see one side of the truth so clearly that we do not see the other; and
so you get two antagonistic schools of Christian teaching who have torn
the one word into halves. One of them says, 'Man is saved by faith
only,' and forgets 'faith without works is dead'; and the other says,
'Do your duty, and never mind about your belief,' and forgets that the
belief--the trust--is the only sure foundation on which conduct can be
based, and the only source from which it is certain to flow.

Now, if I should not be misunderstood by that same narrow and contracted
vision of which I have been speaking, I would venture to say that
salvation by faith alone may be so held as to be a very dangerous
doctrine, and that there is a very real sense in which a man is saved by
works. And if you do not like that, go home and read the Epistle of
James, and see what you make of his teaching: 'Ye see, brethren, how
that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only.' 'Faith wrought
with his works, and by his works was his faith made perfect.'

Only let us understand where the exhortation of the text comes in. We
have to begin with absolute departure from all merit in work, and the
absolute casting of ourselves on Jesus Christ. If you have not done
that, my brother, the teaching 'Laying up in store for themselves a good
foundation' has no application to you, but this teaching has, 'Other
foundation can no man lay. Behold, I lay in Zion a tried corner-stone.
Whosoever believeth in Him shall not make haste.' If you have not
committed your souls and selves and lives and hopes to Jesus Christ, the
teaching 'Lay hold on eternal life' has only a very modified application
to you, because the only hand that can grasp that life is the hand of
faith that is content to receive it from His hands with the prints of
the nails in them. But if you have given yourselves to that Saviour, and
received the germinal gift of eternal life from Him, then, take my text
as absolutely imperative for you. Remember that it is for you, resting
on Christ, to treasure up eternal life; for you to build on that sure
foundation gold and silver and precious stones which may stand the fire;
for you, by faithful continuance in well-doing, to lay hold of that for
which you have been laid hold of by Jesus Christ. May it be true of all
of us that 'our works do follow us'!

          'Thy works, thine alms, and all thy good endeavour
             Stayed not behind, nor in the grave were trod,
             But, as Faith pointed with her golden rod,
           Followed thee up to joy and bliss for ever.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired.

Part I,

Page 44, "transcendant" changed to "transcendent" (this one
transcendent)

Page 59, "entrace" changed to "entrance" (a private entrance)

Page 72, "for for" changed to "for" (day, for one)

Page 150, "roalties" changed to "royalties" (symbols for royalties)

Page 269, "immoveable" changed to "immovable" (firm and immovable)

Part II,

Page 52, "whatsover" changed to "whatsoever" (whatsoever things are
lovely)

Page 63, "centifugal" changed to "centrifugal" (centrifugal and
centripetal)

Page 118, a bit of text was not inked in the original, the following
words have been presumed:

          clea        clear
          an          and
          kno         know
          me          men

  For:                                      "clear
  before you, or you will go yawing about, and washing
  here and there, in the trough of the wave, and
  the tempest will be your master. If you do not know
  where you are going you will have to say, like the men"





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture, by
Alexander Maclaren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE ***

***** This file should be named 21190.txt or 21190.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/1/9/21190/

Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
