the foundation underlying all fairy mythologies. We need only refer to
the following phenomena observed among Celtic and other peoples, and
attributed by them to 'fairy' or 'spirit' agency: (1) music which
competent percipients believe to be of non-human origin, and hence by
the Celts called 'fairy' music, whether this be vocal or instrumental in
sound; (2) the movement of objects without known cause; (3) rappings and
other noises called 'supernatural' (cf. pp. 81 n., 481-4, 488; also pp.
47, 57, 61, 67, 71, 72, 74, 88, 94, 98, 101, 120, 124, 125, 131, 132,
134, 139, 148, 156, 172, 181, 187, 213, 218, 220, &c.).

[592] It is our hope that this book will help to lessen the marked
deficiency of recorded testimony concerning 'fairy' beings and 'fairy'
phenomena observed by reliable percipients. We have endeavoured to
demonstrate that genuine 'fairy' phenomena and genuine 'spirit'
phenomena are in most cases identical. Hence we believe that if 'spirit'
phenomena are worthy of the attention of science, equally so are 'fairy'
phenomena. The fairy-belief _in its typical_ or _conventional aspects_
(apart from the animism which we discovered at the base of the belief)
is, as was pointed out in our anthropological examination of the
evidence (pp. 281-2), due to a very complex social psychology. In this
chapter we have eliminated all social psychology, as not being the
essential factor in the Fairy-Faith. Therefore, from our point of view,
Mr. Lang's implied explanation of the typical fairy-visions, that they
are due to 'suggestion acting on the subconscious self', does not apply
to the rarer kind of fairy visions which form part of our x-quantity
(see pp. 60-6, 83-4, &c.). If it does, then it also applies to all
non-Celtic visions of spirits, in ancient and in modern times; and the
animistic hypothesis now accepted by most psychical researchers, namely,
that discarnate intelligences exist independent of the percipient, must
be set aside in favour of the non-animistic hypothesis. If, on the other
hand, it be admitted that 'fairy' phenomena are, as we maintain,
essentially the same as 'spirit' phenomena, then the belief in fairies
ceases to be purely mythical, and 'fairy' visions by a Celtic seer who
is physically and psychically sound do not seem to arise from that
seer's suggestion acting on his own subconsciousness; but certain types
of 'fairy' visions undoubtedly do arise from suggestion, _coming from a
'fairy' or other intelligence_, acting on the conscious or subconscious
content of the percipient's mind (cf. pp. 484-7).

[593] Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, pp. 208, 35.

[594] Sir Oliver Lodge, _Psychical Research_, in _Harper's Mag._, August
1908 (New York and London).

[595] Sir Oliver Lodge, _The Survival of Man_ (London, 1909), p. 339.

[596] James, op. cit., pp. 587-9.

[597] Readers are referred to such authoritative works as the _Phantasms
of the Living_ (London, 1886), by Gurney, Myers, and Podmore; to the
_Report on the Census of Hallucinations of Modern Spiritualism_, by
Professor Sidgwick's Committee; to the _Naturalisation of the
Supernatural_ (New York and London, 1908), by F. Podmore; to the
_Survival of the Human Personality_, by F. W. H. Myers; and other like
works, all of which originate from the _Proceedings of the Society for
Psychical Research_ (London).

[598] C. Flammarion, _Mysterious Psychic Forces_, pp. 441, 431.

[599] Sir Wm. Crookes, _Notes of an Enquiry into Phenomena called
Spiritual, during the years 1870-73_ (London), Part III, p. 87.

[600] See _Quart. Journ. Science_ (July 1871).

[601] Cf. Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, p. 281; and for other
cases of objects moved without contact see ib., pp. 50, 52, 53, 58, 122
ff. See also F. Podmore's article on _Poltergeists_, in _Proceedings S.
P. R._, xii. 45-115; and his _Naturalisation of the Supernatural_,
chapter vii.

[602] Sir Wm. Crookes, op. cit., Part III, p. 100.

[603] Ib., p. 94.

[604] Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, pp. 60, 81, 139, &c.

[605] Using as a basis the data of Professor Sidgwick's Committee and
the results earlier obtained by Gurney, Myers, and Podmore (see
_Phantasms of the Living_), Mr. William McDougall shows concisely the
probability of an apparition appearing within twelve hours of the death
of the individual whom it represents. He says:--'... of all recognized
apparitions of living persons, only one in 19,000 may be expected to be
a death-coincidence of this sort. But the census shows that of 1,300
recognized apparitions of living persons 30 are death-coincidences, and
that is equivalent to 440 in 19,000. Hence, of recognized
hallucinations, those coincident with death are 440 times more numerous
than we should expect, if no causal relation obtained.' And Mr.
McDougall concludes: '... since good evidence of telepathic
communication has been experimentally obtained, the least improbable
explanation of these death-apparitions is that the dying person exerts
upon his distant friend some telepathic influence which generates an
hallucinatory perception of himself' (_Hallucinations_, in _Ency.
Brit._, 11th ed., xii. 863).

[606] Myers, op. cit., ii. 65, 45 ff., 49 ff., &c.

[607] Nevius, _Demon Possession_, Introduction, pp. iv, vii; pp. 240-2,
144-5. In accordance with all such phenomena, psychical researchers have
logically called spirits manifesting themselves through the body of a
living person possessing spirits. And as in the case of Chinese
demon-possession, the phenomena of mediumship often result in the moral
derangement, insanity, or even suicide on the part of 'mediums' who so
unwisely exhibit it without special preparation or no preparation at
all, and too often in complete ignorance of a possible gradual
undermining of their psychic life, will-power, and even physical health.
All of this seems to offer direct and certain evidence to sustain
Christians and non-Christians in their condemnation of all forms of
necromancy or calling up of spirits. The following statement will make
our position towards mediumship of the most common kind clear:

In Druidism, for one example, disciples for training in magical sciences
are said to have spent twenty years in severe study and special
psychical training before deemed fit to be called Druids and thus to
control daemons, ghosts, or all invisible entities capable of possessing
living men and women. And even now in India and elsewhere there is
reported to be still the same ancient course of severe disciplinary
training for candidates seeking magical powers. But in modern
Spiritualism conditions are altogether different in most cases, and
'mediums' instead of controlling with an iron will, as a magician does,
spirits which become manifest in _seances_, surrender entirely their
will-power and whole personality to them.

[608] Cf. Sigmund Freud, _The Origin and Development of Psychoanalysis_,
in _Amer. Journ. Psych._, xxi, No. 2 (April 1910).

[609] The fact that all matter is capable of assuming a gaseous or
invisible state furnishes good scientific reasons for postulating the
actual existence of intelligent beings possessed of an invisible yet
physical body. There may well be on and about our planet many distinct
invisible organic life-forms undiscovered by zoologists. To deny such a
possibility would be unscientific.

[610] Cf. _Communication adressee au D{r} J. Dupre_, p. 382 of an essay
on _La Metempsycose basee sur les Principes de la Biologie et du
Magnetisme physiologique_, in _Le Hasard_ (Paris, 1909), by P. C. Revel.
Cases of regeneration among the aged are known, and these show how the
subliminal life-forces try to renew the physical body when it is worn
out (cf. Revel, ib., p. 372).

[611] Cf. Revel, op. cit., p. 295 ff.

[612] If scientists discover, as they probably will in time, what they
call the secret of life, they will not have discovered the secret of
life at all. What they will have discovered will be the physical
conditions under which life manifests itself. In other words, science
will most likely soon be able to set up artificially in a laboratory
such physical conditions as exist in nature naturally, and by means of
which life is able to manifest itself through matter. Life will still be
as great a mystery as it is to-day; though short-sighted materialists
are certain to announce to an eager world that the final problem of the
universe has been solved and that life is merely the resultant of a
subtle chemical compound.

[613] Professor Freud, after long and careful study, arrived at the
following conclusion:--'The child has his sexual impulse and activities
from the beginning, he brings them with him into the world, and from
these the so-called normal sexuality of adults emerges by a significant
development through manifold stages.' And Dr. Sanford Bell, in an
earlier writing entitled _A Preliminary Study of the Emotions of Love
between the Sexes_ (see _Amer. Journ. Psych._, 1902), came to a similar
conclusion (cf. Freud, op. cit., pp. 207-8).

[614] Cf. Hans Driesch, _The Science and Philosophy of the Organism_
(London, 1908); and Henri Bergson, _L'Evolution creatrice_ (Paris,
1908).

[615] This Celtic view of non-personal immortality completely fits in
with all the voluminous data of psychical research: after forty years of
scientific research into psychics there are no proofs yet adduced that
the human personality as a self-sufficient unit of consciousness
survives indefinitely the death of its body. Granted that it does
survive as a ghost for an undetermined period, generally to be counted
in years, during which time it seems to be gradually fading out or
disintegrating, there is no reliable evidence anywhere to show that a
personality _as such_ has manifested through a 'medium' or otherwise
after an interval of one thousand years, or even of five hundred years.
We have, in fact, no knowledge of the survival of a human personality
one hundred years after, and probably there are no good examples of such
a survival twenty-five years after the death of the body. Such an
eminent psychical researcher as William James recognized this drift of
the data of psychics, and when he died he held the conviction that there
is no personal immortality (see p. 505 n. following).

[616] Though not inclined toward the vitalistic view of human evolution,
M. Th. Ribot very closely approaches the Celtic view of the Ego (or
individuality) as being the principle which gives unity to different
personalities, but he does not have in mind personalities in the sense
implied by the Celtic Esoteric Doctrine of Re-birth:--'The Ego
subjectively considered consists of a sum of conscious states'
(comparable to personalities).... 'In brief, the Ego may be considered
in two ways: either in its actual form, and then it is the sum of
existing conscious states; or, in its continuity with the past, and then
it is formed by the memory according to the process outlined above. It
would seem, according to this view, that the identity of the Ego
depended entirely upon the memory. But such a conception is only
partial. Beneath the unstable compound phenomenon in all its protean
phases of growth, degeneration, and reproduction, there is a something
that remains: and this something is the undefined consciousness, the
product of all the vital processes, constituting bodily perception and
what is expressed in one word--the _coenaesthesis_.' (_The Diseases of
Memory_, pp. 107-8).

William James, the greatest psychologist of our epoch, after a long and
faithful life consecrated to the search after a true understanding of
human consciousness, finally arrived at substantially the same
conviction as Fechner did, that there is no personal immortality, but
that the personality 'is but a temporary and partial separation and
circumscription of a part of a larger whole, into which it is reabsorbed
at death' (W. McDougall, _In Memory of William James_, in _Proc. S. P.
R._, Part LXII, vol. xxv, p. 28). He thus virtually accepted the
mystic's view that the personality after the death of the body is
absorbed into a higher power, which, to our mind, is comparable with the
Ego conceived as the unifying principle behind personalities. In one of
his last writings, James explained his belief in such a manner as to
make it coincide at certain points with the view held by modern Celtic
mystics which has been presented above; the difference being that,
unlike these mystics, James was not prepared to say (though he raised
the question) whether or not behind the 'mother-sea' of consciousness
there is, as Fechner believed, a hierarchy of consciousnesses
(themselves subordinate to still higher consciousnesses, and comparable
with so many Egos or Individualities) which send out emanations as
temporary human personalities. The organic psychical forms (if we may
use such an expression) of such temporary human personalities would have
to be regarded from James's point of view as being built up out of the
psychical elements constituting the 'mother-sea' of consciousness, just
as the human body is built up out of the physical elements in the realm
of matter:--'Out of my experience, such as it is (and it is limited
enough) one fixed conclusion dogmatically emerges, and that is this,
that we with our lives are like islands in the sea, or like trees in the
forest. The maple and the pine may whisper to each other with their
leaves, and Conanicut and Newport hear each other's foghorns. But the
trees also commingle their roots in the darkness underground, and the
islands also hang together through the ocean's bottom. Just so there is
a continuum of cosmic consciousness, against which our individuality'
(used as synonymous with personality and not in our distinct sense)
'builds but accidental fences, and into which our several minds plunge
as into a mother-sea or reservoir. Our "normal" consciousness' (the
personality as we distinguish it from the Ego or individuality) 'is
circumscribed for adaptation to our external earthly environment, but
the fence is weak in spots, and fitful influences from beyond break in,
showing the otherwise unverifiable common connexion. Not only psychic
research, but metaphysical philosophy and speculative biology are led in
their own ways to look with favour on some such "pan-psychic" view of
the universe as this.' (W. James, _The Confidences of a Psychical
Researcher_, in _The American Magazine_, October 1909). Again, James
wrote:--'The drift of all the evidence we have seems to me to sweep us
very strongly towards the belief in some form of superhuman life with
which we may, unknown to ourselves, be co-conscious.' (_A Pluralistic
Universe_, New York, 1909, p. 309.)

[617] W. James, _Varieties of Religious Experience_ (London, 1902), pp.
511, 236 n.

[618] M. Th. Ribot, in _Diseases of Memory_ (London, 1882), pp. 82-98
ff., gives numerous examples of such loss and recovery of memory.

[619] Cf. Freud, op. cit., pp. 192, 204-5, &c.

[620] Cf. A. Moll, _Hypnotism_ (London, 1890), pp. 141 ff., 126.

[621] Cf. A. Moll, _Hypnotism_ (London, 1890), pp. 141 ff., 126.

[622] Cf. Freud, op. cit., p. 192.

[623] Freud, _Die Traumdeutung_, 2nd ed. (Vienna, 1906); cf. S.
Ferenczi, _The Psychological Analysis of Dreams_, in _Amer. Journ.
Psych._ (April 1910), xxi, No. 2, p. 326.

[624] A similar state of high development is to be assumed for a great
Celtic hero like Arthur, who were he to be re-born would (as is said to
have been the case with King Mongan, the reincarnation of Finn) bring
with him memory of his past: unlike the consciousness of the normal man,
the consciousness of one of the Divine Ones is normally the
subconsciousness, the consciousness of the individuality; and not the
personal consciousness, which, like the personality, is non-permanent
_in itself_. This further illustrates the Celtic theory of non-personal
immortality.

[625] Ribot, op. cit., p. 100 ff.

[626] Cf. Lang, _Cock Lane and Common Sense_, pp. 217 ff. _Blackwood's
Magazine_, cxxix (January 1881), contains a remarkable account of a
child who remembered previous lives. Lord Lindsay, in his _Letters_ (ed.
of 1847, p. 351), refers to a feeling when he beheld the river Kadisha
descending from Lebanon, of having in a previous life seen the same
scene. Dickens in his _Pictures from Italy_ testifies to a parallel
experience. E. D. Walker, in his interesting work on _Reincarnation_
(pp. 42-5) has brought together many other well-attested cases of people
who likewise have thought they could remember fragments of a former
state of conscious existence. In his diary, under date of February 17,
1828, Sir Walter Scott wrote as follows:--'I cannot, I am sure, tell if
it is worth marking down, that yesterday, at dinner-time, I was
strangely haunted by what I would call the sense of pre-existence, viz.
a confused idea that nothing that passed was said for the first time.'
Lockhart, _Life of Scott_ (first ed.), vii. 114. Bulwer Lytton in
_Godolphin_ (chapter xv), and Edgar Allen Poe in _Eureka_, record
similar experiences. Mr. H. Fielding Hall, in _The Soul of a People_{4}
(London, 1902), pp. 290-308, reports several very remarkable cases of
responsible natives of Burma who stated that they could recall former
lives passed by them as men and women. Mr. Hall has carefully
investigated these cases, and gives us the impression that they are
worthy of scientific consideration.

[627] Cf. Ferenczi, op. cit., p. 316, &c. Professor Freud's theory of
dreams supports entirely, but does not imply our hypothesis that some
(and probably many) abnormal dreams of a rare kind, whether good or bad
in tendency, may be due to the latent content of subconsciousness, out
of which they undoubtedly arise, having been collected and carried over
from a previous state of consciousness parallel to our present one. In
respect to our present life Professor Freud holds, as a result of
psycho-analysis of thousands of dream subjects, that the latent content
of every dream in the adult is directly dependent upon mental processes
which frequently reach back to the earliest childhood; and he gives
detailed cases in illustration. In other words, there is always a latent
dream-material behind the conscious dream-content, and probably a part
of it was innate in the child at birth, and hence, according to our
view, was pre-existent. (Cf. Ernest Jones, _Freud's Theory of Dreams_,
in _Amer. Journ. Psych._, April 1910, xxi, No. 2, pp. 301 ff.)

[628] Cf. Du Prel, _Philosophy of Mysticism_, ii. 25 ff., 34 ff.

[629] _The Dream of Ravan_, in _Dublin Univ. Mag._, xliii. 468.

[630] Myers, in _Proc. S. P. R._, vii. 305.

[631] James, _Varieties of Religious Experience_, p. 483.

[632] The esoteric teaching in many of the mystic schools of antiquity
was that the atoms of each human body transmigrate through all lower
forms of life during the long period supposed to intervene between death
and re-birth of the individuality. This doctrine seems to be one of the
main sources of the corruption which crept into the ancient re-birth
doctrines and transformed many of them into doctrines of transmigration
of the human soul into animal and plant bodies; and some unscrupulous
priesthoods openly taught such corrupted doctrines as a means of making
the ignorant populace submissive to ecclesiastical rule, the theological
theory expounded by such priesthoods being that the evil-doer, but not
the keeper of the letter of the canonical law, is condemned to expiate
his sins through birth in brute bodies. The pure form of the mystic
doctrine was that after the lapse of the long period of disembodiment
the individuality reconstructs its human body anew by drawing to itself
the identical atoms which constituted its previous human body--these
atoms, and not the individuality, having transmigrated through all the
lower kingdoms. Such an esoteric doctrine probably lies behind the
exoteric Egyptian teaching that the human soul after the death of its
body passes through all plant and animal bodies during a period of three
thousand years, after which it returns to human embodiment. Some
scholars have held that the exoteric interpretation of this theory and
its consequent literal interpretation as a transmigration doctrine led
the Egyptians to mummify the bodies of their dead. Cf. Lucretius, _De
Rerum Natura_, Book III, ll. 843-61; and Herodotus, Book II, on Egypt.

[633] Cf. Dr. L. S. Fugairon's _La Survivance de l'ame, ou la Mort et la
Renaissance chez les etres vivants; etudes de physiologie et
d'embryologie philosophiques_ (Paris, 1907); cf. Revel, _Le Hasard_, p.
457.

[634] Darwin never considered or attempted to suggest what it is that of
itself really evolves, for it cannot be the physical body which only
_grows_ from immaturity to maturity and then dissolves. Darwin thus
overlooked the essential factor in his whole doctrine; while the Druids
and other ancients, wiser than we have been willing to admit, seem not
only to have anticipated Darwin by thousands of years, but also to have
quite surpassed him in setting up their doctrine of re-birth, which
explains both the physical and psychical evolution of man.




Transcriber's Notes:

Passages in italics are indicated by _italics_.

Superscripted letters are indicated by {superscript}.

The original text includes Greek characters. For this text version these
letters have been replaced with transliterations.

Some quotes are opened with marks but are not closed. Obvious errors
have been silently closed while those requiring interpretation have
been left open.

Other punctuation has been corrected without note.

The following misprints have been corrected:
  "Fortelling" standardized to "foretelling" (page 213)
  "fom" corrected to "from" (footnote 342)
  "Name" corrected to "Names" (Index)

Other than the corrections listed above, inconsistencies in spelling and
hyphenation have been retained from the original.

The following symbols were substituted for images on pages 272 and 273:
  Maltese cross = [C]
  Triangle = [T]
  Jupiter = [J]
  Mercury = [M]
  Venus = [V]
  Saturn = [S]
  Moon = [Mo]
  Sun = [O]
  Large Asterisk [*]






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Fairy-Faith in Celtic Countries, by
W. Y. Evans Wentz

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FAIRY-FAITH IN CELTIC COUNTRIES ***

***** This file should be named 34853.txt or 34853.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/8/5/34853/

Produced by Ted Garvin and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
