conspicuous place, that to look on it might stay the effect of the
poison, is remarkable, not only as sanctioning the forming of an image,
but as associating healing power with a material object. Two questions
must be considered separately,--What did the method of cure say to the
men who turned their bloodshot, languid eyes to it? and What does it
mean for us, who see it by the light of our Lord's great words about
it? As to the former question, we have not to take into account the Old
Testament symbolism which makes the serpent the emblem of Satan or of
sin. Serpents had bitten the wounded. Here was one like them, but
without poison, hanging harmless on the pole. Surely that would declare
that God had rendered innocuous the else fatal creatures. The elevation
of the serpent was simply intended to make it visible from afar; but it
could not have been set so high as to be seen from all parts of the
camp, and we must suppose that the wounded were in many cases carried
from the distant parts of the wide-spreading encampment to places
whence they could catch a glimpse of it glittering in the sunshine. We
are not told that trust in God was an essential part of the look, but
that is taken for granted. Why else should a half-dead man lift his
heavy eyelids to look? Such a one knew that God had commanded the image
to be made, and had promised healing for a look. His gaze was fixed on
it, in obedience to the command involved in the promise, and was, in
some measure, a manifestation of faith. No doubt the faith was very
imperfect, and the desire was only for physical healing; but none the
less it had in it the essence of faith. It would have been too hard a
requirement for men through whose veins the swift poison was burning
its way, and who, at the best, were so little capable of rising above
sense, to have asked from them, as the condition of their cure, a trust
which had no external symbol to help it. The singularity of the method
adopted witnesses to the graciousness of God, who gave their feebleness
a thing that they could look at, to aid them in grasping the unseen
power which really effected the cure. 'He that turned himself to it,'
says the Book of Wisdom, 'was not saved by the thing which he saw, but
by Thee, that art the Saviour of all.'

Our Lord has given us the deepest meaning of the brazen serpent. Taught
by Him, we are to see in it a type of Himself, the significance of
which could not be apprehended till Calvary had given the key. Three
distinct points of parallel are suggested by His use of the incident in
His conversation with Nicodemus. First, He takes the serpent as an
emblem of Himself. Now it is clear that it is so, not in regard to the
saving power that dwells in Him, but in regard to His sinless manhood,
which was made 'in the likeness of sinful flesh,' yet 'without sin.'
The symbolism which takes the serpent as the material type of sin comes
into view now, and is essential to the full comprehension of the
typical significance of the incident.

Secondly, Jesus laid stress on the 'lifting up' of the serpent. That
'lifting up' has two meanings. It primarily refers to the Crucifixion,
wherein, just as the death-dealing power was manifestly triumphed over
in the elevation of the brazen serpent, the power of sin is exhibited
as defeated, as Paul says, 'triumphing over them in it' (Col. ii.
14,15). But that lifting up on the Cross draws after it the elevation
to the throne, and to that, or, rather, to both considered as
inseparably united, our Lord refers when He says,' I, if I be lifted up
from the earth, will draw all men unto Me.'

Thirdly, the condition of healing is paralleled. 'When he looked unto
the serpent of brass, he lived.' 'That whosoever believeth may in Him
have eternal life.' From the serpent no healing power flowed; but our
eternal life is '_in_ Him,' and _from_ Him it flows into our poisoned,
dying nature. The sole condition of receiving into ourselves that new
life which is free from all taint of sin, and is mighty enough to
arrest the venom that is diffused through every drop of blood, is faith
in Jesus lifted on the Cross to slay the sin that is slaying mankind,
and raised to the throne to bestow His own immortal and perfect life on
all who look to Him. The bitten Israelite might be all but dead. The
poison wrought swiftly; but if he from afar lifted his glazing eyeballs
to the serpent on the pole, a swifter healing overtook the death that
was all but conqueror, and cast it out, and he who was borne half
unconscious to the foot of the standard went away a sound man,
'walking, and leaping, and praising God.' So it may be with any man,
however deeply tainted with sin, if he will trust himself to Jesus, and
from  'the ends of the earth' 'look unto' Him 'and be saved,' His power
knows no hopeless cases. He _can_ cure all. He _will_ cure our most
ingrained sin, and calm the hottest fever of our poisoned blood, if we
will let Him. The only thing that we have to do is to gaze, with our
hearts in our eyes and faith in our hearts, on Him, as He is lifted on
the Cross and the throne. But we must so gaze, or we die, for none but
He can cast out the coursing venom. None but He can arrest the
swift-footed death that is intertwined with our very natures.




BALAAM

    'He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the son of
    Beor to Pethor, which is by the river of the land of
    the children of his people, to call him, saying, Behold
    there is a people come out from Egypt: behold, they
    cover the face of the earth, and they abide over against
    me.'--NUM. xxii. 6.

Give a general outline of the history. See Bishop Butler's great sermon.

I. How much knowledge and love of good there may be in a bad man.

Balaam was a prophet:

_(a)_ He knew something of the divine character,

_(b)_ He knew what righteousness was (Micah v. 8).

_(c)_ He knew of a future state, and longed for 'the last end of the
righteous.'

He would not break the law of God, and curse by word of mouth:

But yet for all that he wanted to curse. He wanted to do the wrong
thing, and that made him bad. And when he durst not do it in one way,
he did it in another.

So he is a picture of the universal blending and mixture that there is
even in bad men.

It is not knowledge that makes a man good.

It is not aspirations after righteousness. These dwell more or less in
all souls.

It is not desire 'to go to heaven'--everybody has that desire.

Perfectly vicious men are devils. There is always the blending.

Many of us are trusting to these vagrant wishes, but my friends, it is
not what a man would sometimes like, but what the whole set and tenor
of his life tends towards, that makes him. There may be plenty of
backwater eddies and cross-currents in the sea, but the tide goes on
all the same.

  'All these fancies and their whole array
   One cunning bosom sin blows quite away,'

'Let no man deceive you; he that doeth righteousness is righteous.'

Do not trust your convictions; they are powerless in the fight.

II. How men may deceive themselves about their condition, or the
self-illusions and compromises of sin.

These convictions will never, by themselves, keep a man from evil, but
they may lead men to try to compromise, just as Balaam did. He would
go, but he would not, for the life of him, curse; and he evidently
thought that he was a hero in firmness and a martyr to duty.

He would not curse in words, but he did it in another way--by means of
Baal-peor.

So we find men making compromises between duty and inclination; keeping
the letter and breaking the spirit; obeying in some respects and
indemnifying themselves for their obedience by their disobedience in
others; very devout, attentive to all religious observances, and yet
sinning on. And we find such men playing tricks upon themselves, and
really deluding themselves into the idea that they are very good men!

This is the great characteristic of sin, its deceitfulness. It always
comes as an 'angel of light,' like some of those weird stories in which
we read about a strange guest at a banquet who discloses a skeleton
below the wedding garment!

'Father of lies.' '_Nihil imbecillius denudato diabolo._' The more one
sins, the less capable he becomes of discerning evil. Conscience
becomes sophisticated, and it is always possible to refine away its
judgments.

'By reason of use have their senses exercised to discern.' 'Take heed
lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.'

III. The absurdity and unreasonableness of unrighteousness.

We look at Balaam, and think, how could a man purpose anything so
foolish as to go on seeking for an opportunity to break a law which he
knew to be irrevocable!

Yet what did he do but what every sinner does?

All sin is the breach of law which at the very moment of breaking is
known to be imperative.

All sin is thus the overbearing of conscience, or the sophistication of
conscience, and all sin is the incurring voluntarily of consequences
which at the moment are or might be known to be certain, and far
overbalancing any fancied 'wages of unrighteousness.'

Thus all sin is the overbearing of reason or the sophisticating of
reason by passion. Men know the absurdity of sin, and yet men will go
on sinning. 'A rogue is a roundabout fool.' All wrongdoing is a mighty
blunder. It is only righteousness which is congruous with a man's
reason, with a man's conscience, with a man's highest happiness. 'The
fear of the Lord,' that is wisdom.

IV. The wages of unrighteousness.

How Balaam's experiment ended--his death. He tried to make the 'best of
both worlds,' so he ran with the hare and hunted with the hounds, and
this was how it ended, as it always does, as it always will. How death
ends all the illusions, sternly breaks down all the compromises,
reveals all the absurdities!

Men are one thing or the other. Learn, then, the lesson that no gifts,
no talents, no convictions, no aspirations will avail.

Let this sad figure which looks out upon us with grey streaming hair
and uplifted hands from beside the altar on Pisgah speak to us.

How near the haven it is possible to be cast away! Like Bunyan's way to
hell from near the gate of the celestial city.

Balaam said, 'Let me die the death of the righteous!' and his death was
thus:--'Balaam they slew with the sword,' and his epitaph is 'Balaam
the son of Beor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness,' got them, and
perished!




AN UNFULFILLED DESIRE


    '... Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my
    last end be like his!'--NUM. xxiii. 10.

    '... Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the
    sword.'--NUM. xiii. 8.

Ponder these two pictures. Take the first scene. A prophet, who knows
God and His will, is standing on the mountain top, and as he looks down
over the valley beneath him, with its acacia-trees and swift river,
there spread the tents of Israel. He sees them, and knows that they are
'a people whom the Lord hath blessed.' Brought there to curse, 'he
blesses them altogether'; and as he gazes upon their ordered ranks and
sees somewhat of the wondrous future that lay before them, his mind is
filled with the thought of all the blessedness of that righteous
nation, and the sigh of longing comes to his lips, 'May I be with them
in life and death; may I have no higher honour, no calmer end, than to
lie down and die as one of the chosen people, with memories of a divine
hand that has protected me all through the past, and quiet hopes of the
same hand holding me up in the great darkness!' A devout aspiration, a
worthy desire!

Look at the other picture. Midian has seduced Israel to idolatry and
its constant companion, sensual sin. The old lawgiver has for his last
achievement to punish the idolater. 'Avenge the children of Israel of
the Midianites, afterwards thou shalt be gathered to thy people.' So
each tribe gives its contingent to the fight, and under the fierce and
prompt Phinehas, whose javelin had already smitten one of the chief
offenders, they go forth. Fire and sword, devastation and victory, mark
their track. The princes of Midian fall before the swift rush of the
desert-born invaders. And--sad, strange company!--among them is the
'man who saw the vision of the Almighty, and knew the knowledge of the
Most High'! he who had taught Moab the purest lessons of morality, and
Midian, alas! the practice of the vilest profligacy; he who saw from
afar 'the sceptre arise out of Israel and the Star from Jacob'; he who
longed to 'die the death of the righteous'! The onset of the avenging
host, with the 'shout of a king' in their midst; the terror of the
flight, the riot of havoc and bloodshed, and, finally, the quick thrust
of the sharp Israelite sword in some strong hand, and the grey hairs
all dabbled with his blood--these were what the man came to who had
once breathed the honest desire, 'Let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his'!

I. There is surely a solemn lesson for us all here--as touching the
danger of mere vague religious desires and convictions which we do not
allow to determine our conduct.

Balaam had evidently much knowledge. Look at these points--

_(a)_ His knowledge of the covenant-name of God.

_(b)_ His knowledge of a pure morality and a spiritual worship far
beyond sacrificial notions, and in some respects higher than the then
Old Testament standpoint.

_(c)_ The knowledge (which is implied in the text) of a future state,
which had gone far into the background, even if it had not been
altogether lost, among the Israelites. Is it not remarkable that the
religious ideas of this man were in advance of Israel's at this time;
that there seems to have lingered among these 'outsiders' more of a
pure faith than in Israel itself?

What a lesson here as to the souls led by God and enlightened by Him
beyond the pale of Judaism!

But all this knowledge, of what use was it to Balaam? He knows about
God: does he seek to serve Him? He preaches morality to Moab, and he
teaches Midian to 'teach the children of Israel to commit fornication.'
He knows something of the blessedness of a 'righteous man's' death, and
perhaps sees faintly the shining gates beyond--but how does it all end?
What a gulf between _knowledge_ and _life_!

What is the use of correct ideas about God? They may be the foundations
of holy thoughts, and they are meant to be so. I am not setting up
emotion above principle, or fancying that there can be religion without
theology; but for what are all our thoughts about God given us?

_(a)_ That they may influence our hearts.

_(b)_ That they may subdue our wills.

_(c)_ That they may mould our practical life.

If they do not do that--then _what_ do they do?

They constitute a positive hindrance--like the dead lava-blocks that
choke the mouth of a crater, or the two deposits on the bottom of a
boiler, soot outside and crust inside, which keep the fire from getting
at the water. They have lost their power because they are so familiar.
They are weakened by not being practised. The very organs of
intelligence are, as it were, ossified. Self-complacency lays hold on
the possession of these ideas and shields itself against all appeals
with the fact of possessing them. Many a man mistakes, in his own case,
the knowledge of the truth for obedience to the truth. All this is seen
in everyday life, and with reference to all manner of convictions, but
it is most apparent and most fatal about Christian truth. I appeal to
the many who hear and know all about 'the word,' What more is needed?
That you should do what you know ('Be not hearers only'); that you
should yield your whole being to Christ, the living Word.

II. Balaam is an example of convictions which remain inefficacious.

It was not without some sense of his own character, and some
forebodings of what was possibly brooding over him, that he uttered
these words of the text. But they were transitory emotions, and they
passed away.

I suppose that every man who hears the gospel proclaimed is, at some
time or other, conscious of dawning thoughts which, if followed, would
lead him to decision for Christ. I suppose that every man among us is
conscious of thoughts visiting him many a time when he least expects
them, which, if honestly obeyed, would work an entire revolution in his
life.

I do not wish to speak as if unbelieving men were the only people who
were unfaithful to their consciences, but rather to deal with what is a
besetting sin of us all, though it reaches its highest aggravation in
reference to the gospel.

Such stings of conviction come to us all, but how are they deadened?

_(a)_ By simple neglect. Pay no attention to them; do not do anything
in consequence, and they will gradually disappear. The voice unheard
will cease to speak. Non-obedience to conscience will in the end almost
throttle conscience.

_(b)_ By angry rejection.

_(c)_ By busy occupation with the outer world.

_(d)_ By sinful occupation with it.

Then consider that such dealing with our convictions leaves us far
worse men than before, and if continued will end in utter insensibility.

What should we do with such convictions? Reverently follow them. And in
so doing they will grow and increase, and lead us at last to God and
peace.

Special application of all this to our attitude towards Christian truth.

III. Balaam is an instance of wishes that are never fulfilled.

He wished to die 'as the righteous.' How did he die? miserably; and why?

(1) Because his wish was deficient in character.

It was _one_ among a great many, feeble and not predominant, occasioned
by circumstances, and so fading when these disappeared. Like many men's
relation to the gospel who would _like_ to be Christians, and are not.
These vagrant wishes are nothing; mere 'catspaws' of wind, not a
breeze. They are not real, even while they last, and so they come to
nothing.

(2) Because it was partially wrong in its object.

He was willing to die the death, but not to live the life, of the
righteous; like many men who would be very glad to 'go to heaven when
they die,' but who will not be Christians while they live.

Now, God forbid that I should say that his wish was wrong! But only it
was not enough. Such a wish led to no action.

Now, God hears the faintest wish; He does not require that we should
will strongly, but He does require that we should desire, and that we
should act according to our desires.

Let the close be a brief picture of a righteous death. And oh! if you
feel that it is blessed, then let that desire lead you to Christ, and
all will be well. Remember that Bunyan saw a byway to hell at the door
of the celestial city. Remember how Balaam ended, and stands gibbeted
in the New Testament as an evil man, and the type of false teachers.
Finally, beware of knowledge which is not operative in conduct, of
convictions which are neglected and pass away, of vague desires which
come to nought.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture, by
Alexander Maclaren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE ***

***** This file should be named 7069.txt or 7069.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/0/6/7069/

Produced by Anne Folland, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
