sight of thine eyes,' to be taken as a bit of fierce irony? Is this a
man taking the maxims of the foolish world about him and seeming to
approve of them in order that he may face round at the end with a
quick turn and a cynical face and hand them back their maxims along
with that which will shatter them to pieces--as if he said, 'Oh, yes!
go on, talk your fill about making the best of this world, and
rejoicing and doing as you like, dancing on the edge of a precipice,
and fiddling, like Nero, whilst a worse fire than that of Rome is
burning'? Well, I do not think that is the meaning of it. Though there
is irony to be found in the Bible, I do not think that fierce irony
like that which might do for the like of Dean Swift, is the intention
of the Preacher. So I take these words to be said in good faith, as a
frank recognition of the fact that, after all we have been hearing
about vanity and vexation of spirit, life is worth living for, and
that God means young people to be glad and to make the best of the
fleeting years that will never come back with the same buoyancy and
elasticity all their lives long. And then I take it that the words
added are not meant to destroy or neutralise the concession of the
first sentence, but only to purify and ennoble a gladness which,
without them, would be apt to be stained by many a corruption, and to
make permanent a joy which, without them, would be sure to die down
into the miserable, peevish, and feeble old age of which the grim
picture follows, and to be quenched at last in death. So there are
three words that I take out of this text of mine, and that I want to
bring before my young friends as exhortations which it is wise to
follow. These are Rejoice, Reflect, Remember. Rejoice--the fitting
gladness of youth; reflect--the solemn thought that will guard the
gladness from stain; remember--the religion which will make these
things ever last.

First of all 'Rejoice.' Do as you like, for that is the English
translation of the words, 'Walk in the ways of thine heart and in the
sight of thine eyes.' Buoyantly and cheerfully follow the inclinations
and the desires which are stamped upon your nature and belong to your
time of life. All young things are joyful, from the lamb in the
pastures upwards, and are meant to be so. The mere bounding sense of
physical strength which leads so many of you young men astray is a
good thing and a blessed thing--a blessing to be thankful for and to
cherish. Your smooth cheeks, so unlike those of old age, are only an
emblem of the comparative freedom from care which belongs to your
happy condition. Your memories are not yet like some--a book written
within and without with the records of mourning and disappointment and
crosses. There are in all probability long years stretching before
you, instead of a narrow strip of barren sand, before you come to the
great salt sea that is going to swallow you up, as is the case with
some of us. Christianity looks with complacency on your gladness, and
does not mean to clip the wing of one white-winged pleasure, or to
breathe one glimmer of blackness on your atmosphere. You are meant to
be glad, but it is gladness in a far higher sense that I want to
secure for you, or rather to make you secure for yourselves. God
delights in the prosperity and light-hearted buoyancy of His children,
especially of His young children. Ah! but I know there are young lives
over which poverty or ill-health or sorrows of one kind or another
have cast a gloom as incongruous to your time of life as snow in the
garden in the spring, that pinches the crocuses and weighs down young
green beech-leaves, would be. And if I am speaking to any young man or
young woman at this time who by reason of painful outward
circumstances has had but a chilling spring and youth, I would say to
them, 'don't lose heart'; a cloudy morning often breaks into a perfect
day. It is good for a man to have to 'bear the yoke in his youth,' and
if you miss joy, you may get grace and strength and patience, which
will be a blessing to you all your days. For all that, the ordinary
course of things is that the young should be glad, and that the young
life should be as the rippling brook in the sunshine. I want to leave
upon your minds this impression, that it is all right and all in the
order of God's providence, who means every one of you to rejoice in
the days of your youth. The text says further, 'Walk in the ways of
thine heart.' That sounds very like the unwholesome teaching, 'Follow
nature; do as you like; let passions and tastes and inclinations be
your guides.'

Well, that needs to be set round with a good many guards to prevent it
becoming a doctrine of devils. But for all that, I wish you to notice
that that has a great and a religious side to it. You have come into
possession of this mystical life of yours, a possession which requires
that you must choose what kind of life you will follow. Every one has
this awful prerogative of being able to walk in the way of their
heart. You have to answer for the kind of way that is, and the kind of
heart out of which it has come. But I want to go to more important
things, and so with a clear understanding that the joy of youth is all
right and legitimate, that you are intended to be glad, and to feel
the physical and intellectual spring and buoyancy of early days, let
us go on to the next thing. 'Rejoice,' says my text, and it adds,
'Reflect.' It is one of the blessings of your time of life, my young
friends, that you do not do much of that. It is one of your happy
immunities that you are not yet in the habit of looking at life as a
whole, and considering actions and consequences. Keep that spontaneity
as long as you can; it is a good thing to keep. But for all that, do
not forget this awful thing, that it may turn to exaggeration and
excess, and that it needs, like all other good things, to be guarded
and rightly used. And so, 'Rejoice,' and 'walk in the sight of thine
eyes'; _but_--'know that for all these things God will bring thee
to judgment.' Well, now, is that thought to come in (I was going to
say, like a mourning-coach driven through a wedding procession) to
kill the joys we have been seeming to receive from the former words?
Are we taking back all that we have been giving, and giving out
instead something that will make them all cower and be quiet, like the
singing birds that stop their singing and hide in the leaves when they
see the kite in the sky? No, there is no need for anything of the
sort. 'For all these things God will bring thee to judgment': that is
not the thought that kills, but that purifies and ennobles. Regard
being had to the opinions expressed at various points in the earlier
portion of this Book, we may be allowed to think of this testimony as
having reference to the perpetual judgment that is going on in this
world always over every man's life. A great German thinker has it, in
reference to the history of nations, that the history of the world is
the judgment of the world, and although that is not true if it is a
denial of a physical day of judgment, it is true in a very profound
and solemn sense with regard to the daily life of every man, that
whether there be a judgment-seat beyond the grave or not, and whether
this Preacher knew anything about that or no, there is going on
through the whole of a man's life, and evolving itself, this solemn
conviction, that we are to pass away from this present life. All our
days are knit together as one whole. Yesterday is the parent of today,
and today is the parent of all the tomorrows. The meaning and the
deepest consequence of man's life is that no feeling, no thought that
flits across the mirror of his life and heart dies utterly, leaving
nothing behind it. But rather the metaphor of the Apostle is the true
one, 'That which thou sowest, that shalt thou also reap.' All your
life a seed-time, all your life a harvest-time too, for the seed which
I sow today is the seed which I have reaped from all my former
sowings, and so cause and consequence go rolling on in life in
extricable entanglement, issuing out in this, that whatever a man does
lives on in him, and that each moment inherits the whole consequence
of his former life. And now, you young men and women, you boys and
girls, mind! this seed-time is the one that will be most powerful in
your lives, and there is a judgment you do not need to die to meet. If
you are idle at school, you will never learn Latin when you go to
business. If you are frivolous in your youth, if you stain your souls
and soil your lives by outward coarse sin here in Manchester in your
young days, there will be a taint about you all your lives. You cannot
get rid of that brave law that 'Whatever a man sows, that, thirtyfold,
sixtyfold, an hundredfold, that shall he also reap'--the same kind,
but infinitely multiplied in quantity. Let me therefore name some of
the ways in which your joys or pleasures, as lads, as boys and girls,
as growing young men and women, will bring you to judgment. Health,
that is one; position, that is two; reputation, that is three;
character, that is four. Did you ever see them build one of those
houses they make in some parts of the country, with concrete instead
of stones? Take a spadeful of the mud, and put it into a frame on the
wall. When it is dry, take away the frame and the supports, and it
hardens into rock. You take your single deeds--the mud sometimes,
young men!--pop them on the wall, and think no more about it. Ay, but
they stop there and harden there, and lo! a character--a house for
your soul to live in--health, position, memory, capacity, and all
that. If you have not done certain things which you ought to have
done, you will never be able to do them, and there are the materials
for a judgment. That is going on every moment, and especially is it
going on in the region of your pleasures. If they are unworthy, you
are unworthy; if they are gross, and coarse, and low, and animal, they
are dragging you down; if they are frivolous and foolish, they are
making you a poor butterfly of a creature that is worth nothing and
will be of no good to anybody; if they are pure, and chaste, and
lofty, and virginal and white, they will make your souls good and
gracious and tender with the tenderness and beauty of God.

But that is not all. I am not going to travel beyond the limits of
this present life with any words of mine, but as I read this final
conclusion in this Book of Ecclesiastes, I think I can perceive that
the doubts and the scepticisms about a future life, and the difference
between a man and a beast which are spoken of in the earlier chapters,
have all been overcome, and the clear conviction of the writer is
expressed in these twofold great sayings: 'The spirit shall return
unto God who gave it, and the words with which He stamps all His
message upon our hearts, the final words of His book'; 'God shall
bring every work into judgment with every secret thing.' And I come to
you and say, 'I suppose you believe in a state of retribution beyond?'
I suppose that most of the young folk I am speaking to now at all
events believe that 'Thou wilt come to be our judge,' as the _Te
Deum_ has it; and that it is this same personal self of mine that
is to stand there who is sitting here? God shall bring _thee_
into judgment. Never mind what is to come of the body, the quivering,
palpitating, personal centre. The very same self that I know myself to
be will be carried there. Now, take that with you and lay it to heart,
and let it have a bearing on your pleasure. It will kill nothing that
deserves to live, it will take no real joy out of a man's life. It
will only strain out the poison that would kill you. You turn that
thought upon your heart, my friends. Is it like a policeman's
bull's-eye turned upon a lot of bad characters hiding under a railway
arch in the corner there? If so, the sooner you get rid of the
pleasures and inclinations that slink away when that beam of light
strikes their ugly faces, the better for yourselves and for your
lives. 'Rejoice in the way of thine heart and, that thy joy may be
pure, know that for all this God will bring thee into judgment.'

And now my last word, 'Remember God,' says my text. The former two
sayings, if taken by themselves, would make a very imperfect guide to
life. Self-indulgence regulated by the thought of retribution is a
very low kind of life after all. There is something better in this
world, and that is work; something higher, and that is duty; something
nobler than self-indulgence, and that is self-sacrifice. And so no
religion worthy the name contents itself by saying to a man, 'Be good
and you will be glad'; but, 'Never mind whether you are glad; be good
at any rate, and such gladness as is good for you will come to you,
and you can want the rest.' 'Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth.' Recall God to your thoughts, and keep Him in your mind all the
day long. That is wonderfully unlike your life, is it not? Remember
thy Creator; shift the centre of your life. What I have been saying
might be true of a man, the centre of whose life was himself, and such
a man is next door to a devil, for, I suppose, the definition of devil
is 'self-engrossed still,' and whosoever lives for himself is dead.
Don't let the earth be the centre of your system, but the sun. Do not
live to yourselves, or your pleasures will all be ignoble and
creeping, but live to God. 'Remember.' Well, then, you and I know a
good deal more about God than the writer of the Book of Ecclesiastes
did--both about what He is and how to remember Him. I am not going to
content myself by taking his point of view, but I must take a far
higher and a far better one. If he had been here he would have said
'Remember God.' He would have said, 'Look at God in Jesus Christ, and
trust Him and love Him; go to Him as your Saviour, and take all the
burden of your past sin and lay it upon His merciful shoulders, and
for His dear sake look for forgiveness and cleansing; and then for His
dear sake live to serve and bless Him. Never mind about yourself, and
do not think much about your gladness. Follow in the footsteps of Him
who has shown us that the highest joy is to give oneself utterly away.
Love Jesus Christ and trust Him and serve Him, and that will make all
your gladness permanent.' There is one thing I want to teach you. Look
at that description, or rather read when you go home the description
which follows my text, of that wretched old man who has got no hope in
God and no joy, feeble in body, going down to the grave, and dying out
at last. That is what rejoicing in the days of thy youth, and walking
in the ways of thine own heart, come to when you do not remember God.
There is nothing more miserable on the face of this earth than an
ill-conditioned old man, who is ill-conditioned because he has lost
his early joys and early strength, and has got nothing to make up for
them. How many of your joys, my dear young friends, will last when old
age comes to you? How many of them will survive when your eye is no
longer bright, and your hand no longer strong, and your foot no longer
fleet? How many of them, young woman! when the light is out of your
eye, and the beauty and freshness out of your face and figure, when
you are no longer able for parties, when it is no longer a pastime to
read novels, and when the ballroom is not exactly the place for
you,--how many of your pleasures will survive? Young man! how many of
yours will last when you can no longer go into dissipation, and
stomach and system will no longer stand fast living, nor athletics,
and the like? Oh! let me beseech thee, go to the ant and consider her
ways, who in the summer layeth up for the winter; and do ye likewise
in the days of your youth, store up for yourselves that which knows no
change and laughs at the decay of flesh and sense. A thousand motives
coincide and press on my memory if I had words and time to speak them.
Let me beseech you--especially you young men and women of this
congregation, of some of whom I may venture to speak as a father to
his children, whom I have seen growing up, as it were, from your
mothers' arms, and the rest of you whom I do not know so well--Oh!
carry away with you this beseeching entreaty of mine at the end. Love
Jesus Christ and trust to Him as your Saviour; serve Him as your
Captain and your King in the days of your youth. Do not offer Him the
fag end of a life--the last inch of the candle that is burning down
into the socket. Do it now, for the moments are flying, and you may
never have Him offered to you any more. If there is any softening, any
touch of conscience in your heart, yield to the impulse and do not
stifle it. Take Christ for your Saviour, take Him now--'Now is the
accepted time, now is the day of salvation.'



THE CONCLUSION OF THE MATTER

'Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no
pleasure in them; 2. While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the
stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain; 3. In
the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong
men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few,
and those that look out of the windows be darkened, 4. And the doors
shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low,
and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters
of musick shall be brought low; 5. Also when they shall be afraid of
that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree
shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire
shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go
about the streets: 6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden
bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel
broken at the cistern. 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as
it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it.... 13. Let
us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep His
commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. 14. For God shall
bring every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good, or whether it be evil.'--ECCLES. xii. 1-7,13,14.


The Preacher has passed in review 'all the works that are done under
the sun,' and has now reached the end of his long investigation. It
has been a devious path. He has announced many provisional
conclusions, which are not intended for ultimate truths, but rather
represent the progress of the soul towards the final, sufficient
ground and object of belief and aim of all life, even God Himself.
'Vanity of vanities' is a cheerless creed and a half-truth. Its
completion lies in being driven, by recognising vanity as stamped on
all creatures, to clasp the one reality. 'All is vanity' apart from
God, but He is fullness, and possessed and enjoyed and endured in Him,
life is not 'a striving after wind.' Leave out this last section, and
this book of so-called 'Wisdom' is one-sided and therefore error, as
is modern pessimism, which only says more feebly what the Preacher had
said long ago. Take the rest of the book as the autobiography of a
seeker after reality, and this last section as his declaration of
where he had found it, and all the previous parts fall into their
right places.

Our passage omits the first portion of the closing section, which is
needed in order to set the counsel to remember the Creator in its
right relation. Observe that, properly rendered, the advice in verse 1
is 'remember also,' and that takes us back to the end of the preceding
chapter. There the young are exhorted to enjoy the bright, brief
blossom-time of their youth, withal keeping the consciousness of
responsibility for its employment. In earlier parts of the book
similar advice had been given, but based on different grounds. Here
religion and full enjoyment of youthful buoyancy and delight in fresh,
unhackneyed, homely pleasures are proclaimed to be perfectly
compatible. The Preacher had no idea that a devout young man or woman
was to avoid pleasures natural to their age. Only he wished their joy
to be pure, and the stern law that 'whatsoever a man soweth that shall
he also reap' to be kept in mind. Subject to that limitation, or
rather that guiding principle, it is not only allowable, but
commanded, to 'put away sorrow and evil.' Young people are often
liable to despondent moods, which come over them like morning mists,
and these have to be fought against. The duty of joy is the more
imperative on the young because youth flies so fast, or, as the
Preacher says,' is vanity.'

Now these advices sound very like the base incitements to sensual and
unworthy delight which poets of the meaner sort, and some, alas! of
the nobler in their meaner moments, have presented. But this writer is
no teacher of 'Gather ye rosebuds while ye may,' and wicked trash of
that sort. Therefore he brings side by side with these advices the
other of our passage. That 'also' saves the former from being misused,
just as the thought of judgment did.

That possible combination of hearty, youthful glee and true religion
is the all-important lesson of this passage. The word for Creator is
in the plural number, according to the Hebrew idiom, which thereby
expresses supremacy or excellence. The name of 'Creator' carries us
back to Genesis, and suggests one great reason for the injunction. It
is folly to forget Him on whom we depend for being; it is ingratitude
to forget, in the midst of the enjoyments of our bright, early days,
Him to whom we owe them all. The advice is specially needed; for youth
has so much, that is delightful in its novelty, to think about, and
the world, on both its innocent and its sinful side, appeals to it so
strongly, that the Creator is only too apt to be crowded out of view
by His works. The temptation of the young is to live in the present.
Reflection belongs to older heads; spontaneous action is more
characteristic of youth. Therefore, they specially need to make
efforts to bring clearly to their thoughts both the unseen future and
Him who is invisible. The advice is specially suitable for them; for
what is begun early is likely to last and be strong.

It is hard for older men, stiffened into habits, and with less power
and love of taking to new courses, to turn to God, if they have
forgotten Him in early days. Conversion is possible at any age, but it
is less likely as life goes on. The most of men who are Christians
have become so in the formative period between boyhood and thirty.
After that age, the probabilities of radical change diminish rapidly.
So, 'Remember ... in the days of thy youth,' or the likelihood is that
you will never remember. To say, 'I mean to have my fling, and I shall
turn over a new leaf when I am older,' is to run dreadful risk.
Perhaps you will never be older. Probably, if you are, you will not
want to turn the leaf. If you do, what a shame it is to plan to give
God only the dregs of life! You need Him, quite as much, if not more,
now in the flush of youth as in old age. Why should you rob yourself
of years of blessing, and lay up bitter memories of wasted and
polluted moments? If ever you turn to God in your older days, nothing
will be so painful as the remembrance that you forgot Him so long.

The advice is further important, because it presents the only means of
delivering life from the 'vanity' which the Preacher found in it all.
Therefore he sets it at the close of his meditations. This is the
practical outcome of them all. Forget God, and life is a desert.
Remember Him, and 'the desert will rejoice and blossom as the rose.'

The verses from the middle of verse 1 to the end of verse 7 enforce
the exhortation by the consideration of what will certainly follow
youth, and advise remembrance of the Creator before that future comes.
So much is clear, but the question of the precise meaning of these
verses is much too large for discussion here. The older explanation
takes them for an allegory representing the decay of bodily and mental
powers in old age, whilst others think that in them the advance of
death is presented under the image of an approaching storm. Wright, in
his valuable commentary, regards the description of the gradual waning
away of life in old age, in the first verses, as being set forth under
images drawn from the closing days of the Palestinian winter, which
are dreaded as peculiarly unhealthy, while verse 4_b_ and verse 5
present the advent of spring, and contrast the new life in animals and
plants with the feebleness of the man dying in his chamber and unable
to eat. Still another explanation is that the whole is part of a
dirge, to be taken literally, and describing the mourners in house and
garden. I venture, though with some hesitation, to prefer, on the
whole, the old allegorical theory, for reasons which it would be
impossible to condense here. It is by no means free from difficulty,
but is, as I think, less difficult than any of its rivals.

Interpreters who adopt it differ somewhat in the explanation of
particular details, but, on the whole, one can see in most of the
similes sufficient correspondence for a poet, however foreign to
modern taste such a long-drawn and minute allegory may be. 'The
keepers of the house' are naturally the arms; the 'strong men,' the
legs; the 'grinding women,' the teeth; the 'women who look out at the
windows,' the eyes; 'the doors shut towards the street,' either the
lips or, more probably, the ears. 'The sound of the grinding,' which
is 'low,' is by some taken to mean the feeble mastication of toothless
gums, in which case the 'doors' are the lips, and the figure of the
mill is continued. 'Arising at the voice of the bird' may describe the
light sleep or insomnia of old age; but, according to some, with an
alteration of rendering ('The voice riseth into a sparrow's'), it is
the 'childish treble' of Shakespeare. The former is the more probable
rendering and reference. The allegory is dropped in verse _5a_,
which describes the timid walk of the old, but is resumed in 'the
almond trees shall flourish'; that is, the hair is blanched, as the
almond blossom, which is at first delicate pink, but fades into white.
The next clause has an appropriate meaning in the common translation,
as vividly expressing the loss of strength, but it is doubtful whether
the verb here used ever means 'to be a burden.' The other explanations
of the clause are all strained. The next clause is best taken, as in
the Revised Version, as describing the failure of appetite, which the
stimulating caper-berry is unable to rouse. All this slow decay is
accounted for, 'because the man is going to his long home,' and
already the poet sees the mourners gathering for the funeral
procession.

The connection of the long-drawn-out picture of senile decay with the
advice to remember the Creator needs no elucidation. That period of
failing powers is no time to begin remembering God. How dreary, too,
it will be, if God is not the 'strength of the heart,' when 'heart and
flesh fail'! Therefore it is plain common sense, in view of the
future, not to put off to old age what will bless youth, and keep the
advent of old age from being wretched.

Verses 6 and 7 still more stringently enforce the precept by pointing,
not to the slow approach, but to the actual arrival of death. If a
future of possible weakness and gradual creeping in on us of death is
reason for the exhortation, much more is the certainty that the crash
of dissolution will come. The allegory is partially resumed in these
verses. The 'golden bowl' is possibly the head, and, according to
some, the 'silver cord' is the spinal marrow, while others think
rather of the bowl or lamp as meaning the body, and the cord the soul
which, as it were, holds it up. The 'pitcher' is the heart, and the
'wheel' the organs of respiration. Be this as it may, the general
thought is that death comes, shivering the precious reservoir of
light, and putting an end to drawing of life from the Fountain of
bodily life. Surely these are weighty reasons for the Preacher's
advice. Surely it is well for young hearts sometimes to remember the
end, and to ask, 'What will ye do in the end?' and to do before the
end what is so hard to begin doing at the end, and so needful to have
done if the end is not to be worse than 'vanity.'

The collapse of the body is not the end of the man, else the whole
force of the argument in the preceding verses would disappear. If
death is annihilation, what reason is there for seeking God before it
comes? Therefore verse 7 is no interpolation to bring a sceptical book
into harmony with orthodox Jewish belief, as some commentators affirm.
The 'contradiction' between it and Ecclesiastes iii. 21 is alleged as
proof of its having been thus added. But there is no contradiction.
The former passage is interrogative, and, like all the earlier part of
the book, sets forth, not the Preacher's ultimate convictions, but a
phase through which he passed on his way to these. It is because man
is twofold, and at death the spirit returns to its divine Giver, that
the exhortation of verse 1 is pressed home with such earnestness.

The closing verses are confidently asserted to be, like verse 7,
additions in the interests of Jewish 'orthodoxy.' But Ecclesiastes is
made out to be a 'sceptical book' by expelling these from the text,
and then the character thus established is taken to prove that they
are not genuine. It is a remarkably easy but not very logical process.

'The end of the matter' when all is heard, is, to 'fear God and keep
His commandments.' The inward feeling of reverent awe which does not
exclude love, and the outward life of conformity to His will, is 'the
whole duty of man,' or 'the duty of every man.' And that plain summary
of all that men need to know for practical guidance is enforced by the
consideration of future judgment, which, by its universal sweep and
all-revealing light, must mean the judgment in another life.

Happy they who, through devious mazes of thought and act, have
wandered seeking for the vision of any good, and having found all to
be vanity, have been led at last to rest, like the dove in the ark, in
the broad simplicity of the truth that all which any man needs for
blessedness in the buoyancy of fresh youthful strength and in the
feebleness of decaying age, in the stress of life, in the darkness of
death, and in the day of judgment, is to 'fear God and keep His
commandments'!










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture, by 
Alexander Maclaren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE ***

***** This file should be named 7883.txt or 7883.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/8/8/7883/

Produced by Tiffany Vergon, David King and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
