of the crowd that came round them could only speak in a tongue strange
to Luke, and are therefore called by him 'barbarians,' not as being
uncivilised, but as not speaking Greek. But they could speak the
eloquent language of kindness and pity. They were heathens, but they
were men. They had not come down to the wreck for plunder, as might
have been feared, but to help the unfortunates who were shivering on
the beach in the downpour of rain, and chilled to the bone by exposure.

As always, Paul fills Luke's canvas; the other two hundred and
seventy-five were ciphers. Two incidents, in which the Apostle appears
as protected by God from danger, and as a fountain of healing for
others, are all that is told of the three months' stay in Malta. Taken
together, these cover the whole ground of the Christian's place in the
world; he is an object of divine care, he is a medium of divine
blessing. In the former one, we see in Paul's activity in gathering his
bundle of brushwood an example of how he took the humblest duties on
himself, and was not hindered either by the false sense of dignity
which keeps smaller men from doing small things, as Chinese gentlemen
pride themselves on long nails as a token that they do no work, or by
the helplessness in practical matters which is sometimes natural to,
and often affected by, men of genius, from taking his share in common
duties.

The shipwreck took place in November probably, and the 'viper' had
curled itself up for its winter sleep, and had been lifted with the
twigs by Paul's hasty hand. Roused by the warmth, it darted at Paul's
hand before it could be withdrawn, and fixed its fangs. The sight of it
dangling there excited suspicions in the mind of the natives, who would
know that Paul was a prisoner, and so jumped to the conclusion that he
was a murderer pursued by the Goddess of Justice. These rude islanders
had consciences, which bore witness to a divine law of retribution.

However mistaken may be heathens' conceptions of what constitutes right
and wrong, they all know that it is wrong to do wrong, and the dim
anticipation of God-inflicted punishment is in their hearts. The swift
change of opinion about Paul is like, though it is the reverse of, what
the people of Lystra thought of him. _They_ first took him for a god,
and then for a criminal, worshipping him to-day and stoning him
to-morrow. This teaches us how unworthy the heathen conception of a
deity is, and how lightly the name was given. It may teach us too how
fickle and easily led popular judgments are, and how they are ever
prone to rush from one extreme to another, so that the people's idol of
one week is their abhorrence the next, and the applause and execration
are equally undeserved. These Maltese critics did what many of us are
doing with less excuse--arguing as to men's merits from their
calamities or successes. A good man may be stung by a serpent in the
act of doing a good thing; that does not prove him to be a monster. He
may be unhurt by what seems fatal; that does not prove him to be a god
or a saint.

The other incident recorded as occurring in Malta brings out the
Christian's relation to others as a source of healing. An interesting
incidental proof of Luke's accuracy is found in the fact that
inscriptions discovered in Malta show that the official title of the
governor was 'First of the Melitaeans.' The word here rendered 'chief'
is literally 'first.' Luke's precision is shown in another direction in
his diagnosis of the diseases of Publius's father, which are described
by technical medical terms. The healing seems to have been unasked.
Paul 'went in,' as if from a spontaneous wish to render help. There is
no record of any expectation or request from Publius.

Christians are to be 'like the dew on the grass, which waiteth not for
man,' but falls unsought. The manner of the healing brings out very
clearly its divine source, and Paul's part as being simply that of the
channel for God's power. He prays, and then lays his hands on the sick
man. There are no words assuring him of healing. God is invoked, and
then His power flows through the hands of the suppliant. So with all
our work for men in bringing the better cure with which we are
entrusted, we are but channels of the blessing, pipes through which the
water of life is brought to thirsty lips. Therefore prayer must precede
and accompany all Christian efforts to communicate the healing of the
Gospel; and the most gifted are but, like Paul, 'ministers through
whom' faith and salvation come.

The argument from silence is precarious, but the entire omission of
notice of evangelistic work in Melita is noteworthy. Probably the
Apostle as a prisoner was not free to preach Christ in any public
manner.

Ancient navigation was conducted in a leisurely fashion very strange to
us. Three months' delay in the island, rendered necessary by wintry
storms, would end about the early part of March, when the season for
safe sailing began. So the third ship which was used in this voyage set
sail. Luke notices its 'sign' as being that of the Twin Brethren, the
patrons of sailors, whose images were, no doubt, displayed on the bow,
just as to-day boats in that region often have a Madonna nailed on the
mast. Strange conjunction--Castor and Pollux on the prow, and Paul on
the deck!

Puteoli, on the bay of Naples, was the landing-place, and there, after
long confinement with uncongenial companions, the three Christians,
Paul, Aristarchus, and Luke, found brethren. We can understand the joy
of such a meeting, and can almost hear the narrative of perils which
would be poured into sympathetic ears. Observe that, according to what
seems the true reading, verse 14 says, 'We were consoled among them,
remaining seven days.' The centurion could scarcely delay his march to
please the Christians at Puteoli; and the thought that the Apostle,
whose spirit had never flagged while danger was near and effort was
needed, felt some tendency to collapse, and required cheering when the
strain was off, is as natural as it is pathetic.

So the whole company set off on their march to Rome--about a hundred
and forty miles. The week's delay in Puteoli would give time for
apprising the church in Rome of the Apostle's coming, and two parties
came out to meet him, one travelling as far as Appii Forum, about forty
Roman miles from the city; the other as far as 'The Three Taverns,'
some ten miles nearer it. The simple notice of the meeting is more
touching than many words would have been. It brings out again the
Apostle's somewhat depressed state, partly due, no doubt, to nervous
tension during the long and hazardous voyage, and partly to his
consciousness that the decisive moment was very near. But when he
grasped the hands and looked into the faces of the Roman brethren, whom
he had so long hungered to see, and to whom he had poured out his heart
in his letter, he 'thanked God, and took courage.' The most heroic
need, and are helped by, the sympathy of the humble. Luther was braced
for the Diet of Worms by the knight who clapped him on the back as he
passed in and spoke a hearty word of cheer.

There would be some old friends in the delegation of Roman Christians,
perhaps some of those who are named in Romans xvi., such as Priscilla
and Aquila, and the unnamed matron, Rufus's mother, whom Paul there
calls 'his mother and mine.' It would be an hour of love and effusion,
and the shadow of appearing before Caesar would not sensibly dim the
brightness. Paul saw God's hand in that glad meeting, as we should do
in all the sweetness of congenial intercourse. It was not only because
the welcomers were his friends that he was glad, but because they were
Christ's friends and servants. The Apostle saw in them the evidence
that the kingdom was advancing even in the world's capital, and under
the shadow of Caesar's throne, and that gladdened him and made him
forget personal anxieties. We too should be willing to sink our own
interests in the joy of seeing the spread of Christ's kingdom.

Paul turned thankfulness for the past and present into calm hope for
the future: 'He took courage.' There was much to discourage and to
excuse tremors and forebodings, but he had God and Christ with him, and
therefore he could front the uncertain future without flinching, and
leave all its possibilities in God's hands. Those who have such a past
as every Christian has should put fear far from them, and go forth to
meet any future with quiet hearts, and minds kept in perfect peace
because they are stayed on God.



THE LAST GLIMPSE OF PAUL

'And it came to pass, that, after three days, Paul called the chief of
the Jews together: and when they were come together, he said unto them,
Men and brethren, though I have committed nothing against the people or
customs of our fathers, yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem
into the hands of the Romans; 18. Who, when they had examined me, would
have let me go, because there was no cause of death in me. 19. But when
the Jews spake against it, I was constrained to appeal unto Caesar; not
that I had ought to accuse my nation of. 20. For this cause therefore
have I called for you, to see you, and to speak with you: because that
for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain. 21. And they said
unto him, We neither received letters out of Judaea concerning thee,
neither any of the brethren that came shewed or spake any harm of thee.
22. But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest: for as concerning
this sect, we know that everywhere it is spoken against. 23. And when
they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his lodging;
to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of God, persuading them
concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses, and out of the
prophets, from morning till evening. 24. And some believed the things
which were spoken, and some believed not. 25. And when they agreed not
among themselves, they departed, after that Paul had spoken one word,
Well spake the Holy Ghost by Esias the prophet unto our fathers, 26.
Saying, Go unto this people, and say. Hearing ye shall hear, and shall
not understand; and seeing ye shall see, and not perceive: 27. For the
heart of this people is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of
hearing, and their eyes have they closed; lest they should see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart,
and should be converted, and I should heal them. 28. Be it known
therefore unto you, that the salvation of God is sent unto the
Gentiles, and that they will hear it. 29. And when he had said these
words, the Jews departed, and had great reasoning among themselves. 30.
And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all
that came in unto him, 31. Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence,
no man forbidding him.'--ACTS xxviii. 17-31.

We have here our last certain glimpse of Paul. His ambition had long
been to preach in Rome, but he little knew how his desire was to be
fulfilled. We too are often surprised at the shape which God's answers
to our wishes take. Well for us if we take the unexpected or painful
events which accomplish some long-cherished purpose as cheerfully and
boldly as did Paul. We see him in this last glimpse as the centre of
three concentric widening circles.

I. We have Paul and the leaders of the Roman synagogue. He was not the
man to let the grass grow under his feet. After such a voyage a pause
would have been natural for a less eager worker; but three days were
all that he allowed himself, and these would, no doubt, be largely
occupied by intercourse with the Roman Christians, and with the
multitude of little things to be looked after on entering on his new
lodging. Paul had gifts that we have not, he exemplified many heroic
virtues which we are not called on to repeat; but he had eminently the
prosaic virtue of diligence and persistence in work, and the humblest
life affords a sphere in which that indispensable though homely
excellence of his can be imitated. What a long holiday some of us would
think we had earned, if we had come through what Paul had encountered
since he left Caesarea!

The summoning of the 'chief of the Jews' to him was a prudent
preparation for his trial rather than an evangelistic effort. It was
important to ascertain their feelings, and if possible to secure their
neutrality in regard to the approaching investigation. Hence the
Apostle seeks to put his case to them so as to show his true adherence
to the central principles of Judaism, insisting that he is guiltless of
revolt against either the nation or the law and traditional
observances; that he had been found innocent by the Palestinian
representatives of Roman authority; that his appeal to Caesar, which
would naturally seem hostile to the rulers in Jerusalem, was not meant
as an accusation of the nation to which he felt himself to belong, and
so was no sign of deficient patriotism, but had been forced on him as
his only means of saving his life.

It was a difficult course which he had to steer, and he picked his way
between the shoals with marvellous address. But his explanation of his
position is not only a skilful piece of _apologia_, but it embodies one
of his strongest convictions, which it is worth our while to grasp
firmly; namely, that Christianity is the true fulfilment and perfecting
of the old revelation. His declaration that, so far from his being a
deserter from Israel, he was a prisoner just because he was true to the
Messianic hope which was Israel's highest glory, was not a clever piece
of special pleading meant for the convincing of the Roman Jews, but was
a principle which runs through all his teaching. Christians were the
true Jews. He was not a recreant in confessing, but they were deserters
in denying, the fulfilment in Jesus of the hope which had shone before
the generation of 'the fathers.' The chain which bound him to the
legionary who 'kept him,' and which he held forth as he spoke, was the
witness that he was still 'an Hebrew of the Hebrews.'

The heads of the Roman synagogue went on the tack of non-committal, as
was quite natural. They were much too astute to accept at once an _ex
parte_ statement, and so took refuge in professing ignorance. Probably
they knew a good deal more than they owned. Their statement has been
called 'unhistorical,' and, oddly enough, has been used to discredit
Luke's narrative. It is a remarkable canon of criticism that a reporter
is responsible for the truthfulness of assertions which he reports, and
that, if he has occasion to report truthfully an untruth, he is
convicted of the untruth which he truthfully reports. Luke is
responsible for telling what these people found it convenient to say;
they are responsible for its veracity. But they did not say quite as
much as is sometimes supposed. As the Revised Version shows, they
simply said that they had not had any official deputation or report
about Paul, which is perfectly probable, as it was extremely unlikely
that any ship leaving after Paul's could have reached Italy. They may
have known a great deal about him, but they had no information to act
upon about his trial. Their reply is plainly shaped so as to avoid
expressing any definite opinion or pledging themselves to any course of
action till they do hear from 'home.'

They are politely cautious, but they cannot help letting out some of
their bile in their reference to 'this sect.' Paul had said nothing
about it, and their allusion betrays a fuller knowledge of him and it
than it suited their plea for delay to own. Their wish to hear what he
thought sounded very innocent and impartial, but was scarcely the voice
of candid seekers after truth. They must have known of the existence of
the Roman Church, which included many Jews, and they could scarcely be
ignorant of the beliefs on which it was founded; but they probably
thought that they would hear enough from Paul in the proposed
conference to enable them to carry the synagogue with them in doing all
they could to procure his condemnation. He had hoped to secure at least
their neutrality; they seem to have been preparing to join his enemies.
The request for full exposition of a prisoner's belief has often been
but a trap to ensure his martyrdom. But we have to 'be ready to give to
every man a reason for the hope that is in us,' even when the motive
for asking it may be anything but the sincere desire to learn.

II. Therefore Paul was willing to lay his heart's belief open, whatever
doing so might bring. So the second circle forms round him, and we have
him preaching the Gospel to 'many' of the Jews. He could not go to the
synagogue, so much of the synagogue came to him. The usual method was
pursued by Paul in arguing from the old revelation, but we may note the
twofold manner of his preaching, 'testifying' and 'persuading,' the
former addressed more to the understanding, and the latter to the
affections and will, and may learn how Christian teachers should seek
to blend both--to work their arguments, not in frost, but in fire, and
not to bully or scold or frighten men into the Kingdom, but to draw
them with cords of love. Persuasion without a basis of solid reasoning
is puerile and impotent; reasoning without the warmth of persuasion is
icy cold, and therefore nothing grows from it.

Note too the protracted labour 'from morning till evening.' One can
almost see the eager disputants spending the livelong day over the
rolls of the prophets, relays of Rabbis, perhaps, relieving one another
in the assault on the one opponent's position, and he holding his
ground through all the hours--a pattern for us teachers of all degrees.

The usual effects followed. The multitude was sifted by the Gospel, as
its hearers always are, some accepting and some rejecting. These double
effects ever follow it, and to one or other of these two classes we
each belong. The same fire melts wax and hardens clay; the same light
is joy to sound eyes and agony to diseased ones; the same word is a
savour of life unto life and a savour of death unto death; the same
Christ is set for the fall and for the rising of men, and is to some
the sure foundation on which they build secure, and to some the stone
on which, stumbling, they are broken, and which, falling on them,
grinds them to powder.

Paul's solemn farewell takes up Isaiah's words, already used by Jesus.
It is his last recorded utterance to his brethren after the flesh,
weighty, and full of repressed yearning and sorrow. It is heavy with
prophecy, and marks an epoch in the sad, strange history of that
strange nation. Israel passes out of sight with that dread sentence
fastened to its breast, like criminals of old, on whose front was fixed
the record of their crimes and their condemnation. So this tragic
self-exclusion from hope and life is the end of all that wondrous
history of ages of divine revelation and patience, and of man's
rebellion. The Gospel passes to the Gentiles, and the Jew shuts himself
out. So it has been for nineteen centuries. Was not that scene in
Paul's lodging in Rome the end of an epoch and the prediction of a sad
future?

III. Not less significant and epoch-making is the glimpse of Paul which
closes the Acts. We have the third concentric circle--Paul and the
multitudes who came to his house and heard the Gospel. We note two
points here. First, that his unhindered preaching in the very heart of
the world's capital for two whole years is, in one aspect, the
completion of the book. As Bengel tersely says, 'The victory of the
word of God, Paul at Rome. The apex of the Gospel, the end of Acts.'

But, second, as clearly, the ending is abrupt, and is not a satisfying
close. The lengthened account of the whole process of Paul's
imprisonments and hearings before the various Roman authorities is most
unintelligible if Luke intended to break off at the very crucial point,
and say nothing about the event to which he had been leading up for so
many chapters. There is much probability in Ramsay's suggestion that
Luke intended to write a third book, containing the account of the
trial and subsequent events, but was prevented by causes unknown,
perhaps by martyrdom. Be that as it may, these two verses, with some
information pieced out of the Epistles written during the imprisonment,
are all that we know of Paul's life in Rome. From Philippians we learn
that the Gospel spread by reason of the earlier stages of his trial.
From the other Epistles we can collect some particulars of his
companions, and of the oversight which he kept up of the Churches.

The picture here drawn lays hold, not on anything connected with his
trial, but on his evangelistic activity, and shows us how,
notwithstanding all hindrances, anxieties about his fate, weariness,
and past toils, the flame of evangelistic fervour burned undimmed in
'Paul the aged,' as the flame of mistaken zeal had burned in the 'young
man named Saul,' and how the work which had filled so many years of
wandering and homelessness was carried on with all the old joyfulness,
confidence, and success, from the prisoner's lodging. In such
unexpected fashion did God fulfil the Apostle's desire to 'preach the
Gospel to you that are at Rome also.' To preach the word with all
boldness is the duty of us Christians who have entered into the
heritage of fuller freedom than Paul's, and of whom it is truer than of
him that we can do it, 'no man forbidding' us.



PAUL IN ROME

And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all
that came in unto him, 31. Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching
those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence,
no man forbidding him.'--ACTS xxviii. 30, 31.

So ends this book. It stops rather than ends. Many reasons might be
suggested for closing here. Probably the simplest is the best, that
nothing more is said for nothing more had yet been done. Probably the
book was written during these two years. This abrupt close suggests
several noteworthy thoughts.

I. The true theme of the book.

How convenient if Luke had told us a little more! But Paul's history is
unfinished, like Peter's and John's. This book's treatment of all the
Apostles teaches, as we have often had to remark, that Christ and His
acts are its true subject.

We are wise if we learn the lesson of keeping all human teachers, even
a Paul, in their inferior place, and if we say of each of them: 'He was
not the Light, but came that he might bear witness of the Light.'

II. God's unexpected and unwelcome ways of fulfilling our desires, and
His purposes.

It had long been Paul's dream to 'see Rome.' How little he knew the
steps by which his dream was to be fulfilled! He told the Ephesian
elders that he was going up to Jerusalem under compulsion of the
Spirit, and 'not knowing the things that should befall him there,'
except that he was certain of 'bonds and imprisonment.' He did not know
that these were God's way of bringing him to Rome. Jewish fury, Roman
statecraft and law-abidingness, two years of a prison, a stormy voyage,
a shipwreck, led him to his long-wished-for goal. God uses even man's
malice and opposition to the Gospel to advance the progress of the
Gospel. Men, like coral insects, build their little bit, all unaware of
the whole of which it is a part, but the reef rises above the waves and
ocean breaks against it in vain.

So we may gather lessons of submission, of patient acceptance of
apparently adverse circumstances, and of quiet faith that He who 'makes
stormy winds to fulfil His word and flaming fires His ministers,' will
bend to the carrying out of His designs all things, be they seemingly
friendly or hostile, and will realise our dreams, if in accordance with
His will, even through events which seem to shatter them. Let us trust
and be patient till we see the issues of events.

III. The world's mistaken estimate of greatness.

Who was the greatest man in Rome at that hour? Not the Caesar but the
poor Jewish prisoner. How astonished both would have been if they had
been told the truth! The two kingdoms were, so to speak, set face to
face in these two, their representatives, and neither of them knew his
own relative importance. The Caesar was all unaware that, for all his
legions and his power, he was but 'a noise'; Paul was as unconscious
that he was incomparably the most powerful of the influences that were
then at work in the world. The haughty and stolid eyes of Romans saw in
him nothing but a prisoner, sent up from a turbulent subject land on
some obscure charge, a mere nobody. The crowds in forum and
amphitheatre would have laughed at any one who had pointed to that
humble 'hired house,' and said, 'There lodges a man who bears a word
that will shatter and remould the city, the Empire, the world.'

Let us have confidence in the greatness of the word, though the world
may be deaf to its music and blind to its power, and let us never fear
to ally ourselves with a cause which we know to be God's, however it
may be unpopular and made light of by the 'leaders of opinion.'

IV. The true relation between the Church and the State.

'None forbidding him' marks a great step forward. Paul's unhindered
freedom of speech in Rome itself marks 'the victory of the word, the
apex of the Gospel.' The neutral attitude of the imperial power was,
indeed, broken by subsequent persecutions, but we may say that on the
whole Rome let Christianity alone. That is the best service that the
State can render to the Church. Anything more is help which encumbers
and is harmful to the true spiritual power of the Gospel. The real
requirement which it makes on the civil power is simply what the Greek
philosopher asked of the king who was proffering his good offices,
'Stand out of the sunshine!'










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Expositions of Holy Scripture: The Acts, by 
Alexander Maclaren

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EXPOSITIONS OF HOLY SCRIPTURE ***

***** This file should be named 8397.txt or 8397.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/3/9/8397/

Produced by Charles Franks, John Hagerson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

