
Nay, it were well if the charge rested here: but it is certain it does
not. It can not be denied that it frequently glances from Adam to his
Creator. Have not thousands, even of those that are called Christians,
taken the liberty to call His mercy, if not His justice also, into
question, on this very account? Some indeed have done this a little
more modestly, in an oblique and indirect manner: but others have
thrown aside the mask, and asked, "Did not God foresee that Adam would
abuse his liberty? And did He not know the baneful consequences which
this must naturally have on all his posterity? And why then did He
permit that disobedience? Was it not easy for the Almighty to have
prevented it?" He certainly did foresee the whole. This can not be
denied. "For known unto God are all His works from the beginning of
the world." And it was undoubtedly in His Power to prevent it; for He
hath all power both in heaven and earth. But it was known to Him at
the same time, that it was best upon the whole not to prevent it. He
knew that, "not as the transgression, so is the free gift"; that the
evil resulting from the former was not as the good resulting from the
latter, not worthy to be compared with it. He saw that to permit
the fall of the first man was far best for mankind in general; that
abundantly more good than evil would accrue to the posterity of Adam
by his fall; that if "sin abounded" thereby over all the earth, yet
grace "would much more abound"; yea, and that to every individual of
the human race, unless it was his own choice.

It is exceedingly strange that hardly anything has been written, or
at least published, on this subject: nay, that it has been so little
weighed or understood by the generality of Christians: especially
considering that it is not a matter of mere curiosity, but a truth of
the deepest importance; it being impossible, on any other principle,

  To assert a gracious Providence,
  And justify the ways of God with men:

and considering withal, how plain this important truth is, to all
sensible and candid inquirers. May the Lover of men open the eyes
of our understanding, to perceive clearly that by the fall of Adam
mankind in general have gained a capacity,

First, of being more holy and happy on earth, and,

Secondly, of being more happy in heaven than otherwise they could have
been.

And, first, mankind in general have gained by the fall of Adam a
capacity of attaining more holiness and happiness on earth than it
would have been possible for them to attain if Adam had not fallen.
For if Adam had not fallen, Christ had not died. Nothing can be more
clear than this: nothing more undeniable: the more thoroughly we
consider the point, the more deeply shall we be convinced of it.
Unless all the partakers of human nature had received that deadly
wound in Adam it would not have been needful for the Son of God to
take our nature upon Him. Do you not see that this was the very ground
of His coming into the world? "By one man sin entered into the world,
and death by sin. And thus death passed upon all" through him, "in
whom all men sinned." (Rom. v., 12.) Was it not to remedy this very
thing that "the Word was made flesh"? that "as in Adam all died, so
in Christ all might be made alive"? Unless, then, many had been made
sinners by the disobedience of one, by the obedience of one many would
not have been made righteous (ver. 18); so there would have been no
room for that amazing display of the Son of God's love to mankind.
There would have been no occasion for His "being obedient unto death,
even the death of the cross." It would not then have been said, to the
astonishment of all the hosts of heaven, "God so loved the world,"
yea, the ungodly world, which had no thought or desire of returning to
Him, "that he gave his Son" out of His bosom, His only begotten Son,
to the end that "whosoever believeth on him should not perish, but
have everlasting life." Neither could we then have said, "God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself"; or that He "made him to be
sin," that is, a sin-offering "for us, who know no sin, that we might
be made the righteousness of God through him." There would have been
no such occasion for such "an advocate with the Father" as "Jesus
Christ the Righteous"; neither for His appearing "at the right hand of
God, to make intercession for us."

What is the necessary consequence of this? It is this: there could
then have been no such thing as faith in God, thus loving the world,
giving His only Son for us men, and for our salvation. There could
have been no such thing as faith in the Son of God, as loving us and
giving Himself for us. There could have been no faith in the Spirit of
God, as renewing the image of God in our hearts, as raising us from
the death of sin unto the life of righteousness. Indeed, the whole
privilege of justification by faith could have no existence; there
could have been no redemption in the blood of Christ: neither could
Christ have been "made of God unto us," "wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, or redemption."

And the same grand blank which was in our faith, must likewise have
been in our love. We might have loved the Author of our being, the
Father of angels and men, as our Creator and Preserver: we might have
said, "O Lord our Governor, how excellent is Thy name in all the
earth!" But we could not have loved Him under the nearest and dearest
relation, as delivering up His Son for us all. We might have loved
the Son of God, as being the "brightness of his Father's glory," the
express image of His person (altho this ground seems to belong rather
to the inhabitants of heaven than earth). But we could not have loved
Him as "bearing our sins in his own body on the tree," and "by
that one oblation of himself once offered, making a full oblation,
sacrifice, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world." We would
not have been "made conformable to his death," nor have known "the
power of his resurrection." We could not have loved the Holy Ghost as
revealing to us the Father and the Son, as opening the eyes of our
understanding, bringing us out of darkness into His marvelous light,
renewing the image of God in our soul, and sealing us unto the day of
redemption. So that, in truth, what is now "in the sight of God, even
the Father," not of fallible men "pure religion and undefiled," would
then, have had no being: inasmuch as it wholly depends on those grand
principles, "By grace ye are saved through faith"; and "Jesus Christ
is of God made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification,
and redemption."

We see then what unspeakable advantage we derive from the fall of our
first parent, with regard to faith: faith both in God the Father,
who spared not His own Son, His only Son, but wounded Him for our
transgressions and bruised Him for our iniquities; and in God the Son,
who poured out His soul for us transgressors, and washed us in His own
blood. We see what advantage we derive therefrom with regard to the
love of God, both of God the Father and God the Son. The chief ground
of this love, as long as we remain in the body, is plainly declared
by the apostle, "We love him, because he first loved us." But the
greatest instance of His love had never been given if Adam had not
fallen.

And as our faith, both in God the Father and the Son, receives an
unspeakable increase, if not its very being, from this grand event, as
does also our love both of the Father and the Son: so does the love of
our neighbor also, our benevolence to all mankind: which can not but
increase in the same proportion with our faith and love of God. For
who does not apprehend the force of that inference drawn by the loving
apostle, "Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one
another." If God so loved us--observe, the stress of the argument lies
on this very point: so loved us! as to deliver up His only Son to die
a curst death for our salvation. "Beloved, what manner of love is
this," wherewith God hath loved us? So as to give His only Son! In
glory equal with the Father: in majesty coeternal! What manner of love
is this wherewith the only begotten Son of God hath loved us, as to
empty Himself, as far as possible, of His eternal Godhead; as to
divest Himself of that glory, which He had with the Father before the
world began; as to take upon Him "the form of a servant, being found
in fashion as a man"! And then to humble Himself still further, "being
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross"! If God so loved us,
how ought we to love one another? But this motive to brotherly love
had been totally wanting if Adam had not fallen. Consequently we could
not then have loved one another in so high a degree as we may now.
Nor could there have been that height and depth in the command of our
blest Lord. "As I have loved you, so love one another."

Such gainers may we be by Adam's fall, with regard both to the love of
God and of our neighbor. But there is another grand point, which, tho
little adverted to, deserves our deepest consideration. By that one
act of our first parent, not only "sin entered into the world," but
pain also, and was alike entailed on his whole posterity. And herein
appeared, not only the justice, but the unspeakable goodness of God.
For how much good does He continually bring out of this evil! How much
holiness and happiness out of pain!

How innumerable are the benefits which God conveys to the children of
men through the channel of sufferings! so that it might well be said,
"What are termed afflictions in the language of men, are in the
language of God styled blessings." Indeed, had there been no suffering
in the world, a considerable part of religion, yea, and in some
respects, the most excellent part, could have no place therein: since
the very existence of it depends on our suffering: so that had there
been no pain it could have had no being. Upon this foundation, even
our suffering, it is evident all our passive graces are built; yea,
the noblest of all Christian graces, love enduring all things. Here is
the ground for resignation to God, enabling us to say from the heart,
and in every trying hour, "It is the Lord: let him do what seemeth him
good." "Shall we receive good at the hand of the Lord, and shall we
not receive evil?" And what a glorious spectacle is this? Did it not
constrain even a heathen to cry out, "_Ecce spectaculum Deo dignum!_
See a sight worthy of God: a good man struggling with adversity, and
superior to it." Here is the ground for confidence in God, both with
regard to what we feel, and with regard to what we should fear, were
it not that our soul is calmly stayed on him. What room could there
be for trust in God if there was no such thing as pain or danger? Who
might not say then, "The cup which my Father hath given me, shall
I not drink it?" It is by sufferings that our faith is tried, and,
therefore, made more acceptable to God. It is in the day of trouble
that we have occasion to say, "Tho he slay me, yet will I trust in
him." And this is well pleasing to God, that we should own Him in the
face of danger; in defiance of sorrow, sickness, pain, or death.

Again: Had there been neither natural nor moral evil in the
world, what must have become of patience, meekness, gentleness,
long-suffering? It is manifest they could have had no being: seeing
all these have evil for their object. If, therefore, evil had never
entered into the world, neither could these have had any place in it.
For who could have returned good for evil, had there been no evil-doer
in the universe? How had it been possible, on that supposition, to
overcome evil with good? Will you say, "But all these graces might
have been divinely infused into the hearts of men?" Undoubtedly they
might: but if they had, there would have been no use or exercise for
them. Whereas in the present state of things we can never long want
occasion to exercise them. And the more they are exercised, the
more all our graces are strengthened and increased. And in the same
proportion as our resignation, our confidence in God, our patience and
fortitude, our meekness, gentleness, and long-suffering, together
with our faith and love of God and man increase, must our happiness
increase, even in the present world.

Yet again: As God's permission of Adam's fall gave all his posterity
a thousand opportunities of suffering, and thereby of exercising all
those passive graces which increase both their holiness and happiness,
so it gives them opportunities of doing good in numberless instances,
of exercising themselves in various good works, which otherwise could
have had no being. And what exertions of benevolence, of compassion,
of godlike mercy, had then been totally prevented! Who could then have
said to the lover of men,

  Thy mind throughout my life be shown,
    While listening to the wretches' cry,
  The widow's or the orphan's groan;
    On mercy's wings I swiftly fly
  The poor and needy to relieve;
    Myself, my all, for them to give?

It is the just observation of a benevolent man,

  --All worldly joys are less,
  Than that one joy of doing kindnesses.

Surely in keeping this commandment, if no other, there is great
reward. "As we have time, let us do good unto all men;" good of every
kind and in every degree. Accordingly the more good we do (other
circumstances being equal), the happier we shall be. The more we deal
our bread to the hungry, and cover the naked with garments; the more
we relieve the stranger, and visit them that are sick or in prison;
the more kind offices we do to those that groan under the various
evils of human life; the more comfort we receive even in the present
world; the greater the recompense we have in our own bosom.

To sum up what has been said under this head: As the more holy we are
upon earth, the more happy we must be (seeing there is an inseparable
connection between holiness and happiness); as the more good we do to
others, the more of present reward rebounds into our own bosom:
even as our sufferings for God lead us to rejoice in Him "with joy
unspeakable and full of glory"; therefore, the fall of Adam, first, by
giving us an opportunity of being far more holy; secondly, by giving
us the occasions of doing innumerable good works, which otherwise
could not have been done; and, thirdly, by putting it into our power
to suffer for God, whereby "the spirit of glory and of God rests upon
us": may be of such advantage to the children of men, even in the
present life, as they will not thoroughly comprehend till they attain
life everlasting.

It is then we shall be enabled fully to comprehend not only the
advantages which accrue at the present time to the sons of men by the
fall of their first parent, but the infinitely greater advantages
which they may reap from it in eternity. In order to form some
conception of this, we may remember the observation of the apostle,
"As one star differeth from another star in glory, so also is the
resurrection of the dead." The most glorious stars will undoubtedly
be those who are the most holy; who bear most of that image of God
wherein they were created. The next in glory to these will be those
who have been most abundant in good works: and next to them, those
that have suffered most, according to the will of God. But what
advantages in every one of these respects will the children of God
receive in heaven, by God's permitting the introduction of pain upon
earth, in consequence of sin? By occasion of this they attained many
holy tempers, which otherwise could have had no being: resignation
to God, confidence in him in times of trouble and danger, patience,
meekness, gentleness, long-suffering, and the whole train of passive
virtues. And on account of this superior holiness they will then
enjoy superior happiness. Again: every one will then "receive his
own reward, according to his own labor." Every individual will
be "rewarded according to his work." But the Fall gave rise to
innumerable good works, which could otherwise never have existed, such
as ministering to the necessities of the saints, yea, relieving the
distrest in every kind. And hereby innumerable stars will be added to
their eternal crown. Yet again: there will be an abundant reward in
heaven, for suffering as well as for doing, the will of God: "these
light afflictions, which are but for a moment, work out for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." Therefore that event,
which occasioned the entrance of suffering into the world, has thereby
occasioned to all the children of God, an increase of glory to all
eternity. For altho the sufferings themselves will be at an end: altho

  The pain of life shall then be o'er,
    The anguish and distracting care;
  The sighing grief shall weep no more;
    And sin shall never enter there:--

yet the joys occasioned thereby shall never end, but flow at God's
right hand for evermore.

There is one advantage more that we reap from Adam's fall, which is
not unworthy our attention. Unless in Adam all had died, being in the
loins of their first parent, every descendant of Adam, every child of
man, must have personally answered for himself to God: it seems to
be a necessary consequence of this, that if he had once fallen, once
violated any command of God, there would have been no possibility of
his rising again; there was no help, but he must have perished without
remedy. For that covenant knew not to show mercy: the word was, "The
soul that sinneth, it shall die." Now who would not rather be on the
footing he is now; under a covenant of mercy? Who would wish to hazard
a whole eternity upon one stake? Is it not infinitely more desirable,
to be in a state wherein, tho encompassed with infirmities, yet we
do not run such a desperate risk, but if we fall, we may rise again?
Wherein we may say,

  My trespass is grown up to heaven!
    But, far above the skies,
  In Christ abundantly forgiven,
    I see Thy mercies rise!

In Christ! Let me entreat every serious person, once more to fix his
attention here. All that has been said, all that can be said, on these
subjects, centers in this point. The fall of Adam produced the death
of Christ! Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth! Yea,

  Let earth and heaven agree,
    Angels and men be joined,
  To celebrate with me
    The Saviour of mankind;
  To adore the all-atoning Lamb,
  And bless the sound of Jesus' name!

If God had prevented the fall of man, the Word had never been made
flesh: nor had we ever "seen his glory, the glory as of the only
begotten of the Father." Those mysteries had never been displayed,
"which the very angels desire to look into." Methinks this
consideration swallows up all the rest, and should never be out of
our thoughts. Unless "by one man, judgment had come upon all men to
condemnation," neither angels nor men could ever have known "the
unsearchable riches of Christ."

See then, upon the whole, how little reason we have to repine at
the fall of our first parent, since herefrom we may derive such
unspeakable advantages, both in time and eternity. See how small
pretense there is for questioning the mercy of God in permitting
that event to take place, since therein, mercy, by infinite degrees,
rejoices over judgment! Where, then, is the man that presumes to blame
God for not preventing Adam's sin? Should we not rather bless Him from
the ground of the heart, for therein laying the grand scheme of man's
redemption, and making way for that glorious manifestation of His
wisdom, holiness, justice, and mercy? If indeed God had decreed before
the foundation of the world that millions of men should dwell in
everlasting burnings, because Adam sinned, hundreds or thousands of
yours before they had a being, I know not who could thank him for
this, unless the devil and his angels: seeing, on this supposition,
all those millions of unhappy spirits would be plunged into hell by
Adam's sin, without any possible advantage from it. But, blest be God,
this is not the case. Such a decree never existed. On the contrary,
every one born of a woman may be an unspeakable gainer thereby; and
none ever was or can be a loser, but by his own choice.

We see here a full answer to that plausible account "of the origin of
evil," published to the world some years since, and supposed to be
unanswerable: that it "necessarily resulted from the nature of
matter, which God was not able to alter." It is very kind in this
sweet-tongued orator to make an excuse for God! But there is really no
occasion for it: God hath answered for Himself. He made man in His own
image, a spirit endued with understanding and liberty. Man abusing
that liberty, produced evil, brought sin and pain into the world.
This God permitted, in order to a fuller manifestation of His wisdom,
justice, and mercy, by bestowing on all who would receive it an
infinitely greater happiness than they could possibly have attained if
Adam had not fallen.

"Oh, the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God!"
Altho a thousand particulars of His judgments, and of His ways are
unsearchable to us, and past our finding out, yet we may discern the
general scheme running through time into eternity. "According to the
council of his own will," the plan He had laid before the foundation
of the world, He created the parent of all mankind in His own image.
And He permitted all men to be made sinners by the disobedience of
this one man, that, by the obedience of One, all who receive the free
gift may be infinitely holier and happier to all eternity!



WHITEFIELD

THE METHOD OF GRACE

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


George Whitefield, evangelist and leader of Calvinistic Methodists,
who has been called the Demosthenes of the pulpit, was born at
Gloucester, England, in 1714. He was an impassioned pulpit orator of
the popular type, and his power over immense congregations was largely
due to his histrionic talent and his exquisitely modulated voice,
which has been described as "an organ, a flute, a harp, all in one,"
and which at times became stentorian. He had a most expressive face,
and altho he squinted, in grace and significance of gesture he knew
perfectly how to "suit the action to the word." But he had not the
style or scholarship of Wesley, and his printed sermons do not fully
bear out his reputation. Whitefield died in 1770.




WHITEFIELD

1714--1770

THE METHOD OF GRACE

_They have healed also the hurt of the daughter of my people slightly,
saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace_.--Jeremiah vi., 14.


As God can send a nation or people no greater blessing than to give
them faithful, sincere, and upright ministers, so the greatest curse
that God can possibly send upon a people in this world is to give them
over to blind, unregenerate, carnal, lukewarm, and unskilful guides.
And yet, in all ages, we find that there have been many wolves in
sheep's clothing, many that daubed with untempered mortar, that
prophesied smoother things than God did allow. As it was formerly,
so it is now; there are many that corrupt the word of God and deal
deceitfully with it. It was so in a special manner in the prophet
Jeremiah's time; and he, faithful to his Lord, faithful to that God
who employed him, did not fail from time to time to open his mouth
against them, and to bear a noble testimony to the honor of that
God in whose name he from time to time spake. If you will read his
prophecy, you will find that none spake more against such ministers
than Jeremiah, and here especially in the chapter out of which the
text is taken he speaks very severely against them. He charges them
with several crimes; particularly he charges them with covetousness:
"For," says he, in the thirteenth verse, "from the least of them even
to the greatest of them, every one is given to covetousness; and from
the prophet even unto the priest, every one dealeth falsely."

And then, in the words of the text, in a more special manner he
exemplifies how they had dealt falsely, how they had behaved
treacherously to poor souls: says he, "They have healed also the hurt
of the daughter of my people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when
there is no peace." The prophet, in the name of God, had been
denouncing war against the people; he had been telling them that their
house should be left desolate, and that the Lord would certainly visit
the land with war. "Therefore," says he, in the eleventh verse, "I am
full of the fury of the Lord; I am weary with holding in; I will pour
it out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly of young men
together; for even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged
with him that is full of days. And their houses shall be turned unto
others, with their fields and wives together; for I will stretch out
my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord."

The prophet gives a thundering message, that they might be terrified
and have some convictions and inclinations to repent; but it seems
that the false prophets, the false priests, went about stifling
people's convictions, and when they were hurt or a little terrified,
they were for daubing over the wound, telling them that Jeremiah was
but an enthusiastic preacher, that there could be no such thing as war
among them, and saying to people, Peace, peace, be still, when the
prophet told them there was no peace.

The words, then, refer primarily unto outward things, but I verily
believe have also a further reference to the soul, and are to
be referred to those false teachers who, when people were under
conviction of sin, when people were beginning to look toward heaven,
were for stifling their convictions and telling them they were good
enough before. And, indeed, people generally love to have it so; our
hearts are exceedingly deceitful and desperately wicked; none but the
eternal God knows how treacherous they are.

How many of us cry, Peace, peace, to our souls, when there is no
peace! How many are there who are now settled upon their lees, that
now think they are Christians, that now flatter themselves that they
have an interest in Jesus Christ; whereas if we come to examine their
experiences we shall find that their peace is but a peace of the
devil's making--it is not a peace of God's giving--it is not a peace
that passeth human understanding.

It is a matter, therefore, of great importance, my dear hearers, to
know whether we may speak peace to our hearts. We are all desirous
of peace; peace is an unspeakable blessing; how can we live without
peace? And, therefore, people from time to time must be taught how far
they must go and what must be wrought in them before they can speak
peace to their hearts. This is what I design at present, that I may
deliver my soul, that I may be free from the blood of all those to
whom I preach--that I may not fail to declare the whole counsel of
God. I shall, from the words of the text, endeavor to show you what
you must undergo and what must be wrought in you before you can speak
peace to your hearts.

But before I come directly to this give me leave to premise a caution
or two.

And the first is, that I take it for granted you believe religion to
be an inward thing; you believe it to be a work of the heart, a work
wrought in the soul by the power of the Spirit of God. If you do not
believe this, you do not believe your Bibles. If you do not believe
this, tho you have got your Bibles in your hand, you hate the Lord
Jesus Christ in your heart; for religion is everywhere represented
in Scripture as the work of God in the heart. "The kingdom of God is
within us," says our Lord; and, "he is not a Christian who is one
outwardly; but he is a Christian who is one inwardly." If any of you
place religion in outward things, I shall not perhaps please you this
morning; you will understand me no more when I speak of the work of
God upon a poor sinner's heart than if I were talking in an unknown
tongue.

I would further premise a caution, that I would by no means confine
God to one way of acting. I would by no means say that all persons,
before they come to have a settled peace in their hearts, are obliged
to undergo the same degrees of conviction. No; God has various ways of
bringing His children home; His sacred Spirit bloweth when, and where,
and how it listeth. But, however, I will venture to affirm this: that
before ever you can speak peace to your heart, whether by shorter or
longer continuance of your convictions, whether in a more pungent or
in a more; gentle way, you must undergo what I shall hereafter lay
down in the following discourse.

First, then, before you can speak peace to your hearts, you must be
made to see, made to feel, made to weep over, made to bewail, your
actual transgressions against the law of God. According to the
covenant of works, "the soul that sinneth it shall die"; curst is that
man, be he what he may, be he who he may, that continueth not in all
things that are written in the book of the law to do them.

We are not only to do some things, but we are to do all things, and we
are to continue to do so, so that the least deviation from the moral
law, according to the covenant of works, whether in thought, word,
or deed, deserves eternal death at the hand of God. And if one evil
thought, if one evil word, if one evil action deserves eternal
damnation, how many hells, my friends, do every one of us deserve
whose whole lives have been one continued rebellion against God!
Before ever, therefore, you can speak peace to your hearts, you must
be brought to see, brought to believe, what a dreadful thing it is to
depart from the living God.

And now, my dear friends, examine your hearts, for I hope you came
hither with a design to have your souls made better. Give me leave to
ask you, in the presence of God, whether you know the time, and if you
do not know exactly the time, do you know there was a time when God
wrote bitter things against you, when the arrows of the Almighty were
within you? Was ever the remembrance of your sins grievous to you? Was
the burden of your sins intolerable to your thoughts? Did you ever see
that God's wrath might justly fall upon you, on account of your actual
transgressions against God? Were you ever in all your life sorry for
your sins? Could you ever say, My sins are gone over my head as a
burden too heavy for me to bear? Did you ever experience any such
thing as this? Did ever any such thing as this pass between God and
your soul? If not, for Jesus Christ's sake, do not call yourselves
Christians; you may speak peace to your hearts, but there is no peace.
May the Lord awaken you, may the Lord convert you, may the Lord give
you peace, if it be His will, before you go home!

But, further, you may be convinced of your actual sins, so as to be
