that that comparison is unsuitable, because the Self is not material
like the sun, and there are no real upadhis separate from it as the
water is from the sun; for the comparison merely means to indicate that,
as the reflected image of the sun participates in the changes, increase,
decrease, &c., which the water undergoes while the sun himself remains
unaffected thereby, so the true Self is not affected by the attributes
of the upadhis, while, in so far as it is limited by the latter, it is
affected by them as it were (19, 20).--That the Self is within the
upadhis, Scripture declares (21).

From the above explanation of this important adhikara/n/a the one given
in the Sri-bhashya differs totally. According to Ramanuja the
adhikara/n/a raises the question whether the imperfections clinging to
the individual soul (the discussion of which has now come to an end)
affect also the highest Lord who, according to Scripture, abides within
the soul as antaryamin. 'Notwithstanding the abode (of the highest Self
within the soul) (it is) not (affected by the soul's imperfections)
because everywhere (the highest Self is represented) as having twofold
characteristics (viz. being, on one hand, free from all evil,
apahatapapman, vijara, vim/ri/tyu, &c., and, on the other hand, endowed
with all auspicious qualities, satyakama, satyasa/m/kalpa, &c.)
(11).--Should it be objected that, just as the soul although essentially
free from evil--according to the Prajapativakya in the Chandogya--yet is
liable to imperfections owing to its connexion with a variety of bodies,
so the antaryamin also is affected by abiding within bodies; we deny
this because in every section of the chapter referring to the antaryamin
(in the B/ri/hadara/n/yaka) he is expressly called the Immortal, the
ruler within; which shows him to be free from the shortcomings of the
jiva (12).--Some, moreover, expressly assert that, although the Lord and
the soul are within one body, the soul only is imperfect, not the Lord
(dva supar/n/a sayuja sakhaya) (13).--Should it be said that, according
to the Chandogya, Brahman entered together with the souls into the
elements previously to the evolution of names and forms, and hence
participates in the latter, thus becoming implicated in the sa/m/sara;
we reply that Brahman, although connected with such and such forms, is
in itself devoid of form, since it is the principal element (agent;
pradhana) in the bringing about of names and forms (according to
'aka/s/o ha vai namarupayor nirvahita') (14).--But does not the passage
'satya/m/ j/n/anam anantam brahma' teach that Brahman is nothing but
light (intelligence) without any difference, and does not the passage
'neti neti' deny of it all qualities?--As in order, we reply, not to
deprive passages as the one quoted from the Taittiriya of their purport,
we admit that Brahman's nature is light, so we must also admit that
Brahman is satyasa/m/kalpa, and so on; for if not, the passages in which
those qualities are asserted would become purportless (15).--Moreover
the Taittiriya passage only asserts so much, viz. the praka/s/arupata of
Brahman, and does not deny other qualities (l6).--And the passage 'neti
neti' will be discussed later on.--The ubhayali@ngatva of Brahman in the
sense assigned above is asserted in many places /S/ruti and Sm/ri/ti
(17).--Because Brahman although abiding in many places is not touched by
their imperfections, the similes of the reflected sun, of the ether
limited by jars, &c., are applicable to it (18).--Should it be said that
the illustration is not an appropriate one, because the sun is
apprehended in the water erroneously only while the antaryamin really
abides within all things, and therefore must be viewed as sharing their
defects (19); we reply that what the simile means to negative is merely
that Brahman should, owing to its inherence in many places, participate
in the increase, decrease, and so on, of its abodes. On this view both
similes are appropriate (20).--Analogous similes we observe to be
employed in ordinary life, as when we compare a man to a lion (21).

Sutras 22-30 constitute, according to /S/a@nkara, a new adhikara/n/a
(VI), whose object it is to show that the clause 'not so, not so' (neti
neti; B/ri/hadar) negatives, not Brahman itself, but only the two forms
of Brahman described in the preceding part of the chapter. Sutras 23-26
further dwell on Brahman being in reality devoid of all distinctive
attributes which are altogether due to the upadhis. The last four Sutras
return to the question how, Brahman being one only, the souls are in so
many places spoken of as different from it, and, two explanatory
hypotheses having been rejected, the conclusion is arrived at that all
difference is unreal, due to fictitious limiting adjuncts.

According to Ramanuja, Sutras 22 ff. continue the discussion started in
Sutra 11. How, the question is asked, can the ubhayali@ngatva of Brahman
be maintained considering that the 'not so, not so' of the
B/ri/hadara/n/yaka denies of Brahman all the previously mentioned modes
(prakara), so that it can only be called that which is (sanmatra)?--The
reply given in Sutra 22 is that 'not so, not so' does not deny of
Brahman the distinctive qualities or modes declared previously (for it
would be senseless at first to teach them, and finally to deny them
again[16]), but merely denies the prak/ri/taitavattva, the previously
stated limited nature of Brahman, i.e. it denies that Brahman possesses
only the previously mentioned qualifications. With this agrees, that
subsequently to 'neti neti' Scripture itself enunciates further
qualifications of Brahman. That Brahman as stated above is not the
object of any other means of proof but Scripture is confirmed in Sutra
23, 'Scripture declares Brahman to be the non-manifest.'--And the
intuition (sakshatkkara) of Brahman ensues only upon its sa/m/radhana,
i.e. upon its being perfectly pleased by the worshipper's devotion, as
Scripture and Sm/ri/ti declare (24).--That this interpretation of 'neti'
is the right one, is likewise shown by the fact that in the same way as
praka/s/a, luminousness, j/n/ana, intelligence, &c., so also the quality
of being differentiated by the world (prapa/nk/avsish/t/ata) is intuited
as non-different, i.e. as likewise qualifying Brahman; and that
praka/s/a, and so on, characterise Brahman, is known through repeated
practice (on the part of /ri/shis like Vamadeva) in the work of
sa/m/radhana mentioned before (25).--For all these reasons Brahman is
connected with the infinite, i.e. the infinite number of auspicious
qualities; for thus the twofold indications (li@nga) met with in
Scripture are fully justified (26).--In what relation, then, does the
a/k/id vastu, i.e. the non-sentient matter, which, according to the
b/ri/hadara/n/yaka, is one of the forms of Brahman, stand to the
latter?--Non-sentient beings might, in the first place, be viewed as
special arrangements (sa/m/sthanavisesha/h/) of Brahman, as the coils
are of the body of the snake; for Brahman is designated as both, i.e.
sometimes as one with the world (Brahman is all this, &c.), sometimes as
different from it (Let me enter into those elements, &c.) (27).--Or, in
the second place, the relation of the two might be viewed as analogous
to that of light and the luminous object which are two and yet one, both
being fire (28).--Or, in the third place, the relation is like that
stated before, i.e. the material world is, like the individual souls
(whose case was discussed in II, 3, 43), a part--a/ms/a--of Brahman (29,
30).

Adhik. VII (31-37) explains how some metaphorical expressions, seemingly
implying that there is something different from Brahman, have to be
truly understood.

Adhik. VIII (38-41) teaches that the reward of works is not, as Jaimini
opines, the independent result of the works acting through the so-called
apurva, but is allotted by the Lord.


PADA III.


With the third pada of the second adhyaya a new section of the work
begins, whose task it is to describe how the individual soul is enabled
by meditation on Brahman to obtain final release. The first point to be
determined here is what constitutes a meditation on Brahman, and, more
particularly, in what relation those parts of the Upanishads stand to
each other which enjoin identical or partly identical meditations. The
reader of the Upanishads cannot fail to observe that the texts of the
different /s/akhas contain many chapters of similar, often nearly
identical, contents, and that in some cases the text of even one and the
same /s/akha exhibits the same matter in more or less varied forms. The
reason of this clearly is that the common stock of religious and
philosophical ideas which were in circulation at the time of the
composition of the Upanishads found separate expression in the different
priestly communities; hence the same speculations, legends, &c. reappear
in various places of the sacred Scriptures in more or less differing
dress. Originally, when we may suppose the members of each Vedic school
to have confined themselves to the study of their own sacred texts, the
fact that the texts of other schools contained chapters of similar
contents would hardly appear to call for special note or comment; not
any more than the circumstance that the sacrificial performances
enjoined on the followers of some particular /s/akha were found
described with greater or smaller modifications in the books of other
/s/akhas also. But already at a very early period, at any rate long
before the composition of the Vedanta-sutras in their present form, the
Vedic theologians must have apprehended the truth that, in whatever
regards sacrificial acts, one /s/akha may indeed safely follow its own
texts, disregarding the texts of all other /s/akhas; that, however, all
texts which aim at throwing light on the nature of Brahman and the
relation to it of the human soul must somehow or other be combined into
one consistent systematical whole equally valid for the followers of all
Vedic schools. For, as we have had occasion to remark above, while acts
may be performed by different individuals in different ways, cognition
is defined by the nature of the object cognised, and hence can be one
only, unless it ceases to be true cognition. Hence the attempts, on the
one hand, of discarding by skilful interpretation all contradictions met
with in the sacred text, and, on the other hand, of showing what
sections of the different Upanishads have to be viewed as teaching the
same matter, and therefore must be combined in one meditation. The
latter is the special task of the present pada.

Adhik. I and II (1-4; 5) are concerned with the question whether those
vidyas, which are met with in identical or similar form in more than one
sacred text, are to be considered as constituting several vidyas, or one
vidya only. /S/a@nkara remarks that the question affects only those
vidyas whose object is the qualified Brahman; for the knowledge of the
non-qualified Brahman, which is of an absolutely uniform nature, can of
course be one only wherever it is set forth. But things lie differently
in those cases where the object of knowledge is the sagu/n/am brahma or
some outward manifestation of Brahman; for the qualities as well as
manifestations of Brahman are many. Anticipating the subject of a later
adhikara/n/a, we may take for an example the so-called /S/a/nd/ilyavidya
which is met with in Ch. Up. III, 14, again--in an abridged form--in
B/ri/. Up. V, 6, and, moreover, in the tenth book of the
/S/atapathabrahma/n/a (X, 6, 3). The three passages enjoin a meditation
on Brahman as possessing certain attributes, some of which are specified
in all the three texts (as, for instance, manomayatva, bharupatva),
while others are peculiar to each separate passage (pra/n/a/s/ariratva
and satyasa/m/kalpatva, for instance, being mentioned in the Chandogya
Upanishad and /S/atapatha-brahma/n/a, but not in the B/ri/hadara/n/yaka
Upanishad, which, on its part, specifies sarvava/s/itva, not referred to
in the two other texts). Here, then, there is room for a doubt whether
the three passages refer to one object of knowledge or not. To the
devout Vedantin the question is not a purely theoretical one, but of
immediate practical interest. For if the three texts are to be held
apart, there are three different meditations to be gone through; if, on
the other hand, the vidya is one only, all the different qualities of
Brahman mentioned in the three passages have to be combined into one
meditation.--The decision is here, as in all similar cases, in favour of
the latter alternative. A careful examination of the three passages
shows that the object of meditation is one only; hence the meditation
also is one only, comprehending all the attributes mentioned in the
three texts.

Adhik. III (6-8) discusses the case of vidyas being really separate,
although apparently identical. The examples selected are the
udgithavidyas of the Chandogya Upanishad (I, 1-3) and the
B/ri/hadara/n/yaka Upanishad (I, 3), which, although showing certain
similarities--such as bearing the same name and the udgitha being in
both identified with pra/n/a--yet are to be held apart, because the
subject of the Chandogya vidya is not the whole udgitha but only the
sacred syllabic Om, while the B/ri/hadara/n/yaka Upanishad represents
the whole udgitha as the object of meditation.

Sutra 9 constitutes in /S/a@nkara's view a new adhikara/n/a (IV),
proving that in the passage, 'Let a man meditate' (Ch. Up. I, 1, 1), the
O/m/kara and the udgitha stand in the relation of one specifying the
other, the meaning being, 'Let a man meditate on that O/m/kara which,'
&c.--According to Ramanuja's interpretation, which seems to fall in more
satisfactorily with the form and the wording of the Sutra, the latter
merely furnishes an additional argument for the conclusion arrived at in
the preceding adhikara/n/a.--Adhik. V (10) determines the unity of the
so-called pra/n/a-vidyas and the consequent comprehension of the
different qualities of the pra/n/a, which are mentioned in the different
texts, within one meditation.

Adhik. VI comprises, according to /S/a@nkara, the Sutras 11-13. The
point to be settled is whether in all the meditations on Brahman all its
qualities are to be included or only those mentioned in the special
vidya. The decision is that the essential and unalterable attributes of
Brahman, such as bliss and knowledge, are to be taken into account
everywhere, while those which admit of a more or less (as, for instance,
the attribute of having joy for its head, mentioned in the Taitt. Up.)
are confined to special meditations.--Adhik. VII (14, 15), according to
/S/a@nkara, aims at proving that the object of Ka/th/a. Up. III, 10, 11
is one only, viz. to show that the highest Self is higher than
everything, so that the passage constitutes one vidya only.--Adhik. VIII
(16, 17) determines, according to /S/a@nkara, that the Self spoken of in
Ait. Ar. II, 4, 1, 1 is not a lower form of the Self (the so-called
sutratman), but the highest Self; the discussion of that point in this
place being due to the wish to prove that the attributes of the highest
Self have to be comprehended in the Aitarcyaka meditation.

According to Ramanuja the Sutras 11-17 constitute a single adhikara/n/a
whose subject is the same as that of /S/a@nkara's sixth adhikar/n/a.
Sutras 11-13 are, on the whole, explained as by /S/a@nkara; Sutra 12,
however, is said to mean, 'Such attributes as having joy for its head,
&c. are not to be viewed as qualities of Brahman, and therefore not to
be included in every meditation; for if they were admitted as qualities,
difference would be introduced into Brahman's nature, and that would
involve a more or less on Brahman's part.' Sutras 14-17 continue the
discussion of the passage about the priya/s/irastva.--If
priya/s/irastva, &c. are not to be viewed as real qualities of Brahman,
for what purpose does the text mention them?--'Because,' Sutra 14
replies, 'there is no other purpose, Scripture mentions them for the
purpose of pious meditation.'--But how is it known that the Self of
delight is the highest Self? (owing to which you maintain that having
limbs, head, &c. cannot belong to it as attributes.)--'Because,' Sutra
15 replies, 'the term "Self" (atma anandamaya) is applied to it.'--But
in the previous parts of the chapter the term Self (in atma pra/n/amaya,
&c.) is applied to non-Selfs also; how then do you know that in atma
anandamaya it denotes the real Self?--'The term Self,' Sutra 16 replies,
'is employed here to denote the highest Self as in many other passages
(atmaa va idam eka, &c.), as we conclude from the subsequent passage,
viz. he wished, May I be many.'--But, an objection is raised, does not
the context show that the term 'Self,' which in all the preceding
clauses about the pra/n/amaya, &c. denoted something other than the
Self, does the same in anandamaya atman, and is not the context of
greater weight than a subsequent passage?--To this question asked in the
former half of 17 (anvayad iti /k/et) the latter half replies, 'Still it
denotes the Self, owing to the affirmatory statement,' i.e. the fact of
the highest Self having been affirmed in a previous passage also, viz.
II, 1, 'From that Self sprang ether.'

Adhik. IX (18) discusses a minor point connected with the
pra/n/asa/m/vada.--The subject of Adhik. X (19) has been indicated
already above under Adhik. I.--Adhik. XI (20-22) treats of a case of a
contrary nature; in B/ri/. Up. V, 5, Brahman is represented first as
abiding in the sphere of the sun, and then as abiding within the eye; we
therefore, in spite of certain counter-indications, have to do with two
separate vidyas.--Adhik. XII (23) refers to a similar case; certain
attributes of Brahman mentioned in the Ra/n/ayaniya-khila have not to be
introduced into the corresponding Chandogya vidya, because the stated
difference of Brahman's abode involves difference of vidya.--Adhik. XIII
(24) treats of another instance of two vidyas having to be held apart.

Adhik. XIV (25) decides that certain detached mantras and brahma/n/a
passages met with in the beginning of some Upanishads--as, for instance,
a brahma/n/a about the mahavrata ceremony at the beginning of the
Aitareya-ara/n/yaka--do, notwithstanding their position which seems to
connect them with the brahmavidya, not belong to the latter, since they
show unmistakable signs of being connected with sacrificial acts.

Adhik. XV (26) treats of the passages stating that the man dying in the
possession of true knowledge shakes off all his good and evil deeds, and
affirms that a statement, made in some of those passages only, to the
effect that the good and evil deeds pass over to the friends and enemies
of the deceased, is valid for all the passages.

Sutras 27-30 constitute, according to /S/a@nkara, two adhikara/n/as of
which the former (XVI; 27, 28) decides that the shaking off of the good
and evil deeds takes place--not, as the Kaush. Up. states, on the road
to Brahman's world--but at the moment of the soul's departure from the
body; the Kaushitaki statement is therefore not to be taken
literally.--The latter adhikara/n/a (XVII; 29, 30) treats of the cognate
question whether the soul that has freed itself from its deeds proceeds
in all cases on the road of the gods (as said in the Kaush. Up.), or
not. The decision is that he only whose knowledge does not pass beyond
the sagu/n/am brahma proceeds on that road, while the soul of him who
knows the nirgu/n/am brahma becomes one with it without moving to any
other place.

The /S/ri-bhashya treats the four Sutras as one adhikara/n/a whose two
first Sutras are explained as by /S/a@nkara, while Sutra 29 raises an
objection to the conclusion arrived at, 'the going (of the soul on the
path of the gods) has a sense only if the soul's freeing itself from its
works takes place in both ways, i.e. partly at the moment of death,
partly on the road to Brahman; for otherwise there would be a
contradiction' (the contradiction being that, if the soul's works were
all shaken off at the moment of death, the subtle body would likewise
perish at that moment, and then the bodiless soul would be unable to
proceed on the path of the gods). To this Sutra 30 replies, 'The
complete shaking off of the works at the moment of death is possible,
since matters of that kind are observed in Scripture,' i.e. since
scriptural passages show that even he whose works are entirely
annihilated, and who has manifested himself in his true shape, is yet
connected with some kind of body; compare the passage, 'para/m/ jyotir
upasampadya svena rupe/n/abhinishpadyate sa tatra paryeti kri/d/an
ramamana/h/ sa svara/d/ bhavati tasya sarveshu lokeshu kama/k/aro
bhavati.' That subtle body is not due to karman, but to the soul's
vidyamahatmya.--That the explanation of the /S/ri-bhashya agrees with
the text as well as /S/a@nkara's, a comparison of the two will show;
especially forced is /S/a@nkara's explanation of 'arthavattvam
ubhayatha,' which is said to mean that there is arthavattva in one case,
and non-arthavattva in the other case.

The next Sutra (31) constitutes an adhikara/n/a (XVIII) deciding that
the road of the gods is followed not only by those knowing the vidyas
which specially mention the going on that road, but by all who are
acquainted with the sagu/n/a-vidyas of Brahman.--The explanation given
in the /S/ri-bhashya (in which Sutras 31 and 32 have exchanged places)
is similar, with the difference however that all who meditate on
Brahman--without any reference to the distinction of nirgu/n/a and
sagu/n/a--proceed after death on the road of the gods. (The
/S/ri-bhashya reads 'sarvesham,' i.e. all worshippers, not 'sarvasam,'
all sagu/n/a-vidyas.)

Adhik. XIX (32) decides that, although the general effect of true
knowledge is release from all forms of body, yet even such beings as
have reached perfect knowledge may retain a body for the purpose of
discharging certain offices.--In the /S/ri-bhashya, where the Sutra
follows immediately on Sutra 30, the adhikara/n/a determines, in close
connexion with 30, that, although those who know Brahman as a rule
divest themselves of the gross body--there remaining only a subtle body
which enables them to move--and no longer experience pleasure and pain,
yet certain beings, although having reached the cognition of Brahman,
remain invested with a gross body, and hence liable to pleasure and pain
until they have fully performed certain duties.

Adhik. XX (33) teaches that the negative attributes of Brahman mentioned
in some vidyas--such as its being not gross, not subtle, &c.--are to be
included in all meditations on Brahman.--Adhik. XXI (34) determines that
Ka/th/a Up. III, 1, and Mu. Up. III, 1, constitute one vidya only,
because both passages refer to the highest Brahman. According to
Ramanuja the Sutra contains a reply to an objection raised against the
conclusion arrived at in the preceding Sutra.--Adhik. XXII (35, 36)
maintains that the two passages, B/ri/. Up. III, 4 and III, 5,
constitute one vidya only, the object of knowledge being in both cases
Brahman viewed as the inner Self of all.--Adhik. XXIII (37) on the
contrary decides that the passage Ait. Ar. II, 2, 4, 6 constitutes not
one but two meditations.--Adhik. XXIV (38) again determines that the
vidya of the True contained in B/ri/. Up. V, 4, 5, is one
only--According to Ramanuja, Sutras 35-38 constitute one adhikara/n/a
only whose subject is the same as that of XXII according to /S/a@nkara.

Adhik. XXV (39) proves that the passages Ch. Up. VIII, 1 and B/ri/. Up.
IV, 4, 22 cannot constitute one vidya, since the former refers to
Brahman as possessing qualities, while the latter is concerned with
Brahman as destitute of qualities.--Adhik. XXVI (40, 41) treats,
according to /S/a@nkara, of a minor question connected with Ch. Up. V,
11 ff.--According to the /S/ri-bhashya, Sutras 39-41 form one
adhikara/n/a whose first Sutra reaches essentially the same conclusion
as /S/a@nkara under 39. Sutras 40, 41 thereupon discuss a general
question concerning the meditations on Brahman. The qualities, an
opponent is supposed to remark, which in the two passages discussed are
predicated of Brahman--such as va/s/itva, satyakamatva, &c.--cannot be
considered real (paramarthika), since other passages (sa esha neti neti,
and the like) declare Brahman to be devoid of all qualities. Hence those
qualities cannot be admitted into meditations whose purpose is final
release.--To this objection Sutra 40 replies, '(Those qualities) are not
to be left off (from the meditations on Brahman), since (in the passage
under discussion as well as in other passages) they are stated with
emphasis[17].'--But, another objection is raised, Scripture says that he
who meditates on Brahman as satyakama, &c. obtains a mere perishable
reward, viz. the world of the fathers, and similar results specified in
Ch. Up. VIII, 2; hence, he who is desirous of final release, must not
include those qualities of Brahman in his meditation.--To this objection
Sutra 41 replies, 'Because that (i.e. the free roaming in all the
worlds, the world of the fathers, &c.) is stated as proceeding therefrom
(i.e. the approach to Brahman which is final release) in the case of
(the soul) which has approached Brahman;' (therefore a person desirous
of release, may include satyakamatva, &c. in his meditations.)

Adhik. XXVII (42) decides that those meditations which are connected
with certain matters forming constituent parts of sacrificial actions,
are not to be considered as permanently requisite parts of the
latter.--Adhik. XXVIII (43) teaches that, in a B/ri/. Up. passage and a
similar Ch. Up. passage, Vayu and Pra/n/a are not to be identified, but
to be held apart.--Adhik. XXIX (44-52) decides that the firealtars made
of mind, &c., which are mentioned in the Agnirahasya, do not constitute
parts of the sacrificial action (so that the mental, &c. construction of
the altar could optionally be substituted for the actual one), but
merely subjects of meditations.

Adhik. XXX (53, 54) treats, according to /S/a@nkara, in the way of
digression, of the question whether to the Self an existence independent
of the body can be assigned, or not (as the Materialists
maintain).--According to the /S/ri-bhashya the adhikara/n/a does not
refer to this wide question, but is concerned with a point more
immediately connected with the meditations on Brahman, viz. the question
as to the form under which, in those meditations, the Self of the
meditating devotee has to be viewed. The two Sutras then have to be
translated as follows: 'Some (maintain that the soul of the devotee has,
in meditations, to be viewed as possessing those attributes only which
belong to it in its embodied state, such as j/n/at/ri/tva and the like),
because the Self is (at the time of meditation) in the body.'--The next
Sutra rejects this view, 'This is not so, but the separatedness (i.e.
the pure isolated state in which the Self is at the time of final
release when it is freed from all evil, &c.) (is to be transferred to
the meditating Self), because that will be[18] the state (of the Self in
the condition of final release).'

Adhik. XXXI (55, 56) decides that meditations connected with constituent
elements of the sacrifice, such as the udgitha, are, in spite of
difference of svara in the udgitha, &c., valid, not only for that
/s/akha in which the meditation actually is met with, but for all
/s/akhas.--Adhik. XXXII (57) decides that the Vai/s/vanara Agni of Ch.
Up. V, 11 ff. is to be meditated upon as a whole, not in his single
parts.--Adhik. XXXIII (58) teaches that those meditations which refer to
one subject, but as distinguished by different qualities, have to be
held apart as different meditations. Thus the daharavidya,
/S/a/nd/ilyavidya, &c. remain separate.

Adhik. XXXIV (59) teaches that those meditations on Brahman for which
the texts assign one and the same fruit are optional, there being no
reason for their being cumulated.--Adhik. XXXV (60) decides that those
meditations, on the other hand, which refer to special wishes may be
cumulated or optionally employed according to choice.--Adhik. XXXVI
(61-66) extends this conclusion to the meditations connected with
constituent elements of action, such as the udgitha.


PADA IV.


Adhik. I (1-17) proves that the knowledge of Brahman is not kratvartha,
i.e. subordinate to action, but independent.--Adhik. II (18-20) confirms
this conclusion by showing that the state of the pravrajins is enjoined
by the sacred law, and that for them vidya only is prescribed, not
action.--Adhik. III (21, 22) decides that certain clauses forming part
of vidyas are not mere stutis (arthavadas), but themselves enjoin the
meditation.--The legends recorded in the Vedanta-texts are not to be
used as subordinate members of acts, but have the purpose of
glorifying--as arthavadas--the injunctions with which they are connected
(Adhik. IV, 23, 24).--For all these reasons the urdhvaretasa/h/ require
no actions but only knowledge (Adhik. V, 25).--Nevertheless the actions
enjoined by Scripture, such as sacrifices, conduct of certain kinds,
&c., are required as conducive to the rise of vidya in the mind (Adhik.
VI, 26, 27).--Certain relaxations, allowed by Scripture, of the laws
regarding food, are meant only for cases of extreme need (Adhik. VII,
28-3l).--The a/s/ramakarma/n/i are obligatory on him also who does not
strive after mukti (Adhik. VIII, 32-35).--Those also who, owing to
poverty and so on, are ana/s/rama have claims to vidya (Adhik. IX,
36-39).--An urdhvaretas cannot revoke his vow (Adhik. X, 40).--Expiation
of the fall of an urdhvaretas (Adhik. XI, 41, 42).--Exclusion of the
fallen urdhvaretas in certain cases (Adhik. XII, 43).--Those
meditations, which are connected with subordinate members of the
sacrifice, are the business of the priest, not of the yajamana (Adhik.
XIII, 44-46).--B/ri/. Up. III, 5, 1 enjoins mauna as a third in addition
to balya and pa/nd/itya (Adhik. XIV, 47-49).--By balya is to be
understood a childlike innocent state of mind (Adhik. XV, 50).

Sutras 51 and 52 discuss, according to Ramanuja, the question when the
vidya, which is the result of the means described in III, 4, arises.
Sutra 51 treats of that vidya whose result is mere exaltation
(abhyudaya), and states that 'it takes place in the present life, if
there is not present an obstacle in the form of a prabalakarmantara (in
which latter case the vidya arises later only), on account of Scripture
declaring this (in various passages).'--Sutra 52, 'Thus there is also
absence of a definite rule as to (the time of origination of) that
knowledge whose fruit is release, it being averred concerning that one
also that it is in the same condition (i.e. of sometimes having an
obstacle, sometimes not).'--/S/a@nkara, who treats the two Sutras as two
adhikara/n/as, agrees as to the explanation of 51, while, putting a
somewhat forced interpretation on 52, he makes it out to mean that a
more or less is possible only in the case of the sagu/n/a-vidyas.

Notes:

[Footnote 16: All the mentioned modes of Brahman are known from
Scripture only, not from ordinary experience. If the latter were the
case, then, and then only, Scripture might at first refer to them
'anuvadena,' and finally negative them.]

[Footnote 17: Ramanuja has here some strong remarks on the improbability
of qualities emphatically attributed to Brahman, in more than one
passage, having to be set aside in any meditation: 'Na /k/a
matapit/ri/sahasrebhyo-pi vatsalatara/m/ sastra/m/ pratarakavad
aparamarthikau nirasaniyau gu/n/au prama/n/antarapratipannau
adare/n/opadi/s/ya sa/m/sara/k/akraparivartanena purvam eva
bambhramyamanan mumukshun bhuyo-pi bhramayitum alam.']

[Footnote 18: The /S/ri-bh-ashya as well as several other commentaries
reads tadbhavabhavitvat for /S/an@kara's tadbhavabhavitvat.]


FOURTH ADHYAYA.
PADA I.


Adhikara/n/a I (1, 2).--The meditation on the Atman enjoined by
Scripture is not an act to be accomplished once only, but is to be
repeated again and again.

Adhik. II (3).--The devotee engaged in meditation on Brahman is to view
it as constituting his own Self.

Adhik. III (4).--To the rule laid down in the preceding adhikara/n/a the
so-called pratikopasanas, i.e. those meditations in which Brahman is
viewed under a symbol or outward manifestation (as, for instance, mano
brahmety upasita) constitute an exception, i.e. the devotee is not to
consider the pratika as constituting his own Self.

Adhik. IV (5).--In the pratikopasanas the pratika is to be meditatively
viewed as being one with Brahman, not Brahman as being one with the
pratika.--Ramanuja takes Sutra 5 as simply giving a reason for the
decision arrived at under Sutra 4, and therefore as not constituting a
new adhikara/n/a.

Adhik. V (6).--In meditations connected with constitutives of
sacrificial works (as, for instance, ya evasau tapati tam udgitham
upasita) the idea of the divinity, &c. is to be transferred to the
sacrificial item, not vice versa. In the example quoted, for instance,
the udgitha is to be viewed as Aditya, not Aditya as the udgitha.

Adhik. VI (7-10).--The devotee is to carry on his meditations in a
sitting posture.--/S/a@nkara maintains that this rule does not apply to
those meditations whose result is sa/m/yagdar/s/ana; but the Sutra gives
no hint to that effect.

Adhik. VII (11).--The meditations may be carried on at any time, and in
any place, favourable to concentration of mind.

Adhik. VIII (12).--The meditations are to be continued until
death.--/S/a@nkara again maintains that those meditations which lead to
sa/m/yagdar/s/ana are excepted.

Adhik. IX (13).--When through those meditations the knowledge of Brahman
has been reached, the vidvan is no longer affected by the consequences
of either past or future evil deeds.

Adhik. X (14).--Good deeds likewise lose their efficiency.--The literal
translation of the Sutra is, 'There is likewise non-attachment (to the
vidvan) of the other (i.e. of the deeds other than the evil ones, i.e.
of good deeds), but on the fall (of the body, i.e. when death takes
place).' The last words of the Sutra, 'but on the fall,' are separated
by /S/a@nkara from the preceding part of the Sutra and interpreted to
mean, 'when death takes place (there results mukti of the vidvan, who
through his knowledge has freed himself from the bonds of
works).'--According to Ramanuja the whole Sutra simply means, 'There is
likewise non-attachment of good deeds (not at once when knowledge is
reached), but on the death of the vidvan[19].'

Adhik. XI (15).--The non-operation of works stated in the two preceding
adhikara/n/as holds good only in the case of anarabdhakarya works, i.e.
those works which have not yet begun to produce their effects, while it
does not extend to the arabdhakarya works on which the present existence
of the devotee depends.

Adhik. XII (16, 17).--From the rule enunciated in Adhik. X are excepted
such sacrificial performances as are enjoined permanently (nitya): so,
for instance, the agnihotra, for they promote the origination of
knowledge.

Adhik. XIII (18).--The origination of knowledge is promoted also by such
sacrificial works as are not accompanied with the knowledge of the
upasanas referring to the different members of those works.

Adhik. XIV (19).--The arabdhakarya works have to be worked out fully by
the fruition of their effects; whereupon the vidvan becomes united with
Brahman.--The 'bhoga' of the Sutra is, according to /S/a@nkara,
restricted to the present existence of the devotee, since the complete
knowledge obtained by him destroys the nescience which otherwise would
lead to future embodiments. According to Ramanuja a number of embodied
existences may have to be gone through before the effects of the
arabdhakarya works are exhausted.


PADA II.


This and the two remaining padas of the fourth adhyaya describe the fate
of the vidvan after death. According to /S/a@nkara we have to
distinguish the vidvan who possesses the highest knowledge, viz. that he
is one with the highest Brahman, and the vidvan who knows only the lower
Brahman, and have to refer certain Sutras to the former and others to
the latter. According to Ramanuja the vidvan is one only.

Adhik. I, II, III (1-6).--On the death of the vidvan (i.e. of him who
possesses the lower knowledge, according to /S/a@nkara) his senses are
merged in the manas, the manas in the chief vital air (pra/n/a), the
vital air in the individual soul (jiva), the soul in the subtle
elements.--According to Ramanuja the combination (sampatti) of the
senses with the manas, &c. is a mere conjunction (sa/m/yoga), not a
merging (laya).

Adhik. IV (7).--The vidvan (i.e. according to /S/a@nkara, he who
possesses the lower knowledge) and the avidvan, i.e. he who does not
possess any knowledge of Brahman, pass through the same stages (i.e.
those described hitherto) up to the entrance of the soul, together with
the subtle elements, and so on into the na/d/is.--The vidvan also
remains connected with the subtle elements because he has not yet
completely destroyed avidya, so that the immortality which Scripture
ascribes to him (am/ri/tatva/m/ hi vidvan abhya/s/nute) is only a
relative one.--Ramanuja quotes the following text regarding the
immortality of the vidvan:

    'Yada sarve pramu/k/yante kama yessya h/ri/di sthita/h/ atha
    martyosm/ri/to bhavaty atra brahma sama/s/nute,'

and explains that the immortality which is here ascribed to the vidvan
as soon as he abandons all desires can only mean the
destruction--mentioned in the preceding pada--of all the effects of good
and evil works, while the 'reaching of Brahman' can only refer to the
intuition of Brahman vouchsafed to the meditating devotee.

Adhik. V (8-11) raises; according to /S/a@nkara, the question whether
the subtle elements of which Scripture says that they are combined with
the highest deity (teja/h/ parasya/m/ devatayam) are completely merged
in the latter or not. The answer is that a complete absorption of the
elements takes place only when final emancipation is reached; that, on
the other hand, as long as the sa/m/sara state lasts, the elements,
although somehow combined with Brahman, remain distinct so as to be able
to form new bodies for the soul.

According to Ramanuja the Sutras 8-11 do not constitute a new
adhikara/n/a, but continue the discussion of the point mooted in 7. The
immortality there spoken of does not imply the separation of the soul
from the body, 'because Scripture declares sa/m/sara, i.e. embodiedness
up to the reaching of Brahman' (tasya tavad eva /k/ira/m/ yavan na
vimokshye atha sampatsye) (8).--That the soul after having departed from
the gross body is not disconnected from the subtle elements, is also
proved hereby, that the subtle body accompanies it, as is observed from
authority[20] (9).--Hence the immortality referred to in the scriptural
passage quoted is not effected by means of the total destruction of the
body (10).

Adhik. VI (12-14) is of special importance.--According to /S/a@nkara the
Sutras now turn from the discussion of the departure of him who
possesses the lower knowledge only to the consideration of what becomes
of him who has reached the higher knowledge. So far it has been taught
that in the case of relative immortality (ensuing on the apara vidya)
the subtle elements, together with the senses and so on, depart from the
body of the dying devotee; this implies at the same time that they do
not depart from the body of the dying sage who knows himself to be one
with Brahman.--Against this latter implied doctrine Sutra 12 is supposed
to formulate an objection. 'If it be said that the departure of the
pra/n/as from the body of the dying sage is denied (viz. in B/ri/. Up.
IV, 4, 5, na tasya pra/n/a utkramanti, of him the pra/n/as do not pass
out); we reply that in that passage the genitive "tasya" has the sense
