
Christian Science refutes pantheism, finds Spirit neither in matter nor in
the modes of mortal mind. It shows that matter and mortal mind have neither
origin nor existence in the eternal Mind. Thinking otherwise is what
estranges mortals from divine Life and Love. God is All-in-all. He is
Spirit; and in nothing is He unlike Himself. Nothing that "worketh or
maketh a lie" is to be found in the divine consciousness. For God to know,
is to be; that is, what He knows must truly and eternally exist. If He
knows matter, and matter can exist in Mind, then mortality and discord must
be eternal. He is Mind; and whatever He knows is made manifest, and must be
Truth.

If God knows evil even as a false claim, this knowledge would manifest evil
in Him and proceeding from Him. Christian Science shows that matter, evil,
sin, sickness, and death are but negations of Spirit, Truth, and Life,
which are positives that cannot be gainsaid. The subjective states of evil,
called mortal mind or matter, are negatives destitute of time and space;
for there is none beside God or Spirit and the idea of Spirit.

This infinite logic is the infinite light,--uncomprehended, yet forever
giving forth more light, because it has no darkness to emit. Mortals do not
understand the All; hence their inference of some other existence beside
God and His true likeness,--of something unlike Him. He who is All,
understands all. He can have no knowledge or inference but His own
consciousness, and can take in no more than all.

The mists of matter--sin, sickness, and death--disappear in proportion as
mortals approach Spirit, which is the reality of being. It is not enough to
say that matter is the substratum of evil, and that its highest attenuation
is mortal mind; for there is, strictly speaking, _no_ mortal mind. Mind is
immortal. Death is the consequent of an antecedent false assumption of the
realness of something unreal, material, and mortal. If God knows the
antecedent, He must produce its consequences. From this logic there is no
escape. Matter, or evil, is the absence of Spirit or good. Their
nothingness is thus proven; for God is good, ever-present, and All.

"In Him we live, and move, and have our being;" consequently it is
impossible for the true man--who is a spiritual and individual being,
created in the eternal Science of being--to be conscious of aught but good.
God's image and likeness can never be less than a good man; and for man to
be more than God's likeness is impossible. Man is the climax of creation;
and God is not without an ever-present witness, testifying of Himself.
Matter, or any mode of mortal mind, is neither part nor parcel of divine
consciousness and God's verity.

In Science there is no fallen state of being; for therein is no inverted
image of God, no escape from the focal radiation of the infinite. Hence the
unreality of error, and the truth of the Scripture, that there is "none
beside Him." If mortals could grasp these two words _all_ and _nothing_,
this mystery of a God who has no knowledge of sin would disappear, and the
eternal, infinite harmony would be fathomed. If God could know a false
claim, false knowledge would be a part of His consciousness. Then evil
would be as real as good, sickness as real as health, death as real as
Life; and sickness, sin, and death would be as eternal as God.




IS CHRISTIAN SCIENCE BLASPHEMOUS?


Blasphemy has never diminished sin and sickness, nor acknowledged God in
all His ways. Blasphemy rebukes not the godless lie that denies Him as
All-in-all, nor does it ascribe to Him all presence, power, and glory.
Christian Science does this. If Science lacked the proof of its origin in
God, it would be self-destructive, for it rests alone on the demonstration
of God's supremacy and omnipotence. Right thinking and right acting,
physical and moral harmony, come with Science, and the secret of its
presence lies in the universal need of better health and morals.

Human theories, when weighed in the balance, are found unequal to the
demonstration of divine Life and Love; and their highest endeavors are, to
divine Science, what a child's love of pictures is to art. A child, in his
ignorance, may imagine the face of Dante to be the rapt face of Jesus. Thus
falsely may the human conceive of the Divine. If the schoolmaster is not
Christ, the school gets things wrong, and knows it not; but the teacher is
morally responsible.

Good health and a more spiritual religion are the common wants; and these
wants have wrought this moral result,--that the so-called mortal mind asks
for what Mind alone can supply. This demand militates against the so-called
demands of matter, and regulates the present high premium on Mind-healing.
If the uniform moral and spiritual, as well as physical, effects of
Christian Science were lacking, the premium would go down. That it
continues to rise, and the demand to increase, shows its real value to the
race. Even doctors will agree that infidelity, ignorance, and quackery have
never met the growing wants of humanity. Christian Science is no "Boston
craze;" it is the sober second thought of advancing humanity.




IS THERE A PERSONAL DEITY?


God is infinite. He is neither a limited mind nor a limited body. God is
Love; and Love is Principle, not person. What the person of the infinite
is, we know not; but we are gratefully and lovingly conscious of the
fatherliness of this Supreme Being. God is individual, and man is His
individualized idea. While material man and the physical senses receive no
spiritual idea, and feel no sensation of divine Love, spiritual man and his
spiritual senses are drinking in the nature and essence of the individual
infinite. A sinful sense is incompetent to understand the realities of
being,--that Life is God, and that man is in His image and likeness. A
sinner can take no cognizance of the noumenon or the phenomena of Spirit;
but leaving sin, sense rises to the fulness of the stature of man in
Christ.

Person is formed after the manner of mortal man, so far as he can conceive
of personality. Limitless personality is inconceivable. His person and
perfection are neither self-created, nor discerned through imperfection;
and of God as a person, human reason, imagination, and revelation give us
no knowledge. Error would fashion Deity in a manlike mould, while Truth is
moulding a Godlike man.

When the term divine Principle is used to signify Deity it may seem distant
or cold, until better apprehended. This Principle is Mind, substance, Life,
Truth, Love. When understood, Principle is found to be the only term that
fully conveys the ideas of God,--one Mind, a perfect man, and divine
Science. As the divine Principle is comprehended, God's omnipotence and
omnipresence will dawn on mortals, and the notion of an everywhere-present
body--or of an infinite Mind starting from a finite body, and returning to
it--will disappear.

Ever-present Love must seem ever absent to ever-present selfishness or
material sense. Hence this asking amiss and receiving not, and the common
idolatry of man-worship. In divine Science, God is recognized as the only
power, presence, and glory.

Adam's mistiness and Satan's reasoning, ever since the flood,--when
specimens of every kind emerged from the ark,--have run through the veins
of all human philosophy. Human reason is a blind guide, a continued series
of mortal hypotheses, antagonistic to Revelation and Science. It is
continually straying into forbidden by-paths of sensualism, contrary to
the life and teachings of Jesus and Paul, and the vision of the Apocalypse.
Human philosophy has ninety-nine parts of error to the one-hundredth part
of Truth,--an unsafe decoction for the race. The Science that Jesus
demonstrated, whose views of Truth Confucius and Plato but dimly discerned,
Science and Health interprets. It was not a search after wisdom; it was
wisdom, and it grasped in spiritual law the universe,--all time, space,
immortality, thought, extension. This Science demonstrated the Principle of
all phenomena, identity, individuality, law; and showed man as reflecting
God and the divine capacity. Human philosophy would dethrone perfection,
and substitute matter and evil for divine means and ends.

Human philosophy has an undeveloped God, who unfolds Himself through
material modes, wherein the human and divine mingle in the same realm and
consciousness. This is rank infidelity; because by it we lose God's ways
and perpetuate the supposed power and reality of evil _ad infinitum_.
Christian Science rends this veil in the pantheon of many gods, and
reproduces the teachings of Jesus, whose philosophy is incontestable, bears
the strain of time, and brings in the glories of eternity; "for other
foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ."

Divine philosophy is demonstrably the true idea of the Christ, wherein
Principle heals and saves. A philosophy which cannot heal the sick has
little resemblance to Science, and is, to say the least, like a cloud
without rain, "driven about by every wind of doctrine." Such philosophy
has certainly not touched the hem of the Christ garment.

Leibnitz, Descartes, Fichte, Hegel, Spinoza, Bishop Berkeley, were once
clothed with a "brief authority;" but Berkeley ended his metaphysical
theory with a treatise on the healing properties of tar-water, and Hegel
was an inveterate snuff-taker. The circumlocution and cold categories of
Kant fail to improve the conditions of mortals, morally, spiritually, or
