
What does this mean?

We pray in this request that our Heavenly Father will neither pay
attention to our sins nor refuse requests such as these because of our
sins and because we are neither worthy nor deserve the things for which
we pray. Yet He wants to give them all to us by His grace, because many
times each day we sin and truly deserve only punishment. Because God
does this, we will, of course, want to forgive from our hearts and
willingly do good to those who sin against us.

The Sixth Request

And lead us not into temptation. (Matthew 6:12)

What does this mean?

God tempts no one, of course, but we pray in this request that God will
protect us and save us, so that the Devil, the world and our bodily
desires will neither deceive us nor seduce us into heresy, despair or
other serious shame or vice, and so that we will win and be victorious
in the end, even if they attack us.

The Seventh Request

But set us free from the Evil One. ( Matthew 6:12)

What does this mean?

We pray in this request, as a summary, that our Father in Heaven will
save us from every kind of evil that threatens body, soul, property and
honor. We pray that when at last our final hour has come, He will grant
us a blessed death, and, in His grace, bring us to Himself from this
valley of tears.  Amen

What does this mean?

That I should be certain that such prayers are acceptable to the Father
in Heaven and will be granted, that He Himself has commanded us to pray
in this way and that He promises to answer us. Amen. Amen. This means:
Yes, yes it will happen this way.

IV. The Sacrament of Holy Baptism
The Simple Way a Father Should Present it to His Household

What is Baptism?

Baptism is not just plain water, but it is water contained within God's
command and united with God's Word.

Where in the Word of God is this?

Where our Lord Christ spoke in the last chapter of Matthew (Matthew
28:19):
"Go into all the world, teaching all heathen nations, and baptizing
them in the name of the Father, the Son and of the Holy Spirit."

What does Baptism give? What good is it?

It gives us the forgiveness of sins, redeems us from death and the
Devil, and gives eternal salvation to all who believe this, just as
God's words and promises declare.

What are these words and promises of God?

Our Lord Christ spoke one of them in the last chapter of Mark (Mark
16:16):
"Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved; but whoever does not
believe will be damned."

How can water do such great things?

Water doesn't make these things happen, of course. It is God's Word,
which is with and in the water. Because, without God's Word, the water
is plain water and not baptism. But with God's Word it is a Baptism, a
grace-filled water of life, a bath of new birth in the Holy Spirit, as
St. Paul said to Titus in the third chapter (Titus 3:5-8):
"Through this bath of rebirth and renewal of the Holy Spirit, which He
poured out on us abundantly through Jesus Christ, our Savior, that we,
justified by the same grace are made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. This is a faithful saying."

What is the meaning of such a water Baptism?

It means that the old Adam in us should be drowned by daily sorrow and
repentance, and die with all sins and evil lusts, and, in turn, a new
person daily come forth and rise from death again. He will live forever
before God in righteousness and purity.

Where is this written?

St. Paul says to the Romans in Chapter Six (Romans 6:4):
"We are buried with Christ through Baptism into death, so that, in the
same way Christ is risen from the dead by the glory of the Father, thus
also must we walk in a new life."

V. How You Should Teach the Uneducated to Confess

What is confession?

Confession has two parts: First, a person admits his sin Second, a
person receives absolution or forgiveness from the confessor, as if
from God Himself, without doubting it, but believing firmly that his
