credentials more trustworthy or more intelligible.





CHAPTER IV.

THE PROGRESS OF THE GOSPEL FROM THE DEATH OF CHRIST TO THE DEATH OF
THE APOSTLE JAMES, THE BROTHER OF JOHN.

A.D. 31 TO A.D. 44.


When our Lord bowed His head on the cross and "gave up the ghost," the
work of atonement was completed. The ceremonial law virtually expired
when He explained, by His death, its awful significance; and the crisis
of His passion was the birthday of the Christian economy. At this date
the history of the New Testament Church properly commences.

After His resurrection Jesus remained forty days on earth, [51:1] and,
during this interval, He often took occasion to point out to His
disciples the meaning of His wonderful career. He is represented as
saying to them--"Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to
suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day, and that repentance and
remission of sins should be preached in His name among all nations,
_beginning at Jerusalem_." [51:2] The inspired narratives of the
teaching and miracles of our Lord are emphatically corroborated by the
fact, that a large Christian Church was established, almost immediately
after His decease, in the metropolis of Palestine. The Sanhedrim and the
Roman governor had concurred in His condemnation; and, on the night of
His trial, even the intrepid Peter had been so intimidated that he had
been tempted to curse and to swear as he averred that he knew not "The
Man." It might have been expected that the death of Jesus would have
been followed by a reign of terror, and that no attempt would have been
made, at least in the place where the civil and ecclesiastical
authorities resided, to assert the Divine mission of Him whom they had
crucified as a malefactor. But perfect love casteth out fear. In the
very city where He had suffered, and a few days after His passion, His
disciples ventured in the most public manner to declare His innocence
and to proclaim Him as the Messiah. The result of their appeal is as
wonderful as its boldness. Though the imminent peril of confessing
Christ was well known, such was the strength of their convictions that
multitudes resolved, at all hazards, to enrol themselves among His
followers. The success which accompanied the preaching of the apostolic
missionaries at the feast of Pentecost was a sign and a pledge of their
future triumphs, for "the same day there were added unto them about
three thousand souls." [52:1]

The disinterested behaviour of the converts betokened their intense
earnestness. "All that believed were together and had all things common,
and sold their possessions and goods and parted them to all men, as
every man had need." [52:2] These early disciples were not, indeed,
required, as a term of communion, to deposit their property in a common
stock-purse; but, in the overflowings of their first love, they
spontaneously adopted the arrangement. On the part of the more opulent
members of the community residing in a place which was the stronghold of
Jewish prejudice and influence, this course was, perhaps, as prudent as
it was generous. By joining a proscribed sect they put their lives, as
well as their wealth, into jeopardy; but, by the sale of their effects,
they displayed a spirit of self-sacrifice which must have astonished and
confounded their adversaries. They thus anticipated all attempts at
spoliation, and gave a proof of their readiness to submit to any
suffering for the cause which they had espoused. An inheritance, when
turned into money, could not be easily sequestered; and those who were
in want could obtain assistance out of the secreted treasure. Still,
even at this period, the principle of a community of goods was not
carried out into universal operation; for the foreign Jews who were now
converted to the faith, and who were "possessors of lands or houses"
[53:1] in distant countries, could neither have found purchasers, nor
negotiated transfers, in the holy city. The first sales must obviously
have been confined to those members of the Church who were owners of
property in Jerusalem and its neighbourhood.

The system of having all things common was suggested in a crisis of
apparently extreme peril, so that it was only a temporary expedient; and
it is evident that it was soon given up altogether, as unsuited to the
ordinary circumstances of the Christian Church. But though, in a short
time, the disciples in general were left to depend on their own
resources, the community continued to provide a fund for the help of the
infirm and the destitute. At an early period complaints were made
respecting the distribution of this charity, and we are told that "there
arose a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews because their
widows were neglected in the daily ministration." [53:2] The _Grecians_,
or those converts from Judaism who used the Greek language, were
generally of foreign birth; and as the _Hebrews_, or the brethren who
spoke the vernacular tongue of Palestine, were natives of the country,
there were, perhaps, suspicions that local influence secured for their
poor an undue share of the public bounty. The expedient employed for the
removal of this "root of bitterness" seems to have been completely
successful. "The twelve called the multitude of the disciples unto them
and said, It is not reason that we should leave the word of God and
serve tables. Wherefore, brethren, look ye out among you seven men of
honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom, whom we may appoint
over this business." [54:1]

Had the apostles been anxious for power they would themselves have
nominated the deacons. They might have urged, too, a very plausible
apology for here venturing upon an exercise of patronage. They might
have pleaded that the disciples were dissatisfied with each other--that
the excitement of a popular election was fitted to increase this feeling
of alienation--and that, under such circumstances, prudence required
them to take upon themselves the responsibility of the appointment. But
they were guided by a higher wisdom; and their conduct is a model for
the imitation of ecclesiastical rulers in all succeeding generations. It
was the will of the Great Lawgiver that His Church should possess a free
constitution; and accordingly, at the very outset, its members were
intrusted with the privilege of self-government. The community had
already been invited to choose an apostle in the room of Judas, [54:2]
and they were now required to name office-bearers for the management of
their money transactions. But, whilst the Twelve, on this occasion,
appealed to the suffrages of the Brotherhood, they reserved to
themselves the right of confirming the election; and they might, by
withholding ordination, have refused to fiat an improper appointment.
Happily no such difficulty occurred. In compliance with the instructions
addressed to them, the multitude chose seven of their number "whom they
set before the apostles, and, when they had prayed, they laid their
hands on them." [54:3]

Prior to the election of the deacons, Peter and John had been
incarcerated. The Sanhedrim wished to extort from them a pledge that
they would "not speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus," [55:1] but
the prisoners nobly refused to consent to any such compromise. They
"answered and said unto them--Whether it be right in the sight of God to
hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye." [55:2] The apostles here
disclaimed the doctrine of passive obedience, and asserted principles
which lie at the foundation of the true theory of religious freedom.
They maintained that "God alone is Lord of the conscience"--that His
command overrides all human regulations--and that, no matter what may be
the penalties which earthly rulers may annex to the breach of the
enactments of their statute-book, the Christian is not bound to obey,
when the civil law would compel him to violate his enlightened
convictions. But the Sanhedrim obviously despised such considerations.
For a time they were obliged to remain quiescent, as public feeling ran
strongly in favour of the new preachers; but, soon after the election of
the deacons, they resumed the work of persecution. The tide of
popularity now began to turn; and Stephen, one of the Seven,
particularly distinguished by his zeal, fell a victim to their
intolerance.

The martyrdom of Stephen appears to have occurred about three years and
a half after the death of our Lord. [55:3] Daniel had foretold that the
Messiah would "confirm the covenant with many _for one week_" [55:4]--an
announcement which has been understood to indicate that, at the time of
his manifestation, the gospel would be preached with much success among
his countrymen _for seven years_--and if the prophetic week commenced
with the ministry of John the Baptist, it probably terminated with this
bloody tragedy. [56:1] The Christian cause had hitherto prospered in
Jerusalem, and there are good grounds for believing that, mean while, it
had also made considerable progress throughout all Palestine; but, at
this date, it is suddenly arrested in its career of advancement. The
Jewish multitude begin to regard it with aversion; and the Roman
governor discovers that he may, at any time, obtain the tribute of their
applause by oppressing its ablest and most fearless advocates.

After His resurrection our Lord commanded the apostles to go and "teach
_all nations_" [56:2] and yet years rolled away before they turned their
thoughts towards the evangelisation of the Gentiles. The Jewish mind was
slow to apprehend such an idea, for the posterity of Abraham had been
long accustomed to regard themselves as the exclusive heirs of divine
privileges; but the remarkable development of the kingdom of God
gradually led them to entertain more enlarged and more liberal
sentiments. The progress of the gospel in Samaria, immediately after the
death of Stephen, demonstrated that the blessings of the new
dispensation were not to be confined to God's ancient people. Though
many of the Samaritans acknowledged the divine authority of the writings
of Moses, they did not belong to the Church of Israel; and between them
and the Jews a bitter antipathy had hitherto existed. When Philip
appeared among them, and preached Jesus as the promised Messiah, they
listened most attentively to his appeals, and not a few of them gladly
received Christian baptism. [57:1] It could now no longer be said that
the Jews had "no dealings with the Samaritans," [57:2] for the gospel
gathered both into the fold of a common Saviour, and taught them to keep
"the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace."

When the disciples were scattered abroad by the persecution which arose
after the martyrdom of Stephen, the apostles still kept their post in
the Jewish capital; [57:3] for Christ had instructed them to begin their
ministry in that place: [57:4] and they perhaps conceived that, until
authorised by some further intimation, they were bound to remain at
Jerusalem. But the conversion of the Samaritans must have reminded them
that the sphere of their labours was more extensive. Our Lord had said
to them--"Ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all
Judea, and in Samaria, and _unto the uttermost part of the earth,_"
[57:5] and events, which were now passing before their view, were
continually throwing additional light upon the meaning of this
announcement. The baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch, [57:6] about this
period, was calculated to enlarge their ideas; and the baptism of
Cornelius pointed out, still more distinctly, the wide range of their
evangelical commission. The minuteness with which the case of the devout
centurion is described is a proof of its importance as connected with
this transition-stage in the history of the Church. He had before known
nothing of Peter; and, when they met at Caesarea, each could testify
that he had been prepared for the interview by a special revelation from
heaven. [57:7] Cornelius was "a centurion of the band called the Italian
band" [57:8]--he was a representative of that military power which then
ruled the world--and, in his baptism, we see the Roman Empire
presenting, on the altar of Christianity, the first-fruits of the
Gentiles.

It was not, however, very obvious, from any of the cases already
enumerated, that the salvation of Christ was designed for all classes
and conditions of the human family. The Samaritans did not, indeed,
worship at Jerusalem, but they claimed some interest in "the promises
made unto the fathers;" and they conformed to many of the rites of
Judaism. It does not appear that the Ethiopian eunuch was of the seed of
Abraham; but he acknowledged the inspiration of the Old Testament, and
he was disposed, at least to a certain extent, to observe its
institutions. Even the Roman centurion was what has been called a
_proselyte of the gate_, that is, he professed the Jewish theology--"he
feared God with all his house" [58:1]--though he had not received
circumcision, and had not been admitted into the congregation of Israel.
But the time was approaching when the Church was to burst forth beyond
the barriers within which it had been hitherto inclosed, and an
individual now appeared upon the scene who was to be the leader of this
new movement. He is "a citizen of no mean city" [58:2]--a native of
Tarsus in Cilicia, a place famous for its educational institutes
[58:3]--and he is known, by way of distinction, as "an apostle of _the
nations_." [58:4]

The apostles were at first sent only to their own countrymen; [58:5] and
we have seen that, for some time after our Lord's death, they do not
appear to have contemplated any more comprehensive mission. When Peter
called on the disciples to appoint a successor to Judas, he seems to
have acted under the conviction that the company of the Twelve must
still be maintained in its integrity, and that its numbers must still
exactly correspond to the number of the tribes of Israel. But the Jews,
after the death of Stephen, evinced an increasing aversion to the
gospel; and as the apostles were eventually induced to direct their
views elsewhere, they were, of course, also led to abandon an
arrangement which had a special reference to the sectional divisions of
the chosen people. Meanwhile, too, the management of ecclesiastical
affairs had partially fallen into other hands; new missions, in which
the Twelve had no share, had been undertaken; and Paul henceforth
becomes most conspicuous and successful in extending and organising the
Church.

Paul describes himself as "one born out of due time." [59:1] He was
converted to Christianity when his countrymen seemed about to be
consigned to judicial blindness; and he was "called to be an apostle"
[59:2] when others had been labouring for years in the same vocation.
But he possessed peculiar qualifications for the office. He was ardent,
energetic, and conscientious, as well as acute and eloquent. In his
native city Tarsus he had probably received a good elementary education,
and afterwards, "at the feet of Gamaliel," [59:3] in Jerusalem, he
enjoyed the tuition of a Rabbi of unrivalled celebrity. The apostle of
the Gentiles had much the same religious experience as the father of the
German Reformation; for as Luther, before he understood the doctrine of
a free salvation, attempted to earn a title to heaven by the austerities
of monastic discipline, so Paul in early life was "taught according to
the perfect manner of the law of the fathers," [59:4] and "after the
strictest sect of his religion lived a Pharisee." [59:5] His zeal led
him to become a persecutor; and when Stephen was stoned, the witnesses,
who were required to take part in the execution, prepared themselves for
the work of death, by laying down their upper garments at the feet of
the "young man" Saul. [59:6] He had established himself in the
confidence of the Sanhedrim, and he appears to have been a member of
that influential judicatory, for he tells us that he "shut up many of
the saints in prison," and that, when they were put to death, "he gave
his voice, or his _vote_, [60:1] against them"--a statement implying
that he belonged to the court which pronounced the sentence of
condemnation. As he was travelling to Damascus armed with authority to
seize any of the disciples whom he discovered in that city, and to
convey them bound to Jerusalem, [60:2] the Lord appeared to him in the
way, and he was suddenly converted. [60:3] After reaching the end of his
journey, and boldly proclaiming his attachment to the party he had been
so recently endeavouring to exterminate, he retired into Arabia, [60:4]
where he appears to have spent three years in the devout study of the
Christian theology. He then returned to Damascus, and entered, about
A.D. 37, [60:5] on those missionary labours which he prosecuted with so
much efficiency and perseverance for upwards of a quarter of a century.

Paul declares that he derived a knowledge of the gospel immediately from
Christ; [60:6] and though, for many years, he had very little
intercourse with the Twelve, he avers that he was "not a whit behind the
very chiefest apostles." [60:7] Throughout life he was associated, not
with them, but with others as his fellow-labourers; and he obviously
occupied a distinct and independent position. When he was baptized, the
ordinance was administered by an individual who is not previously
mentioned in the New Testament, [61:1] and when he was separated to the
work to which the Lord had called him, [61:2] the ordainers were
"prophets and teachers," respecting whose own call to the ministry the
inspired historian supplies us with no information. But it may fairly be
presumed that they were regularly introduced into the places which they
are represented as occupying; they are all described by the evangelist
as receiving the same special instructions from heaven; and the
tradition that, at least some of them, were of the number of the
Seventy, [61:3] is exceedingly probable. And if, as has already been
suggested, the mission of the Seventy indicated the design of our
Saviour to diffuse the gospel all over the world, we can see a peculiar
propriety in the arrangement that Paul was ushered into the Church under
the auspices of these ministers. [61:4] It was most fitting that he who
was to be, by way of eminence, the apostle of the Gentiles, was baptized
and ordained by men whose own appointment was intended to symbolise the
catholic spirit of Christianity.

In the treatment of Paul by his unbelieving countrymen we have a most
melancholy illustration of the recklessness of religious bigotry. These
Jews must have known that, in as far as secular considerations were
concerned, he had everything to lose by turning into "the way which they
called heresy;" they were bound to acknowledge that, by connecting
himself with an odious sect, he at least demonstrated his sincerity and
self-denial; but they were so exasperated by his zeal that they "took
counsel to kill him." [62:1] When, after his sojourn in Arabia, he
returned to Damascus that city was in the hands of Aretas, the king of
Arabia Petraea; [62:2] who seems to have contrived to gain possession of
it during the confusion which immediately followed the death of the
Emperor Tiberius. This petty sovereign courted the favour of the Jewish
portion of the population by permitting them to persecute the disciples;
[62:3] and the apostle, at this crisis, would have fallen a victim to
their malignity had not his friends let him down "through a window, in a
basket, by the wall," [62:4] and thus enabled him to escape a premature
martyrdom. He now repaired to Jerusalem, where the brethren do not
appear to have heard of his conversion, and where they at first refused
to acknowledge him as a member of their society; [62:5] for he had been
obliged to leave Damascus with so much precipitation that he had brought
with him no commendatory letters; but Barnabas, who is said to have been
his school-fellow, [62:6] and who had in some way obtained information
respecting his subsequent career, made the leaders of the Mother Church
acquainted with the wonderful change which had taken place in his
sentiments and character, and induced them to admit him to fellowship.
During this visit to the holy city, while he prayed in the temple, he
was more fully instructed respecting his future destination. In a
trance, he saw Jesus, who said to him--"Depart, for I will send thee
_far hence unto the Gentiles_." [62:7] Even had he not received this
intimation, the murderous hostility of the Jews would have obliged him
to retire. "When he spake boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus, and
disputed against the Grecians, they went about to slay him--which, when
the brethren knew, they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him forth
to Tarsus." [63:1]

The apostle now laboured for some years as a missionary in "the regions
of Syria and Cilicia." [63:2] His native city and its neighbourhood
probably enjoyed a large share of his ministrations, and his exertions
seem to have been attended with much success, for, soon afterwards, the
converts in these districts attract particular notice. [63:3] Meanwhile
the gospel was making rapid progress in the Syrian capital, and as Saul
was considered eminently qualified for conducting the mission in that
place, he was induced to proceed thither. "Then," says the sacred
historian, "Barnabas departed to Tarsus to seek Saul, and when he had
found him he brought him unto Antioch. And it came to pass that a whole
year they assembled themselves with the Church, and taught much people;
and the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch." [63:4]

The establishment of a Church in this city formed a new era in the
development of Christianity. Antioch was a great commercial mart with a
large Jewish, as well as Gentile, population; it was virtually the
capital of the Roman Empire in the East--being the residence of the
president, or governor, of Syria; its climate was delightful; and its
citizens, enriched by trade, were noted for their gaiety and
voluptuousness. In this flourishing metropolis many proselytes from
heathenism were to be found in the synagogues of the Greek-speaking
Jews, and the gospel soon made rapid progress among these Hellenists.
"Some of them (which were scattered abroad upon the persecution that
arose about Stephen) were men of Cyprus and Cyrene, which when they were
come to Antioch, spake unto the Grecians, [64:1] preaching the Lord
Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number
believed and turned unto the Lord." [64:2] The followers of Jesus at
this time received a new designation. They had hitherto called
themselves "brethren" or "disciples" or "believers," but now they "were
called Christians" by some of the inhabitants of the Syrian capital. As
the unconverted Jews did not admit that Jesus was the Christ they were
obviously not the authors of this appellation, and, in contempt, they
probably styled the party Nazarenes or Galileans; but it is easy to
understand how the name was suggested to the Pagans as most descriptive
and appropriate. No one could be long in company with the new
religionists without perceiving that Christ was "the end of their
conversation." They delighted to tell of His mighty miracles, of His
holy life, of the extraordinary circumstances which accompanied His
death, of His resurrection and ascension. Out of the fulness of their
hearts they discoursed of His condescension and His meekness, of His
wonderful wisdom, of His sublime theology, and of His unutterable love
to a world lying in wickedness. When they prayed, they prayed to Christ;
when they sang, they sang praise to Christ; when they preached, they
preached Christ. Well then might the heathen multitude agree with one
voice to call them _Christians_. The inventor of the title may have
meant it as a nickname, but if so, He who overruled the waywardness of
Pilate so that he wrote on the cross a faithful inscription, [65:1] also
caused this mocker of His servants to stumble on a most truthful and
complimentary designation.

From his first appearance in Antioch Paul seems to have occupied a very
influential position among his brethren. In that refined and opulent
city his learning, his dialectic skill, his prudence, and his pious
ardour were all calculated to make his ministry most effective. About a
year after his arrival there, he was deputed, in company with a friend,
to visit Palestine on an errand of love. "In those days came prophets
from Jerusalem unto Antioch. And there stood up one of them, named
Agabus, and signified by the Spirit that there should be great dearth
throughout all the world; which came to pass in the days of Claudius
Caesar. Then the disciples, every man according to his ability,
determined to send relief to the brethren which dwelt in Judea. Which
also they did, and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and
Saul." [65:2]

This narrative attests that the principle of a community of goods was
not recognised in the Church of Antioch, for the aid administered was
supplied, not out of a general fund, but by "every man according to his
ability." There was here no "murmuring of the Grecians against the
Hebrews," as, in the spirit of true brotherhood, the wealthy Hellenists
of Antioch cheerfully contributed to the relief of the poor Hebrews of
their fatherland. It does not appear that "the elders" in whose hands
the money was deposited, were all office-bearers connected with the
Church of Jerusalem. These would, of course, receive no small share of
the donations, but as the assistance was designed for the "brethren
which dwelt _in Judea_," and not merely for the disciples in the holy
city, we may infer that it was distributed among the elders of all the
Churches now scattered over the southern part of Palestine. [66:1]
Neither would Barnabas and Paul require to make a tour throughout the
district to visit these various communities. All the elders of Judea
still continued to observe the Mosaic law, and as the deputies from
Antioch were in Jerusalem at the time of the Passover, [66:2] they would
find their brethren in attendance upon the festival.

It is reported by several ancient writers that the apostles were
instructed to remain at Jerusalem for twelve years after the crucifixion
of our Lord, [66:3] and if the tradition is correct, the holy city
continued to be their stated residence until shortly before the period
of the arrival of these deputies from the Syrian capital. The time of
this visit can be pretty accurately ascertained, and there is perhaps no
point connected with the history of the book of the Acts respecting
which there is such a close approximation to unanimity amongst
chronologists; for, as Josephus notices [66:4] both the sudden death of
Herod Agrippa, grandson of Herod the Great, which now occurred, [66:5]
and the famine against which this contribution was intended to provide,
it is apparent from the date which he assigns to them, that Barnabas and
Saul must have reached Jerusalem about A.D. 44. [66:6] At this juncture
at least two of the apostles, James the brother of John, and Peter, were
in the Jewish capital; and it is probable that all the rest had not yet
finally taken their departure. The Twelve, it would seem, did not set
out on distant missions until they were thoroughly convinced that they
had ceased to make progress in the conversion of their countrymen in the
land of their fathers. And it is no trivial evidence, at once of the
strength of their convictions, and of the truth of the evangelical
history, that they continued so long and so efficiently to proclaim the
gospel in the chief city of Palestine. Had they not acted under an
overwhelming sense of duty, they would not have remained in a place
where their lives were in perpetual jeopardy; and had they not been
faithful witnesses, they could not have induced so many, of all classes
of society, to believe statements which, if unfounded, could have been
easily contradicted on the spot. The apostles must have been known to
many in Jerusalem as the companions of our Lord; for, during His public
ministry, they had often been seen with Him in the city and the temple;
and it was to be, therefore, expected, that peculiar importance would be
attached to their testimony respecting His doctrines and His miracles.
Their preaching in the head-quarters of Judaism was fitted to exert an
immense influence, as that metropolis itself contained a vast
population, and as it was, besides, the resort of strangers from all
parts of the world. And so long as the apostles ministered in Jerusalem
or in Palestine only to the house of Israel, it was expedient that their
number, which was an index of the Divine regard for the whole of the
twelve tribes, should be maintained in its integrity. But when, after
preaching twelve years among their countrymen at home, they found their
labours becoming comparatively barren; and when, driven by persecution
from Judea, they proceeded on distant missions, their position was quite
altered. Their number had now at least partially [67:1] lost its
original significance; and hence, when an apostle died, the survivors no
longer deemed it necessary to take steps for the appointment of a
successor. We find accordingly that when Herod "killed James, the
brother of John, with the sword," [68:1] no other individual was
selected to occupy the vacant apostleship.

It has been already stated that when Paul appeared in Jerusalem for the
first time after his conversion, he received, when praying in the
temple, a divine communication informing him of his mission to the
heathen. [68:2] It would seem that, during his present visit, as the
bearer of the contributions from Antioch, he was favoured with another
revelation. In his Second Epistle to the Corinthians he apparently
refers to this most comfortable, yet mysterious, manifestation. "I
know," [68:3] says he, "a man in Christ fourteen years ago [68:4]
(whether in the body, I cannot tell, or whether out of the body, I
cannot tell; God knoweth) such an one caught up to the third heaven. And
I know such a man (whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot
tell; God knoweth) that he was caught up into paradise, and heard
unspeakable words which it is not lawful for man to utter." [68:5] The
present position of the apostle explains the design of this sublime and
delightful vision. As Moses was encouraged to undertake the deliverance
of his countrymen when God appeared to him in the burning bush, [68:6]
and as Isaiah was emboldened to go forth, as the messenger of the Lord
of hosts, when he saw Jehovah sitting upon His throne attended by the
seraphim, [68:7] so Paul was stirred up by an equally impressive
revelation to gird himself for the labours of a new appointment. He was
about to commence a more extensive missionary career, and before
entering upon so great and so perilous an undertaking, the King of kings
condescended to encourage him by admitting him to a gracious audience,
and by permitting him to enjoy some glimpses of the glory of those
realms of light where "they that be wise shall shine as the brightness
of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars
for ever and ever."





CHAPTER V.

THE ORDINATION OF PAUL AND BARNABAS; THEIR MISSIONARY TOUR
IN ASIA MINOR; AND THE COUNCIL OF JERUSALEM.

A.D. 44 TO A.D. 51.


Soon after returning from Jerusalem to Antioch, Paul was formally
invested with his new commission. His fellow-deputy, Barnabas, was
appointed, as his coadjutor, in this important service. "Now," says the
evangelist, "there were in the church that was at Antioch certain
prophets and teachers, as Barnabas, and Simeon that was called Niger,
and Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod
the tetrarch, and Saul. As they ministered to the Lord and fasted, the
Holy Ghost said--Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I
have called them. And when they had fasted, and prayed, and laid their
hands on them, they sent them away." [70:1]

Ten years had now elapsed since the conversion of Paul; and during the
greater part of this period, he had been busily engaged in the
dissemination of the gospel. In the days of his Judaism the learned
Pharisee had, no doubt, been accustomed to act as a teacher in the
synagogues, and, when he became obedient to the faith, he was permitted,
as a matter of course, to expound his new theology in the Christian
assemblies. Barnabas, his companion, was a Levite; [70:2] and as his
tribe was specially charged with the duty of public instruction, [71:1]
he too had probably been a preacher before his conversion. Both these
men had been called of God to labour as evangelists, and the Head of the
Church had already abundantly honoured their ministrations; but hitherto
neither of them seems to have been clothed with pastoral authority by
any regular ordination. Their constant presence in Antioch was now no
longer necessary, so that they were thus left at liberty to prosecute
their missionary operations in the great field of heathendom; and at
this juncture it was deemed necessary to designate them, in due form, to
their "ministry and apostleship." "The Holy Ghost said--Separate me
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them." When we
consider the present circumstances of these two brethren, we may see,
not only why these instructions were given, but also why their
observance has been so distinctly registered.

It is apparent that Barnabas and Saul were now called to a position of
higher responsibility than that which they had previously occupied. They
had heretofore acted simply as preachers of the Christian doctrine.
Prompted by love to their common Master, and by a sense of individual
obligation, they had endeavoured to diffuse all around them a knowledge
of the Redeemer. They taught in the name of Jesus, just because they
possessed the gifts and the graces required for such a service; and, as
their labours were acknowledged of God, they were encouraged to
persevere. But they were now to go forth as a solemn deputation, under
the sanction of the Church, and not only to proclaim the truth, but also
to baptize converts, to organise Christian congregations, and to ordain
Christian ministers. It was, therefore, proper, that, on this occasion,
they should be regularly invested with the ecclesiastical commission.

On other grounds it was desirable that the mission of Barnabas and Paul
should be thus inaugurated. Though the apostles had been lately driven
from Jerusalem, and though the Jews were exhibiting increasing aversion
to the gospel, the Church was, notwithstanding, about to expand with
extraordinary vigour by the ingathering of the Gentiles. In reference to
these new members Paul and Barnabas pursued a bold and independent
course, advocating views which many regarded as dangerous,
latitudinarian, and profane; for they maintained that the ceremonial law
was not binding on the converts from heathenism. Their adoption of this
principle exposed them to much suspicion and obloquy; and because of the
tenacity with which they persisted in its vindication, not a few were
disposed to question their credentials as expositors of the Christian
faith. It was, therefore, expedient that their right to perform all the
apostolic functions should be placed above challenge. In some way, which
is not particularly described, their appointment by the Spirit of God
was accordingly made known to the Church at Antioch, and thus all the
remaining prophets and teachers, who officiated there, were warranted to
testify that these two brethren had received a call from heaven to
engage in the work to which they were now designated. Their ordination,
in obedience to this divine communication, was a decisive recognition of
their spiritual authority. The Holy Ghost had attested their commission,
and the ministers of Antioch, by the laying on of hands, set their seal
to the truth of the oracle. Their title to act as founders of the Church
was thus authenticated by evidence which could not be legitimately
disputed. Paul himself obviously attached considerable importance to
this transaction, and he afterwards refers to it in language of marked
emphasis, when, in the beginning of the Epistle to the Romans, he
introduces himself as "a servant of Jesus Christ, _called_ to be an
apostle, _separated unto the gospel of God_." [71:1]

In the circumstantial record of this proceeding, to be found in the Acts
of the Apostles, we have a proof of the wisdom of the Author of
Revelation. He foresaw that the rite of "the laying on of hands" would
be sadly abused; that it would be represented as possessing something
like a magic potency; and that it would be at length converted, by a
small class of ministers, into an ecclesiastical monopoly. He has,
therefore, supplied us with an antidote against delusion by permitting
us, in this simple narrative, to scan its exact import. And what was the
virtue of the ordination here described? Did it furnish Paul and
Barnabas with a title to the ministry? Not at all. God himself had
already called them to the work, and they could receive no higher
authorisation. Did it necessarily add anything to the eloquence, or the
prudence, or the knowledge, or the piety, of the missionaries? No
results of the kind could be produced by any such ceremony. What then
was its meaning? The evangelist himself furnishes an answer. The Holy
Ghost required that Barnabas and Saul should be _separated_ to the work
to which the Lord had called them, and the laying on of hands was the
_mode_, or _form_, in which they were set apart, or designated, to the
office. This rite, to an Israelite, suggested grave and hallowed
associations. When a Jewish father invoked a benediction on any of his
family, he laid his hand upon the head of the child; [73:1] when a
Jewish priest devoted an animal in sacrifice, he laid his hand upon the
head of the victim; [73:2] and when a Jewish ruler invested another with
office, he laid his hand upon the head of the new functionary. [73:3]
The ordination of these brethren possessed all this significance. By the
laying on of hands the ministers of Antioch implored a blessing on
Barnabas and Saul, and announced their separation, or dedication, to the
work of the gospel, and intimated their investiture with ecclesiastical
authority.

It is worthy of note that the parties who acted as ordainers were not
dignitaries, planted here and there throughout the Church, and selected
for this service on account of their official pre-eminence. They were
all, at the time, connected with the Christian community assembling in
the city which was the scene of the inauguration. It does not appear
that any individual amongst them claimed the precedence; all engaged on
equal terms in the performance of this interesting ceremony. We cannot
mistake the official standing of these brethren if we only mark the
nature of the duties in which they were ordinarily occupied. They were
"prophets and teachers;" they were sound scriptural expositors; some of
them, perhaps, were endowed with the gift of prophetic interpretation;
and they were all employed in imparting theological instruction. Though
the name is not here expressly given to them, they were, at least
virtually, "the elders who laboured in the word and doctrine." [74:1]
Paul, therefore, was ordained by the laying on of the hands of the
_Presbytery_ of Antioch. [74:2]

If the narrative of Luke was designed to illustrate the question of
ministerial ordination, it plainly suggests that the power of Church
rulers is very circumscribed. They have no right to refuse the laying on
of hands to those whom God has called to the work of the gospel, and
who, by their gifts and graces, give credible evidences of their holy
vocation; and they are not at liberty to admit the irreligious or
incompetent to ecclesiastical offices. In the sight of the Most High the
ordination to the pastorate of an individual morally and mentally
disqualified is invalid and impious.

Immediately after their ordination Paul and Barnabas entered on their
apostolic mission. Leaving Antioch they quickly reached Seleucia
[75:1]--a city distant about twelve miles--and from thence passed on to
Cyprus, [75:2] the native country of Barnabas. [75:3] They probably
spent a considerable time in that large island. It contained several
towns of note; it was the residence of great numbers of Jews; and the
degraded state of its heathen inhabitants may be inferred from the fact
that Venus was their tutelary goddess. The preaching of the apostles in
this place appears to have created an immense sensation; their fame at
length attracted the attention of persons of the highest distinction;
and the heart of Paul was cheered by the accession of no less
illustrious a convert than Sergius Paulus, [75:4] the Roman proconsul.
Departing from Cyprus, Paul and Barnabas now set sail for Asia Minor,
where they landed at Perga in Pamphylia. Here John Mark, the nephew of
Barnabas, by whom they had been hitherto accompanied, refused to proceed
further. He seems to have been intimidated by the prospect of
accumulating difficulties. From many, on religious grounds, they had
reason to anticipate a most discouraging reception; and the land journey
now before them was otherwise beset with dangers. Whilst engaged in it,
Paul seems to have experienced those "perils of waters," or of "rivers,"
[75:5] and "perils of robbers," which he afterwards mentions; for the
highlands of Asia Minor were infested with banditti, and the mountain
streams often rose with frightful rapidity, and swept away the unwary
stranger. John Mark now returned to Jerusalem, and, at a subsequent
period, we find Paul refusing, in consequence, to receive him as a
travelling companion. [76:1] But though Barnabas was then dissatisfied
because the apostle continued to be distrustful of his relative, and
though "the contention was so sharp" between these two eminent heralds
of the cross that "they departed asunder one from the other," [76:2] the
return of this young minister from Perga appears to have led to no
change in their present arrangements. Continuing their journey into the
interior of the country, they now preached in Antioch of Pisidia, in
Iconium, in "Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia," and in "the region
that lieth round about." [76:3] When they had proceeded thus far, they
began to retrace their steps, and again visited the places where they
had previously succeeded in collecting congregations. They now supplied
their converts with a settled ministry. When they had presided in every
church at an appointment of elders, [76:4] in which the choice was
determined by popular suffrage, [76:5] and when they had prayed with
fasting, they laid their hands on the elected office-bearers, and in
this form "commended them to the Lord on whom they believed." Having
thus planted the gospel in many districts which had never before been
trodden by the feet of a Christian missionary, they returned to Antioch
in Syria to rehearse "all that God had done with them, and how he had
opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles." [76:6]

Paul and Barnabas spent about six years in this first tour; [76:7] and,
occasionally, when their ministrations were likely to exert a wide and
permanent influence, remained long in particular localities. The account
of their designation, and of their labours in Cyprus, Pamphylia,
Lycaonia, and the surrounding regions, occupies two whole chapters of
the Acts of the Apostles. The importance of their mission may be
estimated from this lengthened notice. Christianity now greatly extended
its base of operations, and shook paganism in some of its strongholds.
In every place which they visited, the apostles observed a uniform plan
of procedure. In the first instance, they made their appeal to the seed
of Abraham; as they were themselves learned Israelites, they were
generally permitted, on their arrival in a town, to set forth the claims
of Jesus of Nazareth in the synagogue; and it was not until the Jews had
exhibited a spirit of unbelief, that they turned to the heathen
population. In the end, by far the majority of their converts were
reclaimed idolaters. "The Gentiles were glad, and glorified the word of
the Lord, and as many as were ordained to eternal life, believed."
[77:1] Astonished at the mighty miracles exhibited by the two
missionaries, the pagans imagined that "the gods" had come down to them
"in the likeness of men;" and at Lystra the priest of Jupiter "brought
oxen and garlands unto the gates, and would have done sacrifice with the
people;" [77:2] but the Jews looked on in sullen incredulity, and kept
alive an active and implacable opposition. At Cyprus, the apostles had
to contend against the craft of a Jewish conjuror; [77:3] at Antioch,
"the Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women, and the chief men
of the city, and raised persecution" against them, "and expelled them
out of their coasts;" [77:4] at Iconium, the Jews again "stirred up the
Gentiles, and made their minds evil affected against the brethren;"
[77:5] and at Lystra, the same parties "persuaded the people, and having
stoned Paul, drew him out of the city, supposing he had been dead"
[78:1] The trials through which he now passed seem to have made an
indelible impression on the mind of the great apostle, and in the last
of his epistles, written many years afterwards, he refers to them as
among the most formidable he encountered in his perilous career.
Timothy, who at this time must have been a mere boy, appears to have
witnessed some of these ebullitions of Jewish malignity, and to have
marked with admiration the heroic spirit of the heralds of the Cross.
Paul, when about to be decapitated by the sword of Nero, could,
therefore, appeal to the evangelist, and could fearlessly declare that,
twenty years before, when his life was often at stake, he had not
quailed before the terrors of martyrdom. "Thou," says he, "hast fully
known my long-suffering, charity, patience, persecutions, afflictions,
which came unto me at _Antioch_, at _Iconium_, at _Lystra_, what
persecutions I endured, but, out of them all, the Lord delivered me."
[78:2]

The hostile efforts of the Jews did not arrest the gospel in its
triumphant career. The truth prevailed mightily among the Gentiles, and
the great influx of converts began to impart an entirely new aspect to
the Christian community. At first the Church consisted exclusively of
Israelites by birth, and all who entered it still continued to observe
the institutions of Moses. But it was now evident that the number of its
Gentile adherents would soon very much preponderate, and that, ere long,
the keeping of the typical law would become the peculiarity of a small
minority of its members. Many of the converted Jews were by no means
prepared for such an alternative. They prided themselves upon their
divinely-instituted worship; and, misled by the fallacy that whatever is
appointed by God can never become obsolete, they conceived that the
spread of Christianity must be connected with the extension of their
national ceremonies. They accordingly asserted that the commandment
relative to the initiatory ordinance of Judaism was binding upon all
admitted to Christian fellowship. "Certain men which came down from
Judea" to Antioch, "taught the brethren, and said, Except ye be
circumcised after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved." [79:1]

Paul was eminently qualified to deal with such errorists. There was a
time when he had valued himself upon his Pharisaic strictness, but when
God revealed to him His glory in the face of Jesus Christ, he was taught
to distinguish between a living faith, and a dead formalism. He still
maintained his social status, as one of the "chosen people," by the
keeping of the law; but he knew that it merely prefigured the great
redemption, and that its types and shadows must quickly disappear before
the light of the gospel. He saw, too, that the arguments urged for
circumcision could also be employed in behalf of all the Levitical
arrangements, [79:2] and that the tendency of the teaching of these "men
which came down from Judea" was to encumber the disciples with the
weight of a superannuated ritual. Nor was this all. The apostle was well
aware that the spirit which animated those Judaising zealots was a
spirit of self-righteousness. When they "taught the brethren and said,
Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, _ye cannot be
saved_" they subverted the doctrine of justification by faith alone.
[79:3] A sinner is saved as soon as he believes on the Lord Jesus
Christ, [79:4] and he requires neither circumcision, nor any other
ordinance, to complete his pardon. Baptism is, indeed, the sign by which
believers solemnly declare their acceptance of the gospel, and the seal
by which God is graciously pleased to recognise them as heirs of the
righteousness of faith; and yet even baptism is not essential to
salvation, for the penitent thief, though unbaptized, was admitted into
paradise. [80:1] But circumcision is no part of Christianity at all; it
does not so much as indicate that the individual who submits to it is a
believer in Jesus. Faith in the Saviour is the only and the perfect way
of justification. "Blessed are all they that put their trust in him,"
[80:2] for Christ will, without fail, conduct to glory all who commit
themselves to His guidance and protection. Those who trust in Him cannot
but love Him, and those who love Him cannot but delight to do His will;
and as faith is the root of holiness and happiness, so unbelief is the
fountain of sin and misery. But though the way of salvation by faith can
only be spiritually discerned, many seek to make it palpable by
connecting it with certain visible institutions. Faith looks to Jesus as
the only way to heaven; superstition looks to some outward observance,
such as baptism or circumcision, (which is only a finger-post on the
way,) and confounds it with the way itself. Faith is satisfied with a
very simple ritual; superstition wearies itself with the multiplicity of
its minute observances. Faith holds communion with the Saviour in all
His appointments, and rejoices in Him with joy unspeakable; superstition
leans on forms and ceremonies, and is in bondage to these beggarly
elements. No wonder then that the attempt to impose on the converted
Gentiles the rites of both Christianity and Judaism encountered such
resolute opposition. Paul and Barnabas at once withstood its abettors,
and had "no small dissension and disputation with them." [80:3] It was
felt, however, that a matter of such grave importance merited the
consideration of the collective wisdom of the Church, and it was
accordingly agreed to send these two brethren, "and certain other of
them" "to Jerusalem unto the apostles and elders about this question."
[81:1]

It is not stated that the Judaising teachers confined their interference
to Antioch, and the subsequent narrative apparently indicates that the
deputation to Jerusalem acted on behalf of all the Churches in Syria and
Cilicia. [81:2] The Christian societies scattered throughout Pamphylia,
Lycaonia, and some other districts of Asia Minor, do not seem to have
been directly concerned in sending forward the commissioners; but as
these communities had been collected and organised by Paul and Barnabas,
they doubtless considered that they were represented by their founders,
and they at once acceded to the decision of the assembly which met in
the Jewish metropolis. [81:3] That assembly approached, perhaps, more
closely than any ecclesiastical convention that has ever since been
held, to the character of a general council. It is pretty clear that its
deliberations must have taken place at the time of one of the great
annual festivals, for, seven or eight years before, the apostles had
commenced their travels as missionaries, and except about the season of
the Passover or of Pentecost, the Syrian deputation could have scarcely
reckoned on finding them in the holy city. It is not said that the
officials who were to be consulted belonged exclusively to Jerusalem.
[81:4] They, not improbably, included the elders throughout Palestine
who usually repaired to the capital to celebrate the national
solemnities. This meeting, therefore, seems to have been constructed on
a broader basis than what a superficial reading of the narrative might
suggest. Amongst its members were the older apostles, as well as
Barnabas and Paul, so that it contained the principal founders of the
Jewish and Gentile Churches: there were also present the elders of
Jerusalem, and deputies from Antioch, that is, the representatives of
the two most extensive and influential Christian societies in existence:
whilst commissioners from the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, and elders
from various districts of the holy land, were, perhaps, likewise in
attendance. The Universal Church was thus fairly represented in this
memorable Synod.

The meeting was held A.D. 51, and Paul, exactly fourteen years before,
[82:1] had visited Jerusalem for the first time after his conversion.
[82:2] So little was then known of his remarkable history, even in the
chief city of Judea, that when he "assayed to join himself to the
disciples, they were all afraid of him, and believed not that he was a
disciple;" [82:3] but now his position was completely changed, and he
was felt to be one of the most influential personages who took part in
the proceedings of this important convention. Some have maintained that
