splendour-loving Burman puts on every panel and pillar as much
decoration as it will hold.

The result must be looked at as a whole and not too minutely. The best
work is the wood carving which has a freedom and boldness often
missing in the minute and crowded designs of Indian art. Still as a
rule it is at the risk of breaking the spell that you examine the
details of Burmese ornamentation. Better rest content with your first
amazement on beholding these carved and pinnacled piles of gold
and vermilion, where the fantastic animals and plants seem about to
break into life.

The most celebrated shrine in Burma is the Shwe Dagon Pagoda which
attracts pilgrims from all the Buddhist world. No descriptions of it
gave me any idea of its real appearance nor can I hope that I shall be
more successful in giving the reader my own impressions. The pagoda
itself is a gilt bell-shaped mass rather higher than the Dome of St.
Paul's and terminating in a spire. It is set in the centre of a raised
mound or platform, approached by lofty flights of steps. The platform,
which is paved and level, is of imposing dimensions, some nine hundred
feet long and seven hundred wide. Round the base of the central pagoda
is a row of shrines and another row runs round the edge of the
platform so that one moves, as it were, in a street of these edifices,
leading here and there into side squares where are quiet retreats with
palm trees and gigantic images. But when after climbing the long
staircase one first emerges on the platform one does not realize the
topography at once and seems to have entered suddenly into Jerusalem
the Golden. Right and left are rows of gorgeous, fantastic
sanctuaries, all gold, vermilion and glass mosaic, and within them sit
marble figures, bland, enigmatic personages who seem to invite
approach but offer no explanation of the singular scene or the part
they play in it. If analyzed in detail the artistic merits of these
shrines might be found small but the total impression is unique. The
Shwe Dagon has not the qualities which usually distinguish great
religious buildings. It is not specially impressive by its majesty or
holiness; it is certainly wanting in order and arrangement. But on
entering the platform one feels that one has suddenly passed from this
life into another and different world. It is not perhaps a very
elevated world; certainly not the final repose of the just or the
steps of the throne of God, but it is as if you were walking in the
bazaars of Paradise--one of those Buddhist Paradises where the souls
of the moderately pure find temporary rest from the whirl of
transmigration, where the very lotus flowers are golden and the leaves
of the trees are golden bells that tinkle in the perfumed breeze.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 124: For the Pyus see Blagden in _J.R.A.S._ pp. 365-388.
_Ibid._ in _Epigr. Indica_, 1913, pp. 127-133. Also reports of _Burma
Arch. Survey_, 1916, 1917.]

[Footnote 125: So C.C. Lowis in the _Gazetteer of Burma_, vol. I. p.
292, but according to others the Burmese chronicles place the event at
the beginning of the Christian era.]

[Footnote 126: Sometimes called New Pagan to distinguish it from Old
Pagan which was a name of Tagaung. Also called Pagan or Pugama and in
Pali Arimaddanapura.]

[Footnote 127: See the travels of Kia Tan described by Pelliot in
_B.E.F.E.O._ 1904, pp. 131-414.]

[Footnote 128: More correctly Taung-ngu.]

[Footnote 129: For the history and present condition of Buddhism in
Burma the following may be consulted besides other works referred to
in the course of this chapter.

M. Bode, _Edition of the Sasanavamsa_ with valuable dissertations,
1897. This work is a modern Burmese ecclesiastical history written in
1861 by Pannasami.

M. Bode, _The Pali Literature of Burma_, 1909.

The Gandhavamsa: containing accounts of many Pali works written in
Burma. Edited by Minayeff in _Jour. Pali Text Soc._ for 1886, pp. 54
ff. and indexed by M. Bode, _ibid._ 1896, 53 ff.

Bigandet, _Vie ou Legende de Gautama_, 1878.

Yoe, _The Burman, his life and notions_.

J.G. Scott, _Burma, a handbook of practical information_, 1906.

_Reports of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma_,
1916-1920.

Various articles (especially by Duroiselle, Taw-Sein-Ko and R.C.
Temple) in the _Indian Antiquary_, _Buddhism_, and _Bulletin de
l'Ecole Francaise de l'Extreme Orient._]

[Footnote 130: So too Prome is called Srikshetra and the name
Irrawaddy represents Iravati (the modern Ravi). The ancient town of
Sravasti or Savatthi is said to reappear in the three forms
Tharawaddy, Tharawaw and Thawutti.]

[Footnote 131: See _Indian Antiquary_, 1893, p. 6, and Forchhammer on
the Mahamuni Pagoda in _Burmese Archaeological Report_ (? 1890).]

[Footnote 132: Dipav. VIII. 12, and in a more embellished form in
Mahavamsa XII. 44-54. See also the Kalyani Inscriptions in _Indian
Ant._ 1893, p. 16.]

[Footnote 133: Through the form Saton representing Saddhan. Early
European travellers called it Satan or Xatan.]

[Footnote 134: The Burmese identify Aparantaka and Yona to which Asoka
also sent missionaries with Upper Burma and the Shan country. But this
seems to be merely a misapplication of Indian names.]

[Footnote 135: See Forchhammer, _Jardine Prize Essay_, 1885, pp.
23-27. He also says that the earliest Talaing alphabet is identical
with the Vengi alphabet of the fourth century A.D. _Burma Archaeol.
Report_, 1917, p. 29.]

[Footnote 136: See R.C. Temple, "Notes on Antiquities of Ramannadesa,"
_Ind. Antiq._ 1893, pp. 327 ff. Though I admit the possibility that
Mahayanism and Tantrism may have flourished in lower Burma, it does
not seem to me that the few Hindu figures reproduced in this article
prove very much.]

[Footnote 137: _J.A._ 1912, II. pp. 121-136.]

[Footnote 138: It is remarkable that Buddhaghosa commenting on Ang.
Nik. 1. 14. 6 (quoted by Forchhammer) describes the merchants of
Ukkala as inhabiting Asitanjana in the region of Hamsavati or Pegu.
This identification of Ukkala with Burmese territory is a mistake but
accepted in Burma and it is more likely that a Burmese would have made
it than a Hindu.]

[Footnote 139: Chap. XXXIX.]

[Footnote 140: See however _Epig. Indica_, vol. V. part iv. Oct. 1898,
pp. 101-102. For the prevalence of forms which must be derived from
Sanskrit not Pali see _Burma Arch. Rep._ 1916, p. 14, and 1917, p.
39.]

[Footnote 141: Report of _Supt. Arch. Survey Burma_, 1909, p. 10,
1910, p. 13, and 1916, pp. 33, 38. Finot, _Notes d'Epigraphie_, p.
357.]

[Footnote 142: See especially Finot in _J.A._ 1912, II. p. 123, and
Huber in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1909 P. 584.]

[Footnote 143: The Aris are further credited with having practised a
sort of _jus primae noctis_. See on this question the chapter on
Camboja and alleged similar customs there.]

[Footnote 144: See _Burma Arch. Rep._ 1916, pp. 12, 13. They seem to
have been similar to the Nilapatanadarsana of Ceylon. The
Prabodhacandrodaya (about 1100 A.D.) represents Buddhist monks as
drunken and licentious.]

[Footnote 145: See Parker, _Burma_, 1892. The annalist says "There is
a huge white elephant (or image) 100 feet high. Litigants burn
incense and kneel before it, reflecting within themselves whether they
are right or wrong.... When there is any disaster or plague the king
also kneels in front of it and blames himself." The Chinese character
means either image or elephant, but surely the former must be the
meaning here.]

[Footnote 146: See Taw-Sein-Ko, in _Ind. Antiquary_, 1906, p. 211. But
I must confess that I have not been able to follow or confirm all the
etymologies suggested by him.]

[Footnote 147: See for Chinese remains at Pagan, _Report of the
Superintendent, Arch. Survey, Burma, for year ending 31st March,
1910_, pp. 20, 21. An inscription at Pagan records that in 1285
Khubilai's troops were accompanied by monks sent to evangelize Burma.
Both troops and monks halted at Tagaung and both were subsequently
withdrawn. See _Arch. Survey_, 1917, p. 38.]

[Footnote 148: The date of Anawrata's conquest of Thaton seems to be
now fixed by inscriptions as 1057 A.D., though formerly supposed to be
earlier. See _Burma Arch. Rep._ 1916. For Anawrata's religious reforms
see _Sasanavamsa_, pp. 17 ff. and 57 ff.]

[Footnote 149: It has been noted that many of the inscriptions
explanatory of the scenes depicted on the walls of the Ananda temple
at Pagan are in Talaing, showing that it was some time before the
Burmans were able to assimilate the culture of the conquered country.]

[Footnote 150: See the _Sasanavamsa_, p. 64 and p. 20. See also
Bode, _Pali Literature of Burma_, p. 15. But the Mahavamsa, LX.
4-7, while recording the communications between Vijaya Bahu and
Aniruddha ( = Anawrata) represents Ceylon as asking for monks from
Ramanna, which implies that lower Burma was even then regarded as a
Buddhist country with a fine tradition.]

[Footnote 151: The Burmese canon adds four works to the
Khuddaka-Nikaya, namely: (a) Milinda Panha, (b) Netti-Pakarana, (c)
Suttasangaha, (d) Petakopadesa.]

[Footnote 152: Inscriptions give his reign as 1084-1112 A.D. See
_Burma Arch. Rep._ 1916, p. 24. Among many other remarkable edifices
may be mentioned the Thapinyu or Thabbannu (1100), the Gaudapalin
(1160) and the Bodhi (_c._ 1200) which is a copy of the temple at
Bodhgaya.]

[Footnote 153: The best known of his works are the Sutta-niddesa on
grammar and the Sankhepavannana. The latter is a commentary on
the Abhidhammattha-sangaha, but it is not certain if Chapata
composed it or merely translated it from the Sinhalese.]

[Footnote 154: Some authorities speak as if the four disciples of
Chapata had founded four sects, but the reprobate Rahula can hardly
have done this. The above account is taken from the Kalyani
inscription, _Ind. Ant_. 1893, pp. 30, 31. It says very distinctly
"There were in Pugama (Pagan) 4 sects. 1. The successors of the
priests who introduced the religion from Sudhammanagara (_i.e._ the
Mramma Sangha). 2. The disciples of Sivalimahathera. 3. The disciples
of Tamalindamahathera. 4. The disciples of Ananda Mahathera."]

[Footnote 155: Also known by the title of Dhammavitasa. He was active
in 1246.]

[Footnote 156: Found in Zaingganaing, a suburb of Pegu. The text,
translation and notes are contained in various articles by Taw-Sein-Ko
in the _Indian Antiquary_ for 1893-4.]

[Footnote 157: Mahavagga, II. 11, 12, 13.]

[Footnote 158: According to Taw-Sein-Ko (_Ind. Ant._ 1893, p. 11)
"about 105 or 126 feet in perimeter."]

[Footnote 159: No contact with Cambojan religion is implied. The sect
was so called because its chief monastery was near the Camboja market
and this derived its name from the fact that many Cambojan (probably
meaning Shan) prisoners were confined near it.]

[Footnote 160: In favour of it, it may be said that the Dipavamsa
and the earlier traditions on which the Dipavamsa is based are
ancient and impartial witnesses: against it, that Asoka's attention
seems to have been directed westwards, not towards Bengal and Burma,
and that no very early proof of the existence of Buddhism in Burma has
been found.]

[Footnote 161: Apparently about 1525-1530.]

[Footnote 162: See _Sasanavamsa_, pp. 118 ff.]

[Footnote 163: _E.g._ Mahavagga, I. 29, 2; IV. 3, 3. Ekamsam
uttarasangam karitva. But both arrangements of drapery are found in
the oldest images of the Buddha and perhaps the Ekamsika fashion is
the commoner. See Grunwedel, _Buddhist Art in India_, 1901, p. 172.
Though these images are considerably later than the Mahavagga and
prove nothing as to the _original_ practice of the Sangha, yet they
show that the Ekamsika fashion prevailed at a relatively early
period. It now prevails in Siam and partly in Ceylon. I-Ching (chap.
XI.) has a discussion on the way robes were worn in India (_c._ 680
A.D.) which is very obscure but seems to say that monks may keep their
shoulders covered while in a monastery but should uncover one when
they go out.]

[Footnote 164: _Sasanav._ p. 123. Sakala-Maramma-ratthavasino
ca: ayam amhakam raja bodhisatto ti voharimsu. In the Po-U-Daung
inscription, Alompra's son, Hsin-byu-shin, says twice "In virtue of
this my good deed, may I become a Buddha, ... an omniscient one."
_Indian Antiquary_, 1893, pp. 2 and 5. There is something Mahayanist
in this aspiration. Cf. too the inscriptions of the Siamese King
Sri-Suryavamsa Rama mentioned below.]

[Footnote 165: They were Puritans who objected to shrines and images
and are said to be represented to-day by the Sawti sect.]

[Footnote 166: See _The Burmese Empire_ by the Italian Father
Sangermano, who went to Burma in 1783 and lived there about 20 years.]

[Footnote 167: Thathana is the Pali Sasana. In Burmese pronunciation
the s of Indian words regularly appears as th ( = [Greek: th]), r as y
and j as z. Thus Thagya for Sakra, Yazawin for Rajavamsa.]

[Footnote 168: See E. Forchhammer, _Jardine Prize Essay_ (on the
sources and development of Burmese Law), 1885. J. Jolly, "Recht und
Sitte" in _Grundriss der Ind. Ar. Phil._ 1896, pp. 41-44. M.H. Bode,
_Pali Lit. of Burma_, pp. 83 ff. Dhammathat is the Burmese
pronunciation of Dhammasattha, Sanskrit Dharmasastra.]

[Footnote 169: This theory did not prevent the kings of Burma and
their subordinates from inflicting atrociously cruel punishments.]

[Footnote 170: Forchhammer gives a list of 39 Dhammathats compiled
between 1753 and 1882.]

[Footnote 171: They seem to have included tantric works of the
Mahakalacakra type. See Bode, _Pali Lit. of Burma_, p. 108, Nos. 270,
271. But the name is given in the Pali form cakka.]

[Footnote 172: Among usages borrowed from Hinduism may be mentioned
the daily washing in holy water of the image in the Arakan temple at
Mandalay. Formerly court festivities, such as the New Year's feast and
the festival of ploughing, were performed by Ponnas and with Indian
rites. On the other hand the Ramayana does not seem to have the same
influence on art and literature that it has had in Siam and Java,
though scenes from it are sometimes depicted. See _Report, Supt.
Archaeolog. Survey, Burma_, 1908, p. 22.]

[Footnote 173: See especially _The Thirty Seven Nats_ by Sir. R.C.
Temple, 1906, and _Burma_ by Sir. J.G. Scott, 1906, pp. 380 ff. The
best authorities seem agreed that Nat is not the Sanskrit Natha but an
indigenous word of unknown derivation.]

[Footnote 174: Possibly in order to include four female spirits: or
possibly because it was felt that sundry later heroes had as strong a
claim to membership of this distinguished body as the original 33.]

[Footnote 175: It is noticeable that Thagya comes from the Sanskrit
Sakra not the Pali Sakka. Th = Sk. s: y = Sk. r.]

[Footnote 176: See R.C. Temple, _The Thirty Seven Nats_, chaps.
X.-XIII., for these cycles.]

[Footnote 177: _E.g._ R.C. Temple, _l.c._ p. 36.]

[Footnote 178: According to Sir. J.G. Scott much more commonly than
prayers among Christians. _Burma_, p. 366.]

[Footnote 179: 15,371 according to the census of 1891. The figures in
the last census are not conveniently arranged for Buddhist
statistics.]

[Footnote 180: Hastings' _Encycl. of Religion and Ethics_, art. "Burma
(Buddhism)."]

[Footnote 181: See Bode, _Pali Literature in Burma_, pp. 95 ff.]

[Footnote 182: No less than 22 translations of it have been made into
Burmese. See S.Z. Aung in _J.P.T.S._ 1912, p. 129. He also mentions
that night lectures on the Abhidhamma in Burmese are given in
monasteries.]

[Footnote 183: But on such occasions the laity usually fast after
midday.]

[Footnote 184: Man is the Burmese form of Mara.]

[Footnote 185: Among the most striking characteristics of the Nepalese
style are buildings of many stories each with a projecting roof. No
examples of similar buildings from ancient India have survived,
perhaps because they were made of wood, but representations of
two-storied buildings have come down to us, for instance on the
Sohgaura copper plate which dates probably from the time of Asoka (see
Buhler, _W.Z.K.M._ 1896, p. 138). See also the figures in Foucher's
_Art Greco-bouddhique du Gandhara_, on pp. 121, 122. The monuments at
Mamallapuram known as Raths (see Fergusson, _Indian and Eastern
Architecture_, I. p. 172) appear to be representations of many storied
Viharas. There are several references to seven storied buildings in
the Jatakas.]

[Footnote 186: = cetiya.]

[Footnote 187: Occasionally groups of five Buddhas, that is, these
four Buddhas together with Metteyya, are found. See _Report of the
Supt. Arch. Survey (Burma) for the year ending March 31st, 1910_, p.
16.]




CHAPTER XXXVII

SIAM[188]

1


The Buddhism of Siam does not differ materially from that of Burma and
Ceylon but merits separate mention, since it has features of its own
due in some measure to the fact that Siam is still an independent
kingdom ruled by a monarch who is also head of the Church. But whereas
for the last few centuries this kingdom may be regarded as a political
and religious unit, its condition in earlier times was different and
Siamese history tells us nothing of the introduction and first
diffusion of Indian religions in the countries between India and
China.

The people commonly known as Siamese call themselves Thai which
(in the form Tai) appears to be the racial name of several tribes who
can be traced to the southern provinces of China. They spread thence,
in fanlike fashion, from Laos to Assam, and the middle section
ultimately descended the Menam to the sea. The Siamese claim to have
assumed the name Thai (free) after they threw off the yoke of the
Cambojans, but this derivation is more acceptable to politics than to
ethnology. The territories which they inhabited were known as Siem,
Syam or Syama, which is commonly identified with the Sanskrit
Syama, dark or brown.[189] But the names Shan and A-hom seem to be
variants of the same word and Syama is possibly not its origin but
a learned and artificial distortion.[190] The Lao were another
division of the same race who occupied the country now called Laos
before the Tai had moved into Siam. This movement was gradual and
until the beginning of the twelfth century they merely established
small principalities, the principal of which was Lamphun,[191] on the
western arm of the Mekong. They gradually penetrated into the kingdoms
of Svankalok, Sukhothai[192] and Lavo (Lophburi) which then were
vassals of Camboja, and they were reinforced by another body of Tais
which moved southwards early in the twelfth century. For some time the
Cambojan Empire made a successful effort to control these immigrants
but in the latter part of the thirteenth century the Siamese
definitely shook off its yoke and founded an independent state with
its capital at Sukhothai. There was probably some connection between
these events and the southern expeditions of Khubilai Khan who in 1254
conquered Talifu and set the Tai tribes in motion.

The history of their rule in Siam may be briefly described as a
succession of three kingdoms with capitals at Sukhothai, Ayuthia and
Bangkok respectively. Like the Burmese, the Siamese have annals or
chronicles. They fall into two divisions, the chronicles[193] of the
northern kingdom in three volumes which go down to the foundation of
Ayuthia and are admitted even by the Siamese to be mostly fabulous, and
the later annals in 40 volumes which were rearranged after the sack of
Ayuthia in 1767 but claim to begin with the foundation of the city.
Various opinions have been expressed as to their trustworthiness,[194]
but it is allowed by all that they must be used with caution. More
authoritative but not very early are the inscriptions set up by various
kings, of which a considerable number have been published and
translated.[195]

The early history of Sukhothai and its kings is not yet beyond dispute
but a monarch called Ramaraja or Rama Khomheng played a considerable
part in it. His identity with Phaya Ruang, who is said to have
founded the dynasty and city, has been both affirmed and denied.
Sukhothai, at least as the designation of a kingdom, seems to be much
older than his reign.[196] It was undoubtedly understood as the
equivalent of the Sanskrit Sukhodaya, but like Syama it may be an
adaptation of some native word. In an important inscription found at
Sukhothai and now preserved at Bangkok,[197] which was probably
composed about 1300 A.D., Rama Khomheng gives an account of his
kingdom. On the east it extended to the banks of the Mekhong and
beyond it to Chava (perhaps a name of Luang-Prabang): on the south to
the sea, as far as Sri Dharmaraja or Ligor: on the west to
Hamsavati or Pegu. This last statement is important for it enables
us to understand how at this period, and no doubt considerably
earlier, the Siamese were acquainted with Pali Buddhism. The king
states that hitherto his people had no alphabet but that he invented
one.[198] This script subsequently developed into the modern
Siamese writing which, though it presents many difficulties, is an
ingenious attempt to express a language with tones in an alphabet. The
vocabulary of Siamese is not homogeneous: it comprises (_a_) a
foundation of Thai, (_b_) a considerable admixture of Khmer words,
(_c_) an element borrowed from Malay and other languages, (_d_)
numerous ecclesiastical and learned terms taken from Pali and
Sanskrit. There are five tones which must be distinguished, if either
written or spoken speech is to be intelligible. This is done partly by
accents and partly by dividing the forty-four consonants (many of
which are superfluous for other purposes) into three groups, the high,
middle and deep.

The king also speaks of religion. The court and the inhabitants of
Sukhothai were devout Buddhists: they observed the season of Vassa and
celebrated the festival of Kathina with processions, concerts and
reading of the scriptures. In the city were to be seen statues of the
Buddha and scenes carved in relief, as well as large monasteries. To
the west of the city was the Forest Monastery, presented to a
distinguished elder who came from Sri Dharmaraja and had studied
the whole Tripitaka. The mention of this official and others suggests
that there was a regular hierarchy and the king relates how he exhumed
certain sacred relics and built a pagoda over them. Though there is no
direct allusion to Brahmanism, stress is laid on the worship of
spirits and devas on which the prosperity of the kingdom depends.

The form of Buddhism described seems to have differed little from the
Hinayanism found in Siam to-day. Whence did the Siamese obtain it? For
some centuries before they were known as a nation, they probably
professed some form of Indian religion. They came from the border
lands, if not from the actual territory of China, and must have been
acquainted with Chinese Buddhism. Also Burmese influence probably
reached Yunnan in the eighth century,[199] but it is not easy to say
what form of religion it brought with it. Still when the Thai entered
what is now Siam, it is likely that their religion was some form of
Buddhism. While they were subject to Camboja they must have felt the
influence of Sivaism and possibly of Mahayanist Sanskrit
Buddhism but no Pali Buddhism can have come from this quarter.[200]

Southern Siam was however to some extent affected by another wave of
Buddhism. From early times the eastern coast of India (and perhaps
Ceylon) had intercourse not only with Burma but with the Malay
Peninsula. It is proved by inscriptions that the region of Ligor,
formerly known as Sri Dharmaraja, was occupied by Hindus (who were
probably Buddhists) at least as early as the fourth century A.D.,[201]
and Buddhist inscriptions have been found on the mainland opposite
Penang. The Chinese annals allude to a change in the customs of
Camboja and I-Ching says plainly that Buddhism once nourished there
but was exterminated by a wicked king, which may mean that Hinayanist
Buddhism had spread thither from Ligor but was suppressed by a dynasty
of Sivaites. He also says that at the end of the seventh century
Hinayanism was prevalent in the islands of the Southern Sea. An
inscription of about the fourth century found in Kedah and another of
the seventh or eighth from Phra Pathom both contain the formula _Ye
dharma_, etc. The latter inscription and also one from Mergui ascribed
to the eleventh century seem to be in mixed Sanskrit and Pali. The
Sukhothai inscription summarized above tells how a learned monk was
brought thither from Ligor and clearly the Pali Buddhism of northern
Siam may have followed the same route. But it probably had also
another more important if not exclusive source, namely Burma. After
the reign of Anawrata Pali Buddhism was accepted in Burma and in what
we now call the Shan States as the religion of civilized mankind and
this conviction found its way to the not very distant kingdom of
Sukhothai. Subsequently the Siamese recognized the seniority and
authority of the Sinhalese Church by inviting an instructor to come
from Ceylon, but in earlier times they can hardly have had direct
relation with the island.

We have another picture of religious life in a Khmer
inscription[202] of Lidaiya or Sri Suryavamsa Rama composed in
1361 or a little later. This monarch, who is also known by many
lengthy titles, appears to have been a man of learning who had
studied the Tipitaka, the Vedas, the Sastragama and Dharmanaya
and erected images of Mahesvara and Vishnu as well as of the
Buddha. In 1361 he sent a messenger to Ceylon charged with the task of
bringing back a Metropolitan or head of the Sangha learned in the
Pitakas. This ecclesiastic, who is known only by his title, was duly
sent and on arriving in Siam was received with the greatest honour and
made a triumphal progress to Sukhothai. He is not represented as
introducing a new religion: the impression left by the inscription is
rather that the king and his people being already well-instructed in
Buddhism desired ampler edification from an authentic source. The
arrival of the Sangharaja coincided with the beginning of Vassa and
at the end of the sacred season the king dedicated a golden image of
the Buddha, which stood in the midst of the city, and then entered the
order. In doing so he solemnly declared his hope that the merit thus
acquired might make him in future lives not an Emperor, an Indra or a
Brahma but a Buddha able to save mankind. He pursued his religious
career with a gratifying accompaniment of miracles and many of the
nobility and learned professions followed his example. But after a
while a deputation waited on his Majesty begging him to return to the
business of his kingdom.[203] An edifying contest ensued. The monks
besought him to stay as their preceptor and guide: the laity pointed
out that government was at an end and claimed his attention. The
matter was referred to the Sangharaja who decided that the king
ought to return to his secular duties. He appears to have found little
difficulty in resuming lay habits for he proceeded to chastise the
people of Luang-Prabang.

Two other inscriptions,[204] apparently dating from this epoch,
relate that a cutting of the Bo-tree was brought from Ceylon and
that certain relics (perhaps from Patna) were also installed with
great solemnity. To the same time are referred a series of engravings
on stone (not reliefs) found in the Vat-si-jum at Sukhothai. They
illustrate about 100 Jatakas, arranged for the most part according to
the order followed in the Pali Canon.

The facts that King Sri Suryavamsa sent to Ceylon for his
Metropolitan and that some of the inscriptions which extol his merits
are in Pali[205] make it probable that the religion which he professed
differed little from the Pali Buddhism which flourishes in Siam to-day
and this supposition is confirmed by the general tone of his
inscriptions. But still several phrases in them have a Mahayanist
flavour. He takes as his model the conduct of the Bodhisattvas,
described as ten headed by Metteyya, and his vow to become a Buddha
and save all creatures is at least twice mentioned. The Buddhas are
said to be innumerable and the feet of Bhikkhus are called Buddha
feet.[206] There is no difficulty in accounting for the presence of
such ideas: the only question is from what quarter this Mahayanist
influence came. The king is said to have been a student of Indian
literature: his country, like Burma, was in touch with China and his
use of the Khmer language indicates contact with Camboja.

Another inscription engraved by order of Dharmasokaraja[207] and
apparently dating from the fourteenth century is remarkable for its
clear statement of the doctrine (generally considered as Mahayanist)
that merit acquired by devotion to the Buddha can be transferred. The
king states that a woman called Bunrak has transferred all her merit
to the Queen and that he himself makes over all his merit to his
teacher, to his relations and to all beings in unhappy states of
existence.

At some time in this period the centre of the Thai empire changed
but divergent views have been held as to the date[208] and character
of this event. It would appear that in 1350 a Siamese subsequently
known as King Ramadhipati, a descendant of an ancient line of Thai
princes, founded Ayuthia as a rival to Sukhothai. The site was not
new, for it had long been known as Dvaravati and seems to be mentioned
under that name by I-Ching (_c._ 680), but a new city was apparently
constructed. The evidence of inscriptions indicates that Sukhothai was
not immediately subdued by the new kingdom and did not cease to be a
royal residence for some time. But still Ayuthia gradually became
predominant and in the fifteenth century merited the title of capital
of Siam.

Its rise did not affect the esteem in which Buddhism was held, and it
must have contained many great religious monuments. The jungles which
now cover the site of the city surround the remnants of the Wat
Somarokot, in which is a gigantic bronze Buddha facing with scornful
calm the ruin which threatens him. The Wat Chern, which lies at
some distance, contains another gigantic image. A curious
inscription[209] engraved on an image of Siva found at Sukhothai
and dated 1510 A.D. asserts the identity of Buddhism and Brahmanism,
but the popular feeling was in favour of the former. At Ayuthia the
temples appear to be exclusively Buddhist and at Lophburi ancient
buildings originally constructed for the Brahmanic cult have been
adapted to Buddhist uses. It was in 1602 that the mark known as the
footprint of Buddha was discovered at the place now called Phra-bat.

Ayuthia was captured by the Burmese in 1568 and the king was carried
into captivity but the disaster was not permanent, for at the end of
the century the power of the Siamese reached its highest point and
their foreign relations were extensive. We hear that five hundred
Japanese assisted them to repulse a Burmese attack and that there was
a large Japanese colony in Ayuthia. On the other hand when Hideyoshi
invaded Korea in 1592, the Siamese offered to assist the Chinese.
Europeans appeared first in 1511 when the Portuguese took Malacca.
But on the whole the dealings of Siam with Europe were peaceful
and both traders and missionaries were welcomed. The most singular
episode in this international intercourse was the career of the Greek
adventurer Constantine Phaulcon who in the reign of King Narai was
practically Foreign Minister. In concert with the French missionaries
he arranged an exchange of embassies (1682 and 1685) between Narai
and Louis XIV, the latter having been led to suppose that the king and
people of Siam were ready to embrace Christianity. But when the French
envoys broached the subject of conversion, the king replied that he
saw no reason to change the religion which his countrymen had
professed for two thousand years, a chronological statement which it
might be hard to substantiate. Still, great facilities were given to
missionaries and further negotiations ensued, in the course of which
the French received almost a monopoly of foreign trade and the right
to maintain garrisons. But the death of Narai was followed by a
reaction. Phaulcon died in prison and the French garrisons were
expelled. Buddhism probably flourished at this period for the
Mahavamsa tells us that the king of Ceylon sent to Ayuthia for
monks in 1750 because religion there was pure and undefiled.

Ayuthia continued to be the capital until 1767 when it was laid in
ruins by the Burmese who, though Buddhists, did not scruple to destroy
or deface the temples and statues with which it was ornamented. But
the collapse of the Siamese was only local and temporary. A leader of
Chinese origin named Phaya Tak Sin rallied their forces, cleared
the Burmese out of the country and made Bangkok, officially described
as the Capital of the Angels, the seat of Government. But he was
deposed in 1782 and one of the reasons for his fall seems to have been
a too zealous reformation of Buddhism. In the troublous times
following the collapse of Ayuthia the Church had become disorganized
and corrupt, but even those who desired improvement would not assent
to the powers which the king claimed over monks. A new dynasty (of
which the sixth monarch is now on the throne) was founded in 1782 by
Chao Phaya Chakkri. One of his first acts was to convoke a council
for the revision of the Tipitaka and to build a special hall in
which the text thus agreed on was preserved. His successor Phra:
Buddha Lot La is considered the best poet that Siam has produced and
it is probably the only country in the world where this
distinction has fallen to the lot of a sovereign. The poet king had
two sons, Phra: Nang: Klao, who ascended the throne after his death,
and Mongkut, who during his brother's reign remained in a monastery
strictly observing the duties of a monk. He then became king and
during his reign (1851-1868) Siam "may be said to have passed from the
middle ages to modern times."[210] It is a tribute to the excellence
of Buddhist discipline that a prince who spent twenty-six years as a
monk should have emerged as neither a bigot nor an impractical mystic
but as an active, enlightened and progressive monarch. The equality
and simplicity of monastic life disposed him to come into direct touch
with his subjects and to adopt straightforward measures which might
not have occurred to one who had always been surrounded by a wall of
ministers. While still a monk he founded a stricter sect which aimed
at reviving the practice of the Buddha, but at the same time he
studied foreign creeds and took pleasure in conversing with
missionaries. He wrote several historical pamphlets and an English
Grammar, and was so good a mathematician that he could calculate the
occurrence of an eclipse. When he became king he regulated the
international position of Siam by concluding treaties of friendship
and commerce with the principal European powers, thus showing the
broad and liberal spirit in which he regarded politics, though a
better acquaintance with the ways of Europeans might have made him
refuse them extraterritorial privileges. He abolished the custom which
obliged everyone to keep indoors when the king went out and he
publicly received petitions on every Uposatha day. He legislated
against slavery,[211] gambling, drinking spirits and smoking opium and
considerably improved the status of women. He also published edicts
ordering the laity to inform the ecclesiastical authorities if they
noticed any abuses in the monasteries. He caused the annals of Siam to
be edited and issued numerous orders on archaeological and literary
questions, in which, though a good Pali scholar, he deprecated the
affected use of Pali words and enjoined the use of a terse and simple
Siamese style, which he certainly wrote himself. He appears to
have died of scientific zeal for he caught a fatal fever on a trip
which he took to witness a total eclipse of the sun.

He was succeeded by his son Chulalongkorn[212] (1868-1911), a liberal
and enlightened ruler, who had the misfortune to lose much territory
to the French on one side and the English on the other. For religion,
his chief interest is that he published an edition of the Tipitaka.
The volumes are of European style and printed in Siamese type, whereas
Cambojan characters were previously employed for religious works.

2


As I have already observed, there is not much difference between
Buddhism in Burma and Siam. In mediaeval times a mixed form of religion
prevailed in both countries and Siam was influenced by the Brahmanism
and Mahayanism of Camboja. Both seem to have derived a purer form of
the faith from Pegu, which was conquered by Anawrata in the eleventh
century and was the neighbour of Sukhothai so long as that kingdom
lasted. Both had relations with Ceylon and while venerating her as the
metropolis of the faith also sent monks to her in the days of her
spiritual decadence. But even in externals some differences are
visible. The gold and vermilion of Burma are replaced in Siam by more
sober but artistic tints--olive, dull purple and dark orange--and the
change in the colour scheme is accompanied by other changes in the
buildings.

A religious establishment in Siam consists of several edifices and is
generally known as Wat,[213] followed by some special designation
such as Wat Chang. Bangkok is full of such establishments mostly
constructed on the banks of the river or canals. The entrance is
usually guarded by gigantic and grotesque figures which are often
lions, but at the Wat Pho in Bangkok the tutelary demons are
represented by curious caricatures of Europeans wearing tall hats. The
gate leads into several courts opening out of one another and not
arranged on any fixed plan. The first is sometimes surrounded by a
colonnade in which are set a long line of the Buddha's eighty
disciples. The most important building in a Wat is known as
Bot.[214] It has a colonnade of pillars outside and is surmounted
by three or four roofs, not much raised one above the other, and
bearing finials of a curious shape, said to represent a snake's
head.[215] It is also marked off by a circuit of eight stones, cut in
the shape of Bo-tree leaves, which constitute a sima or boundary. It
is in the Bot that ordinations and other acts of the Sangha are
performed. Internally it is a hall: the walls are often covered with
paintings and at the end there is always a sitting figure of the
Buddha[216] forming the apex of a pyramid, the lower steps of which
are decorated with smaller images and curious ornaments, such as
clocks under glass cases.

Siamese images of the Buddha generally represent him as crowned by a
long flame-like ornament called Siro rot,[217] probably
representing the light supposed to issue from the prominence on his
head. But the ornament sometimes becomes a veritable crown terminating
in a spire, as do those worn by the kings of Camboja and Siam. On the
left and right of the Buddha often stand figures of Phra: Mokha: la
(Moggalana) and Phra: Saribut (Sariputta). It is stated that the
Siamese pray to them as saints and that the former is invoked to heal
broken limbs.[218] The Buddha when represented in frescoes is robed in
red but his face and hands are of gold. Besides the Bot a Wat
contains one or more wihans. The word is derived from _Vihara_ but
has come to mean an image-house. The wihans are halls not unlike
the Bots but smaller. In a large Wat there is usually one
containing a gigantic recumbent image of the Buddha and they sometimes
shelter Indian deities such as Yama.

In most if not in all Wat there are structures known as Phra: chedi
and Phra: prang. The former are simply the ancient cetiyas, called
dagobas in Ceylon and zedis in Burma. They do not depart materially
from the shape usual in other countries and sometimes, for
instance in the gigantic chedi at Pra Pratom, the part below the spire
is a solid bell-shaped dome. But Siamese taste tends to make such
buildings slender and elongate and they generally consist of stone
discs of decreasing size, set one on the other in a pile, which
assumes in its upper parts the proportions of a flagstaff rather than
of a stone building. The Phra: prangs though often larger than the
Phra: chedis are proportionally thicker and less elongate. They appear
to be derived from the Brahmanic temple towers of Camboja which
consist of a shrine crowned by a dome. But in Siam the shrine is often
at some height above the ground and is reduced to small dimensions,
sometimes becoming a mere niche. In large Phra: prangs it is
approached by a flight of steps outside and above it rises the tower,
terminating in a metal spire. But whereas in the Phra: chedis these
spires are simple, in the Phra: prangs they bear three crescents
representing the trident of Siva and appear like barbed arrows. A
large Wat is sure to contain a number of these structures and may also
comprise halls for preaching, a pavilion covering a model of Buddha's
foot print, tanks for ablution and a bell tower. It is said that only
royal Wats contain libraries and buildings called chatta mukh,
which shelter a four-faced image of Brahma.[219]

The monks are often housed in single chambers arranged round the
courts of a Wat but sometimes in larger buildings outside it. The
number of monks and novices living in one monastery is larger than in
Burma, and according to the Bangkok Directory (1907) works out at an
average of about 12. In the larger Wats this figure is considerably
exceeded. Altogether there were 50,764 monks and 10,411 novices in
1907,[220] the province of Ayuthia being decidedly the best provided
with clergy. As in Burma, it is customary for every male to spend some
time in a monastery, usually at the age of about 20, and two months is
considered the minimum which is respectable. It is also common to
enter a monastery for a short stay on the day when a parent is
cremated. During the season of Vassa all monks go out to collect
alms but at other seasons only a few make the daily round and the food
collected, as in Burma and Ceylon, is generally not eaten. But during
the dry season it is considered meritorious for monks to make a
pilgrimage to Phra Bat and while on the way to live on charity. They
engage to some extent in manual work and occupy themselves with
carpentering.[221] As in Burma, education is in their hands, and they
also act as doctors, though their treatment has more to do with charms
and faith cures than with medicine.

As in Burma there are two sects, the ordinary unreformed body, and the
rigorous and select communion founded by Mongkut and called Dhammayut.
It aims at a more austere and useful life but in outward observances
the only distinction seems to be that the Dhammayuts hold the
alms-bowl in front of them in both hands, whereas the others hold it
against the left hip with the left hand only. The hierarchy is well
developed but somewhat secularized, though probably not more so than
it was in India under Asoka. In the official directory where the
departments of the Ministry of Public Instruction are enumerated, the
Ecclesiastical Department comes immediately after the Bacteriological,
the two being clearly regarded as different methods of expelling evil
spirits. The higher clerical appointments are made by the king. He
names four Primates,[222] one of whom is selected as chief. The
Primates with nineteen superior monks form the highest governing body
of the Church. Below them are twelve dignitaries called Gurus, who are
often heads of large Wats. There are also prelates who bear the
Cambojan title of Burien equivalent to Mahacarya. They must have
passed an examination in Pali and are chiefly consulted on matters of
ceremonial.

It will thus be seen that the differences between the churches of
Burma, Ceylon and Siam are slight; hardly more than the local
peculiarities which mark the Roman church in Italy, Spain, and
England. Different opinions have been expressed as to the moral tone
and conduct of Siamese monks and most critics state that they are
somewhat inferior to their Burmese brethren. The system by which
a village undertakes to support a monk, provided that he is a
reasonably competent school-master and of good character, works well.
But in the larger monasteries it is admitted that there are inmates
who have entered in the hope of leading a lazy life and even fugitives
from justice. Still the penalty for any grave offence is immediate
expulsion by the ecclesiastical authorities and the offender is
treated with extreme severity by the civil courts to which he then
becomes amenable.

The religious festivals of Siam are numerous and characteristic. Many
are Buddhist, some are Brahmanic, and some are royal. Uposatha days
(wan phra:) are observed much as in Burma. The birth, enlightenment
and death of the Buddha (which are all supposed to have taken place on
the 15th day of the 6th waxing moon) are celebrated during a three
days festival. These three days are of peculiar solemnity and are
spent in the discharge of religious duties, such as hearing sermons
and giving alms. But at most festivals religious observances are
mingled with much picturesque but secular gaiety. In the morning the
monks do not go their usual round[223] and the alms-bowls are arranged
in a line within the temple grounds. The laity (mostly women) arrive
bearing wicker trays on which are vessels containing rice and
delicacies. They place a selection of these in each bowl and then
proceed to the Bot where they hear the commandments recited and often
vow to observe for that day some which are usually binding only on
monks. While the monks are eating their meal the people repair to a
river, which is rarely far distant in Siam, and pour water drop by
drop saying "May the food which we have given for the use of the holy
ones be of benefit to our fathers and mothers and to all of our
relatives who have passed away." This rite is curiously in harmony
with the injunctions of the Tirokuddasuttam in the Khuddakapatha,
which is probably an ancient work.[224] The rest of the day is usually
devoted to pious merrymaking, such as processions by day and
illuminations by night. On some feasts the laws against gambling are
suspended and various games of chance are freely indulged in. Thus the
New Year festival called Trut (or Krut) Thai lasts three days. On the
first two days, especially the second, crowds fill the temples to
offer flowers before the statues of Buddha and more substantial
presents of food, clothes, etc., to the clergy. Well-to-do families
invite monks to their houses and pass the day in listening to their
sermons and recitations. Companies of priests are posted round the
city walls to scare away evil spirits and with the same object guns
are fired throughout the night. But the third day is devoted to
gambling by almost the whole population except the monks. Not
dissimilar is the celebration of the Songkran holidays, at the
beginning of the official year. The special religious observance at
this feast consists in bathing the images of Buddha and in theory the
same form of watery respect is extended to aged relatives and monks.
In practice its place is taken by gifts of perfumes and other
presents.

The rainy season is preceded and ended by holidays. During this period
both monks and pious laymen observe their religious duties more
strictly. Thus monks eat only once a day and then only what is put
into their bowls and laymen observe some of the minor vows. At the end
of the rains come the important holidays known as Thot Kathin,[225]
when robes are presented to monks. This festival has long had a
special importance in Siam. Thus Rama Khomheng in his inscription of
A.D. 1292[226] describes the feast of Kathina which lasts a month. At
the present day many thousands of robes are prepared in the capital
alone so as to be ready for distribution in October and November, when
the king or some deputy of high rank visits every temple and makes the
offering in person. During this season Bangkok witnesses a series of
brilliant processions.

These festivals mentioned may be called Buddhist though their
light-hearted and splendour-loving gaiety, their processions and
gambling are far removed from the spirit of Gotama. Others however are
definitely Brahmanic and in Bangkok are superintended by the Brahmans
attached to the Court. Since the time of Mongkut Buddhist priests are
also present as a sign that the rites, if not ordered by Buddhism, at
least have its countenance. Such is the Rek Na,[227] or
ploughing festival. The king is represented by the Minister of
Agriculture who formerly had the right to exact from all shops found
open such taxes as he might claim for his temporary sovereignty. At
present he is escorted in procession to Dusit,[228] a royal park
outside Bangkok, where he breaks ground with a plough drawn by two
white oxen.

Somewhat similar is the Thib-Ching-Cha, or Swinging holidays, a
two days' festival which seems to be a harvest thanksgiving. Under the
supervision of a high official, four Brahmans wearing tall conical
hats swing on a board suspended from a huge frame about 100 ft high.
Their object is to catch with their teeth a bag of money hanging at a
little distance from the swing. When three or four sets of swingers
have obtained a prize in this way, they conclude the ceremony by
sprinkling the ground with holy water contained in bullock horns.
Swinging is one of the earliest Indian rites[229] and as part of the
worship of Krishna it has lasted to the present day. Yet another
Brahmanic festival is the Loi Kathong,[230] when miniature rafts
and ships bearing lights and offerings are sent down the Menam to the
sea.

Another class of ceremonies may be described as royal, inasmuch as
they are religious only in so far as they invoke religion to protect
royalty. Such are the anniversaries of the birth and coronation of the
king and the Thu Nam or drinking of the water of allegiance
which takes place twice a year. At Bangkok all officials assemble at
the Palace and there drink and sprinkle on their heads water in which
swords and other weapons have been dipped thus invoking vengeance on
themselves should they prove disloyal. Jars of this water are
despatched to Governors who superintend the performance of the same
ceremony in the provincial capitals. It is only after the water
has been drunk that officials receive their half yearly salary. Monks
are excused from drinking it but the chief ecclesiastics of Bangkok
meet in the Palace temple and perform a service in honour of the
occasion.

Besides these public solemnities there are a number of domestic
festivals derived from the twelve Samskaras of the Hindus. Of these
only three or four are kept up by the nations of Indo-China, namely
the shaving of the first hair of a child a month after birth, the
giving of a name, and the piercing of the ears for earrings. This last
is observed in Burma and Laos, but not in Siam and Camboja where is
substituted for it the Kon Chuk or shaving of the topknot, which
is allowed to grow until the eleventh or thirteenth year. This
ceremony, which is performed on boys and girls alike, is the most
important event in the life of a young Siamese and is celebrated by
well-to-do parents with lavish expenditure. Those who are indigent
often avail themselves of the royal bounty, for each year a public
ceremony is performed in one of the temples of Bangkok at which poor
children receive the tonsure gratis. An elaborate description of the
tonsure rites has been published by Gerini.[231] They are of
considerable interest as showing how closely Buddhist and Brahmanic
rites are intertwined in Siamese family life.

Marriages are celebrated with a feast to which monks are invited but
are not regarded as religious ceremonies. The dead are usually
disposed of by cremation, but are often kept some time, being either
embalmed or simply buried and exhumed subsequently. Before cremation
the coffin is usually placed within the grounds of a temple. The monks
read Suttas over it and it is said[232] that they hold ribbons which
enter into the coffin and are supposed to communicate to the corpse
the merit acquired by the recitations and prayers.

3


In the preceding pages mention has often been made not only of
Brahmanic rites but of Brahman priests.[233] These are still to be
found in Bangkok attached to the Court and possibly in other cities.
They dress in white and have preserved many Hindu usages but are said
to be poor Sanskrit scholars. Indeed Gerini[234] seems to say that
they use Pali in some of their recitations. Their principal duty is to
officiate at Court functions, but wealthy families invite them to take
part in domestic rites, and also to cast horoscopes and fix lucky
days. It is clear that the presence of these Brahmans is no
innovation. Brahmanism must have been strong in Siam when it was a
province of Camboja, but in both countries gave way before Buddhism.
Many rites, however, connected with securing luck or predicting the
future were too firmly established to be abolished, and, as Buddhist
monks were unwilling to perform them[235] or not thought very
competent, the Brahmans remained and were perhaps reinforced from time
to time by new importations, for there are still Brahman colonies in
Ligor and other Malay towns. Siamese lawbooks, like those of Burma,
seem to be mainly adaptations of Indian Dharmasastras.

On a cursory inspection, Siamese Buddhism, especially as seen in
villages, seems remarkably free from alien additions. But an
examination of ancient buildings, of royal temples in Bangkok and
royal ceremonial, suggests on the contrary that it is a mixed faith in
which the Brahmanic element is strong. Yet though this element appeals
to the superstition of the Siamese and their love of pageantry, I
think that as in Burma it has not invaded the sphere of religion and
ethics more than the Pitakas themselves allow. In art and
literature its influence has been considerable. The story of the
Ramayana is illustrated on the cloister walls of the royal temple at
Bangkok and Indian mythology has supplied a multitude of types to the
painter and sculptor; such as Yomma: rat (Yama), Phaya Man
(Mara), Phra: In (Indra). These are all deities known to the
Pitakas but the sculptures or images[236] in Siamese temples also
include Ganesa, Phra: Narai (Narayana or Vishnu) riding
on the Garuda and Phra: Isuen (Siva) riding on a bull. There is a
legend that the Buddha and Siva tried which could make himself
invisible to the other. At last the Buddha sat on Siva's head and
the god being unable to see him acknowledged his defeat. This story is
told to explain a small figure which Siva bears on his head and
recalls the legend found in the Pitakas[237] that the Buddha made
himself invisible to Brahma but that Brahma had not the corresponding
power. Lingas are still venerated in a few temples, for instance at
Wat Pho in Bangkok, but it would appear that the majority (_e.g._
those found at Pra Pratom and Lophburi) are survivals of ancient
Brahmanic worship and have a purely antiquarian importance. The
Brahmanic cosmology which makes Mt. Meru the centre of this Universe is
generally accepted in ecclesiastical treatises and paintings, though
the educated Siamese may smile at it, and when the topknot of a
Siamese prince is cut off, part of the ceremony consists in his being
received by the king dressed as Siva on the summit of a mound cut
in the traditional shape of Mt. Kailasa.

Like the Nats of Burma, Siam has a spirit population known as
Phis.[238] The name is occasionally applied to Indian deities, but the
great majority of Phis fall into two classes, namely, ghosts of the
dead and nature spirits which, though dangerous, do not rise above the
position of good or bad fairies. In the first class are included the
Phi Pret, who have the characteristics as well as the name of the
Indian Pretas, and also a multitude of beings who like European
ghosts, haunt houses and behave in a mysterious but generally
disagreeable manner. The Phiam is apparently our nightmare. The
ghosts of children dying soon after birth are apt to kill their
mothers and in general women are liable to be possessed by Phis. The
ghosts of those who have died a violent death are dangerous but it
would seem that Siamese magicians know how to utilize them as familiar
spirits. The better sort of ghosts are known as Chao Phi and shrines
called San Chao are set up in their honour. It does not however appear
that there is any hierarchy of Phis like the thirty-seven Nats of
Burma.

Among those Phis who are not ghosts of the dead the most important
is the Phi ruen or guardian spirit of each house. Frequently a
little shrine is erected for him at the top of a pole. There are also
innumerable Phis in the jungle mostly malevolent and capable of
appearing either in human form or as a dangerous animal. But the tree
spirits are generally benevolent and when their trees are cut down
they protect the houses that are made of them.

Thus the Buddhism of Siam, like that of Burma, has a certain admixture
of Brahmanism and animism. The Brahmanism is perhaps more striking
than in Burma on account of the Court ceremonies: the belief in
spirits, though almost universal, seems to be more retiring and less
conspicuous. Yet the inscription of Rama Komheng mentioned above
asserts emphatically that the prosperity of the Empire depends on due
honour being shown to a certain mountain spirit.[239]

