gift of welcome from their Lord. That which Allah hath in store is
better for the righteous.

S: But as to those who are careful of (their duty to) their Lord, they
shall have gardens beneath which rivers flow, abiding in them; an
entertainment from their Lord, and that which is with Allah is best for
the righteous.

003.199
Y: And there are, certainly, among the People of the Book, those who
believe in Allah, in the revelation to you, and in the revelation to
them, bowing in humility to Allah: They will not sell the Signs of
Allah for a miserable gain! For them is a reward with their Lord, and
Allah is swift in account.

P: And lo! of the People of the Scripture there are some who believe in
Allah and that which is revealed unto you and that which was revealed
unto them, humbling themselves before Allah. They purchase not a
trifling gain at the price of the revelations of Allah. Verily their
reward is with their Lord. Lo! Allah is swift to take account.

S: And most surely of the followers of the Book there are those who
believe in Allah and (in) that which has been revealed to you and (in)
that which has been revealed to them, being lowly before Allah; they do
not take a small price for the communications of Allah; these it is
that have their reward with their Lord; surely Allah is quick in
reckoning.

003.200
Y: O ye who believe! Persevere in patience and constancy; vie in such
perseverance; strengthen each other; and fear Allah; that ye may
prosper.

P: O ye who believe! Endure, outdo all others in endurance, be ready,
and observe your duty to Allah, in order that ye may succeed.

S: O you who believe! be patient and excel in patience and remain
steadfast, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, that you may be
successful.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 4:

                              AN-NISA (WOMEN)
 Total Verses: 176 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

004.001
Y: O mankind! reverence your Guardian-Lord, who created you from a
single person, created, of like nature, His mate, and from them twain
scattered (like seeds) countless men and women;- reverence Allah,
through whom ye demand your mutual (rights), and (reverence) the wombs
(That bore you): for Allah ever watches over you.

P: O mankind! Be careful of your duty to your Lord Who created you from
a single soul and from it created its mate and from them twain hath
spread abroad a multitude of men and women. Be careful of your duty
toward Allah in Whom ye claim (your rights) of one another, and toward
the wombs (that bare you). Lo! Allah hath been a watcher over you.

S: O people! be careful of (your duty to) your Lord, Who created you
from a single being and created its mate of the same (kind) and spread
from these two, many men and women; and be careful of (your duty to)
Allah, by Whom you demand one of another (your rights), and (to) the
ties of relationship; surely Allah ever watches over you.

004.002
Y: To orphans restore their property (When they reach their age), nor
substitute (your) worthless things for (their) good ones; and devour
not their substance (by mixing it up) with your won. For this is indeed
a great sin.

P: Give unto orphans their wealth. Exchange not the good for the bad (in
your management thereof) nor absorb their wealth into your own wealth.
Lo! that would be a great sin.

S: And give to the orphans their property, and do not substitute
worthless (things) for (their) good (ones), and do not devour their
property (as an addition) to your own property; this is surely a great
crime.

004.003
Y: If ye fear that ye shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans,
Marry women of your choice, Two or three or four; but if ye fear that
ye shall not be able to deal justly (with them), then only one, or (a
captive) that your right hands possess, that will be more suitable, to
prevent you from doing injustice.

P: And if ye fear that ye will not deal fairly by the orphans, marry of
the women, who seem good to you, two or three or four; and if ye fear
that ye cannot do justice (to so many) then one (only) or (the
captives) that your right hands possess. Thus it is more likely that ye
will not do injustice.

S: And if you fear that you cannot act equitably towards orphans, then
marry such women as seem good to you, two and three and four; but if
you fear that you will not do justice (between them), then (marry) only
one or what your right hands possess; this is more proper, that you may
not deviate from the right course.

004.004
Y: And give the women (on marriage) their dower as a free gift; but if
they, of their own good pleasure, remit any part of it to you, Take it
and enjoy it with right good cheer.

P: And give unto the women (whom ye marry) free gift of their marriage
portions; but if they of their own accord remit unto you a part
thereof, then ye are welcome to absorb it (in your wealth).

S: And give women their dowries as a free gift, but if they of
themselves be pleased to give up to you a portion of it, then eat it
with enjoyment and with wholesome result.

004.005
Y: To those weak of understanding Make not over your property, which
Allah hath made a means of support for you, but feed and clothe them
therewith, and speak to them words of kindness and justice.

P: Give not unto the foolish (what is in) your (keeping of their)
wealth, which Allah hath given you to maintain; but feed and clothe
them from it, and speak kindly unto them.

S: And do not give away your property which Allah has made for you a
(means of) support to the weak of understanding, and maintain them out
of (the profits of) it, and clothe them and speak to them words of
honest advice.

004.006
Y: Make trial of orphans until they reach the age of marriage; if then
ye find sound judgment in them, release their property to them; but
consume it not wastefully, nor in haste against their growing up. If
the guardian is well-off, Let him claim no remuneration, but if he is
poor, let him have for himself what is just and reasonable. When ye
release their property to them, take witnesses in their presence: But
all-sufficient is Allah in taking account.

P: Prove orphans till they reach the marriageable age; then, if ye find
them of sound judgment, deliver over unto them their fortune; and
devour it not by squandering and in haste lest they should grow up
Whoso (of the guardians) is rich, let him abstain generously (from
taking of the property of orphans); and whoso is poor let him take
thereof in reason (for his guardianship). And when ye deliver up their
fortune unto orphans, have (the transaction) witnessed in their
presence. Allah sufficeth as a Reckoner.

S: And test the orphans until they attain puberty; then if you find in
them maturity of intellect, make over to them their property, and do
not consume it extravagantly and hastily, lest they attain to full age;
and whoever is rich, let him abstain altogether, and whoever is poor,
let him eat reasonably; then when you make over to them their property,
call witnesses in their presence; and Allah is enough as a Reckoner.

004.007
Y: From what is left by parents and those nearest related there is a
share for men and a share for women, whether the property be small or
large,-a determinate share.

P: Unto the men (of a family) belongeth a share of that which parents
and near kindred leave, and unto the women a share of that which
parents and near kindred leave, whether it be little or much - a legal
share.

S: Men shall have a portion of what the parents and the near relatives
leave, and women shall have a portion of what the parents and the near
relatives leave, whether there is little or much of it; a stated
portion.

004.008
Y: But if at the time of division other relatives, or orphans or poor,
are present, feed them out of the (property), and speak to them words
of kindness and justice.

P: And when kinsfolk and orphans and the needy are present at the
division (of the heritage), bestow on them therefrom and speak kindly
unto them.

S: And when there are present at the division the relatives and the
orphans and the needy, give them (something) out of it and speak to
them kind words.

004.009
Y: Let those (disposing of an estate) have the same fear in their minds
as they would have for their own if they had left a helpless family
behind: Let them fear Allah, and speak words of appropriate (comfort).

P: And let those fear (in their behaviour toward orphans) who if they
left behind them weak offspring would be afraid for them. So let them
mind their duty to Allah, and speak justly.

S: And let those fear who, should they leave behind them weakly
offspring, would fear on their account, so let them be careful of
(their duty to) Allah, and let them speak right words.

004.010
Y: Those who unjustly eat up the property of orphans, eat up a Fire into
their own bodies: They will soon be enduring a Blazing Fire!

P: Lo! Those who devour the wealth of orphans wrongfully, they do but
swallow fire into their bellies, and they will be exposed to burning
flame.

S: (As for) those who swallow the property of the orphans unjustly,
surely they only swallow fire into their bellies and they shall enter
burning fire.

004.011
Y: Allah (thus) directs you as regards your Children's (Inheritance): to
the male, a portion equal to that of two females: if only daughters,
two or more, their share is two-thirds of the inheritance; if only one,
her share is a half. For parents, a sixth share of the inheritance to
each, if the deceased left children; if no children, and the parents
are the (only) heirs, the mother has a third; if the deceased Left
brothers (or sisters) the mother has a sixth. (The distribution in all
cases is) after the payment of legacies and debts. Ye know not whether
your parents or your children are nearest to you in benefit. These are
settled portions ordained by Allah; and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

P: Allah chargeth you concerning (the provision for) your children: to
the male the equivalent of the portion of two females, and if there be
women more than two, then theirs is two-thirds of the inheritance, and
if there be one (only) then the half. And to each of his parents a
sixth of the inheritance, if he have a son; and if he have no son and
his parents are his heirs, then to his mother appertaineth the third;
and if he have brethren, then to his mother appertaineth the sixth,
after any legacy he may have bequeathed, or debt (hath been paid). Your
parents and your children: Ye know not which of them is nearer unto you
in usefulness. It is an injunction from Allah. Lo! Allah is Knower,
Wise.

S: Allah enjoins you concerning your children: The male shall have the
equal of the portion of two females; then if they are more than two
females, they shall have two-thirds of what the deceased has left, and
if there is one, she shall have the half; and as for his parents, each
of them shall have the sixth of what he has left if he has a child, but
if he has no child and (only) his two parents inherit him, then his
mother shall have the third; but if he has brothers, then his mother
shall have the sixth after (the payment of) a bequest he may have
bequeathed or a debt; your parents and your children, you know not
which of them is the nearer to you in usefulness; this is an ordinance
from Allah: Surely Allah is Knowing, Wise.

004.012
Y: In what your wives leave, your share is a half, if they leave no
child; but if they leave a child, ye get a fourth; after payment of
legacies and debts. In what ye leave, their share is a fourth, if ye
leave no child; but if ye leave a child, they get an eighth; after
payment of legacies and debts. If the man or woman whose inheritance is
in question, has left neither ascendants nor descendants, but has left
a brother or a sister, each one of the two gets a sixth; but if more
than two, they share in a third; after payment of legacies and debts;
so that no loss is caused (to any one). Thus is it ordained by Allah;
and Allah is All-Knowing, Most Forbearing.

P: And unto you belongeth a half of that which your wives leave, if they
have no child; but if they have a child then unto you the fourth of
that which they leave, after any legacy they may have bequeathed, or
debt (they may have contracted, hath been paid). And unto them
belongeth the fourth of that which ye leave if ye have no child, but if
ye have a child then the eighth of that which ye leave, after any
legacy ye may have bequeathed, or debt (ye may have contracted, hath
been paid). And if a man or a woman have a distant heir (having left
neither parent nor child), and he (or she) have a brother or a sister
(only on the mother's side) then to each of them twain (the brother and
the sister) the sixth, and if they be more than two, then they shall be
sharers in the third, after any legacy that may have been bequeathed or
debt (contracted) not injuring (the heirs by willing away more than a
third of the heritage) hath been paid. A commandment from Allah. Allah
is Knower, Indulgent.

S: And you shall have half of what your wives leave if they have no
child, but if they have a child, then you shall have a fourth of what
they leave after (payment of) any bequest they may have bequeathed or a
debt; and they shall have the fourth of what you leave if you have no
child, but if you have a child then they shall have the eighth of what
you leave after (payment of) a bequest you may have bequeathed or a
debt; and if a man or a woman leaves property to be inherited by
neither parents nor offspring, and he (or she) has a brother or a
sister, then each of them two shall have the sixth, but if they are
more than that, they shall be sharers in the third after (payment of)
any bequest that may have been bequeathed or a debt that does not harm
(others); this is an ordinance from Allah: and Allah is Knowing,
Forbearing.

004.013
Y: Those are limits set by Allah: those who obey Allah and His Messenger
will be admitted to Gardens with rivers flowing beneath, to abide
therein (for ever) and that will be the supreme achievement.

P: These are the limits (imposed by) Allah. Whoso obeyeth Allah and His
messenger, He will make him enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow,
where such will dwell for ever. That will be the great success.

S: These are Allah's limits, and whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger,
He will cause him to enter gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide
in them; and this is the great achievement.

004.014
Y: But those who disobey Allah and His Messenger and transgress His
limits will be admitted to a Fire, to abide therein: And they shall
have a humiliating punishment.

P: And whoso disobeyeth Allah and His messenger and transgresseth His
limits, He will make him enter Fire, where he will dwell for ever; his
will be a shameful doom.

S: And whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger and goes beyond His
limits, He will cause him to enter fire to abide in it, and he shall
have an abasing chastisement.

004.015
Y: If any of your women are guilty of lewdness, Take the evidence of
four (Reliable) witnesses from amongst you against them; and if they
testify, confine them to houses until death do claim them, or Allah
ordain for them some (other) way.

P: As for those of your women who are guilty of lewdness, call to
witness four of you against them. And if they testify (to the truth of
the allegation) then confine them to the houses until death take them
or (until) Allah appoint for them a way (through new legislation).

S: And as for those who are guilty of an indecency from among your
women, call to witnesses against them four (witnesses) from among you;
then if they bear witness confine them to the houses until death takes
them away or Allah opens some way for them.

004.016
Y: If two men among you are guilty of lewdness, punish them both. If
they repent and amend, Leave them alone; for Allah is Oft-Returning,
Most Merciful.

P: And as for the two of you who are guilty thereof, punish them both.
And if they repent and improve, then let them be. Lo! Allah is ever
relenting, Merciful.

S: And as for the two who are guilty of indecency from among you, give
them both a punishment; then if they repent and amend, turn aside from
them; surely Allah is Oft-returning (to mercy), the Merciful.

004.017
Y: Allah accept the repentance of those who do evil in ignorance and
repent soon afterwards; to them will Allah turn in mercy: For Allah is
full of knowledge and wisdom.

P: Forgiveness is only incumbent on Allah toward those who do evil in
ignorance (and) then turn quickly (in repentance) to Allah. These are
they toward whom Allah relenteth. Allah is ever Knower, Wise.

S: Repentance with Allah is only for those who do evil in ignorance,
then turn (to Allah) soon, so these it is to whom Allah turns
(mercifully), and Allah is ever Knowing, Wise.

004.018
Y: Of no effect is the repentance of those who continue to do evil,
until death faces one of them, and he says, "Now have I repented
indeed;" nor of those who die rejecting Faith: for them have We
prepared a punishment most grievous.

P: The forgiveness is not for those who do ill-deeds until, when death
attendeth upon one of them, he saith: Lo! I repent now; nor yet for
those who die while they are disbelievers. For such We have prepared a
painful doom.

S: And repentance is not for those who go on doing evil deeds, until
when death comes to one of them, he says: Surely now I repent; nor
(for) those who die while they are unbelievers. These are they for whom
We have prepared a painful chastisement.

004.019
Y: O ye who believe! Ye are forbidden to inherit women against their
will. Nor should ye treat them with harshness, that ye may Take away
part of the dower ye have given them,-except where they have been
guilty of open lewdness; on the contrary live with them on a footing of
kindness and equity. If ye take a dislike to them it may be that ye
dislike a thing, and Allah brings about through it a great deal of
good.

P: O ye who believe! It is not lawful for you forcibly to inherit the
women (of your deceased kinsmen), nor (that) ye should put constraint
upon them that ye may take away a part of that which ye have given
them, unless they be guilty of flagrant lewdness. But consort with them
in kindness, for if ye hate them it may happen that ye hate a thing
wherein Allah hath placed much good.

S: O you who believe! it is not lawful for you that you should take
women as heritage against (their) will, and do not straiten them in
order that you may take part of what you have given them, unless they
are guilty of manifest indecency, and treat them kindly; then if you
hate them, it may be that you dislike a thing while Allah has placed
abundant good in it.

004.020
Y: But if ye decide to take one wife in place of another, even if ye had
given the latter a whole treasure for dower, Take not the least bit of
it back: Would ye take it by slander and manifest wrong?

P: And if ye wish to exchange one wife for another and ye have given
unto one of them a sum of money (however great), take nothing from it.
Would ye take it by the way of calumny and open wrong?

S: And if you wish to have (one) wife in place of another and you have
given one of them a heap of gold, then take not from it anything; would
you take it by slandering (her) and (doing her) manifest wrong?

004.021
Y: And how could ye take it when ye have gone in unto each other, and
they have Taken from you a solemn covenant?

P: How can ye take it (back) after one of you hath gone in unto the
other, and they have taken a strong pledge from you?

S: And how can you take it when one of you has already gone in to the
other and they have made with you a firm covenant?

004.022
Y: And marry not women whom your fathers married,- except what is past:
It was shameful and odious,- an abominable custom indeed.

P: And marry not those women whom your fathers married, except what hath
already happened (of that nature) in the past. Lo! it was ever lewdness
and abomination, and an evil way.

S: And marry not woman whom your fathers married, except what has
already passed; this surely is indecent and hateful, and it is an evil
way.

004.023
Y: Prohibited to you (For marriage) are:- Your mothers, daughters,
sisters; father's sisters, Mother's sisters; brother's daughters,
sister's daughters; foster-mothers (Who gave you suck), foster-sisters;
your wives' mothers; your step-daughters under your guardianship, born
of your wives to whom ye have gone in,- no prohibition if ye have not
gone in;- (Those who have been) wives of your sons proceeding from your
loins; and two sisters in wedlock at one and the same time, except for
what is past; for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful;-

P: Forbidden unto you are your mothers, and your daughters, and your
sisters, and your father's sisters, and your mother's sisters, and your
brother's daughters and your sister's daughters, and your
foster-mothers, and your foster-sisters, and your mothers-in-law, and
your step-daughters who are under your protection (born) of your women
unto whom ye have gone in - but if ye have not gone in unto them,
then it is no sin for you (to marry their daughters) - and the wives
of your sons who (spring) from your own loins. And (it is forbidden
unto you) that ye should have two sisters together, except what hath
already happened (of that nature) in the past. Lo! Allah is ever
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Forbidden to you are your mothers and your daughters and your sisters
and your paternal aunts and your maternal aunts and brothers' daughters
and sisters' daughters and your mothers that have suckled you and your
foster-sisters and mothers of your wives and your step-daughters who
are in your guardianship, (born) of your wives to whom you have gone
in, but if you have not gone in to them, there is no blame on you (in
marrying them), and the wives of your sons who are of your own loins
and that you should have two sisters together, except what has already
passed; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

004.024
Y: Also (prohibited are) women already married, except those whom your
right hands possess: Thus hath Allah ordained (Prohibitions) against
you: Except for these, all others are lawful, provided ye seek (them in
marriage) with gifts from your property,- desiring chastity, not lust,
seeing that ye derive benefit from them, give them their dowers (at
least) as prescribed; but if, after a dower is prescribed, agree
Mutually (to vary it), there is no blame on you, and Allah is
All-Knowing, All-Wise.

P: And all married women (are forbidden unto you) save those (captives)
whom your right hands possess. It is a decree of Allah for you. Lawful
unto you are all beyond those mentioned, so that ye seek them with your
wealth in honest wedlock, not debauchery. And those of whom ye seek
content (by marrying them), give unto them their portions as a duty.
And there is no sin for you in what ye do by mutual agreement after the
duty (hath been done). Lo! Allah is ever Knower, Wise.

S: And all married women except those whom your right hands possess
(this is) Allah's ordinance to you, and lawful for you are (all women)
besides those, provided that you seek (them) with your property, taking
(them) in marriage not committing fornication. Then as to those whom
you profit by, give them their dowries as appointed; and there is no
blame on you about what you mutually agree after what is appointed;
surely Allah is Knowing, Wise.

004.025
Y: If any of you have not the means wherewith to wed free believing
women, they may wed believing girls from among those whom your right
hands possess: And Allah hath full knowledge about your faith. Ye are
one from another: Wed them with the leave of their owners, and give
them their dowers, according to what is reasonable: They should be
chaste, not lustful, nor taking paramours: when they are taken in
wedlock, if they fall into shame, their punishment is half that for
free women. This (permission) is for those among you who fear sin; but
it is better for you that ye practise self-restraint. And Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: And whoso is not able to afford to marry free, believing women, let
them marry from the believing maids whom your right hands possess.
Allah knoweth best (concerning) your faith. Ye (proceed) one from
another; so wed them by permission of their folk, and give unto them
their portions in kindness, they being honest, not debauched nor of
loose conduct. And if when they are honourably married they commit
lewdness they shall incur the half of the punishment (prescribed) for
free women (in that case). This is for him among you who feareth to
commit sin. But to have patience would be better for you. Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And whoever among you has not within his power ampleness of means to
marry free believing women, then (he may marry) of those whom your
right hands possess from among your believing maidens; and Allah knows
best your faith: you are (sprung) the one from the other; so marry them
with the permission of their masters, and give them their dowries
justly, they being chaste, not fornicating, nor receiving paramours;
and when they are taken in marriage, then if they are guilty of
indecency, they shall suffer half the punishment which is (inflicted)
upon free women. This is for him among you who fears falling into evil;
and that you abstain is better for you, and Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.

004.026
Y: Allah doth wish to make clear to you and to show you the ordinances
of those before you; and (He doth wish to) turn to you (In Mercy): And
Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

P: Allah would explain to you and guide you by the examples of those who
were before you, and would turn to you in mercy. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: Allah desires to explain to you, and to guide you into the ways of
those before you, and to turn to you (mercifully), and Allah is
Knowing, Wise.

004.027
Y: Allah doth wish to Turn to you, but the wish of those who follow
their lusts is that ye should turn away (from Him),- far, far away.

P: And Allah would turn to you in mercy; but those who follow vain
desires would have you go tremendously astray.

S: And Allah desires that He should turn to you (mercifully), and those
who follow (their) lusts desire that you should deviate (with) a great
deviation.

004.028
Y: Allah doth wish to lighten your (difficulties): For man was created
Weak (in flesh).

P: Allah would make the burden light for you, for man was created weak.

S: Allah desires that He should make light your burdens, and man is
created weak.

004.029
Y: O ye who believe! Eat not up your property among yourselves in
vanities: But let there be amongst you Traffic and trade by mutual
good-will: Nor kill (or destroy) yourselves: for verily Allah hath been
to you Most Merciful!

P: O ye who believe! Squander not your wealth among yourselves in
vanity, except it be a trade by mutual consent, and kill not one
another. Lo! Allah is ever Merciful unto you.

S: O you who believe! do not devour your property among yourselves
falsely, except that it be trading by your mutual consent; and do not
kill your people; surely Allah is Merciful to you.

004.030
Y: If any do that in rancour and injustice,- soon shall We cast them
into the Fire: And easy it is for Allah.

P: Whoso doeth that through aggression and injustice, we shall cast him
into Fire, and that is ever easy for Allah.

S: And whoever does this aggressively and unjustly, We will soon cast
him into fire; and this is easy to Allah.

004.031
Y: If ye (but) eschew the most heinous of the things which ye are
forbidden to do, We shall expel out of you all the evil in you, and
admit you to a gate of great honour.

P: If ye avoid the great (things) which ye are forbidden, We will remit
from you your evil deeds and make you enter at a noble gate.

S: If you shun the great sins which you are forbidden, We will do away
with your small sins and cause you to enter an honorable place of
entering.

004.032
Y: And in no wise covet those things in which Allah Hath bestowed His
gifts More freely on some of you than on others: To men is allotted
what they earn, and to women what they earn: But ask Allah of His
bounty. For Allah hath full knowledge of all things.

P: And covet not the thing in which Allah hath made some of you excel
others. Unto men a fortune from that which they have earned, and unto
women a fortune from that which they have earned. (Envy not one
another) but ask Allah of His bounty. Lo! Allah is ever Knower of all
things.

S: And do not covet that by which Allah has made some of you excel
others; men shall have the benefit of what they earn and women shall
have the benefit of what they earn; and ask Allah of His grace; surely
Allah knows all things.

004.033
Y: To (benefit) every one, We have appointed shares and heirs to
property left by parents and relatives. To those, also, to whom your
right hand was pledged, give their due portion. For truly Allah is
witness to all things.

P: And unto each We have appointed heirs of that which parents and near
kindred leave; and as for those with whom your right hands have made a
covenant, give them their due. Lo! Allah is ever Witness over all
things.

S: And to every one We have appointed heirs of what parents and near
relatives leave; and as to those with whom your rights hands have
ratified agreements, give them their portion; surely Allah is a witness
over all things.

004.034
Y: Men are the protectors and maintainers of women, because Allah has
given the one more (strength) than the other, and because they support
them from their means. Therefore the righteous women are devoutly
obedient, and guard in (the husband's) absence what Allah would have
them guard. As to those women on whose part ye fear disloyalty and
ill-conduct, admonish them (first), (Next), refuse to share their beds,
(And last) beat them (lightly); but if they return to obedience, seek
not against them Means (of annoyance): For Allah is Most High, great
(above you all).

P: Men are in charge of women, because Allah hath made the one of them
to excel the other, and because they spend of their property (for the
support of women). So good women are the obedient, guarding in secret
that which Allah hath guarded. As for those from whom ye fear
rebellion, admonish them and banish them to beds apart, and scourge
them. Then if they obey you, seek not a way against them. Lo! Allah is
ever High, Exalted, Great.

S: Men are the maintainers of women because Allah has made some of them
to excel others and because they spend out of their property; the good
women are therefore obedient, guarding the unseen as Allah has guarded;
and (as to) those on whose part you fear desertion, admonish them, and
leave them alone in the sleeping-places and beat them; then if they
obey you, do not seek a way against them; surely Allah is High, Great.

004.035
Y: If ye fear a breach between them twain, appoint (two) arbiters, one
from his family, and the other from hers; if they wish for peace, Allah
will cause their reconciliation: For Allah hath full knowledge, and is
acquainted with all things.

P: And if ye fear a breach between them twain (the man and wife),
appoint an arbiter from his folk and an arbiter from her folk. If they
desire amendment Allah will make them of one mind. Lo! Allah is ever
Knower, Aware.

S: And if you fear a breach between the two, then appoint judge from his
people and a judge from her people; if they both desire agreement,
Allah will effect harmony between them, surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.

004.036
Y: Serve Allah, and join not any partners with Him; and do good- to
parents, kinsfolk, orphans, those in need, neighbours who are near,
neighbours who are strangers, the companion by your side, the wayfarer
(ye meet), and what your right hands possess: For Allah loveth not the
arrogant, the vainglorious;-

P: And serve Allah. Ascribe no thing as partner unto Him. (Show)
kindness unto parents, and unto near kindred, and orphans, and the
needy, and unto the neighbour who is of kin (unto you) and the
neighbour who is not of kin, and the fellow-traveller and the wayfarer
and (the slaves) whom your right hands possess. Lo! Allah loveth not
such as are proud and boastful,

S: And serve Allah and do not associate any thing with Him and be good
to the parents and to the near of kin and the orphans and the needy and
the neighbor of (your) kin and the alien neighbor, and the companion in
a journey and the wayfarer and those whom your right hands possess;
surely Allah does not love him who is proud, boastful;

004.037
Y: (Nor) those who are niggardly or enjoin niggardliness on others, or
hide the bounties which Allah hath bestowed on them; for We have
prepared, for those who resist Faith, a punishment that steeps them in
contempt;-

P: Who hoard their wealth and enjoin avarice on others, and hide that
which Allah hath bestowed upon them of His bounty. For disbelievers We
prepare a shameful doom;

S: Those who are niggardly and bid people to be niggardly and hide what
Allah has given them out of His grace; and We have prepared for the
unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement.

004.038
Y: Not those who spend of their substance, to be seen of men, but have
no faith in Allah and the Last Day: If any take the Evil One for their
intimate, what a dreadful intimate he is!

P: And (also) those who spend their wealth in order to be seen of men,
and believe not in Allah nor the Last Day. Whoso taketh Satan for a
comrade, a bad comrade hath he.

S: And those who spend their property (in alms) to be seen of the people
and do not believe in Allah nor in the last day; and as for him whose
associate is the Shaitan, an evil associate is he!

004.039
Y: And what burden Were it on them if they had faith in Allah and in the
Last Day, and they spent out of what Allah hath given them for
sustenance? For Allah hath full knowledge of them.

P: What have they (to fear) if they believe in Allah and the Last Day
and spend (aright) of that which Allah hath bestowed upon them, when
Allah is ever Aware of them (and all they do)?

S: And what (harm) would it have done them if they had believed in Allah
and the last day and spent (benevolently) of what Allah had given them?
And Allah knows them.

004.040
Y: Allah is never unjust in the least degree: If there is any good
(done), He doubleth it, and giveth from His own presence a great
reward.

P: Lo! Allah wrongeth not even of the weight of an ant; and if there is
a good deed, He will double it and will give (the doer) from His
presence an immense reward.

S: Surely Allah does not do injustice to the weight of an atom, and if
it is a good deed He multiplies it and gives from Himself a great
reward.

004.041
Y: How then if We brought from each people a witness, and We brought
thee as a witness against these people!

P: But how (will it be with them) when We bring of every people a
witness, and We bring thee (O Muhammad) a witness against these?

S: How will it be, then, when We bring from every people a witness and
bring you as a witness against these?

004.042
Y: On that day those who reject Faith and disobey the messenger will
wish that the earth Were made one with them: But never will they hide a
single fact from Allah!

P: On that day those who disbelieved and disobeyed the messenger will
wish that they were level with the ground, and they can hide no fact
from Allah.

S: On that day will those who disbelieve and disobey the Messenger
desire that the earth were levelled with them, and they shall not hide
any word from Allah.

004.043
Y: O ye who believe! Approach not prayers with a mind befogged, until ye
can understand all that ye say,- nor in a state of ceremonial impurity
(Except when travelling on the road), until after washing your whole
body. If ye are ill, or on a journey, or one of you cometh from offices
of nature, or ye have been in contact with women, and ye find no water,
then take for yourselves clean sand or earth, and rub therewith your
faces and hands. For Allah doth blot out sins and forgive again and
again.

P: O ye who believe! Draw not near unto prayer when ye are drunken, till
ye know that which ye utter, nor when ye are polluted, save when
journeying upon the road, till ye have bathed. And if ye be ill, or on
a journey, or one of you cometh from the closet, or ye have touched
women, and ye find not water, then go to high clean soil and rub your
faces and your hands (therewith). Lo! Allah is Benign, Forgiving.

S: O you who believe! do not go near prayer when you are Intoxicated
until you know (well) what you say, nor when you are under an
obligation to perform a bath-- unless (you are) travelling on the
road-- until you have washed yourselves; and if you are sick, or on a
journey, or one of you come from the privy or you have touched the
women, and you cannot find water, betake yourselves to pure earth, then
wipe your faces and your hands; surely Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.

004.044
Y: Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who were given a portion of
the Book? they traffic in error, and wish that ye should lose the right
path.

P: Seest thou not those unto whom a portion of the Scripture hath been
given, how they purchase error, and seek to make you (Muslims) err from
the right way?

S: Have you not considered those to whom a portion of the Book has been
given? They buy error and desire that you should go astray from the
way.

004.045
Y: But Allah hath full knowledge of your enemies: Allah is enough for a
protector, and Allah is enough for a Helper.

P: Allah knoweth best (who are) your enemies. Allah is sufficient as a
Guardian, and Allah is sufficient as a Supporter.

S: And Allah best knows your enemies; and Allah suffices as a Guardian,
and Allah suffices as a Helper.

004.046
Y: Of the Jews there are those who displace words from their (right)
places, and say: "We hear and we disobey"; and "Hear what is not
Heard"; and     "Ra'ina"; with a twist of their tongues and a slander to
Faith. If only they had said: "We hear and we obey"; and "Do hear";
and "Do look at us"; it would have been better for them, and more
proper; but Allah hath cursed them for their Unbelief; and but few
of them will believe.

P: Some of those who are Jews change words from their context and say:
"We hear and disobey; hear thou as one who heareth not" and "Listen to
us!" distorting with their tongues and slandering religion. If they had
said: "We hear and we obey: hear thou, and look at us" it had been
better for them, and more upright. But Allah hath cursed them for their
disbelief, so they believe not, save a few.

S: Of those who are Jews (there are those who) alter words from their
places and say: We have heard and we disobey and: Hear, may you not be
made to hear! and: Raina, distorting (the word) with their tongues and
taunting about religion; and if they had said (instead): We have heard
and we obey, and hearken, and unzurna it would have been better for
them and more upright; but Allah has cursed them on account of their
unbelief, so they do not believe but a little.

004.047
Y: O ye People of the Book! believe in what We have (now) revealed,
confirming what was (already) with you, before We change the face and
fame of some (of you) beyond all recognition, and turn them hindwards,
or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath-breakers, for the decision of
Allah must be carried out.

P: O ye unto whom the Scripture hath been given! Believe in what We have
revealed confirming that which ye possess, before We destroy
countenances so as to confound them, or curse them as We cursed the
Sabbath-breakers (of old time). The commandment of Allah is always
executed.

S: O you who have been given the Book! believe that which We have
revealed, verifying what you have, before We alter faces then turn them
on their backs, or curse them as We cursed the violaters of the
Sabbath, and the command of Allah shall be executed.

004.048
Y: Allah forgiveth not that partners should be set up with Him; but He
forgiveth anything else, to whom He pleaseth; to set up partners with
Allah is to devise a sin most heinous indeed.

P: Lo! Allah forgiveth not that a partner should be ascribed unto Him.
He forgiveth (all) save that to whom He will. Whoso ascribeth partners
to Allah, he hath indeed invented a tremendous sin.

S: Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated with
Him, and forgives what is besides that to whomsoever He pleases; and
whoever associates anything with Allah, he devises indeed a great sin.

004.049
Y: Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who claim sanctity for
themselves? Nay-but Allah Doth sanctify whom He pleaseth. But never
will they fail to receive justice in the least little thing.

P: Hast thou not seen those who praise themselves for purity? Nay, Allah
purifieth whom He will, and they will not be wronged even the hair upon
a date-stone.

S: Have you not considered those who attribute purity to themselves?
Nay, Allah purifies whom He pleases; and they shall not be wronged the
husk of a date stone.

004.050
Y: Behold! how they invent a lie against Allah! but that by itself is a
manifest sin!

P: See, how they invent lies about Allah! That of itself is flagrant
sin.

S: See how they forge the lie against Allah, and this is sufficient as a
manifest sin.

004.051
Y: Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who were given a portion of
the Book? they believe in sorcery and Evil, and say to the Unbelievers
that they are better guided in the (right) way Than the believers!

P: Hast thou not seen those unto whom a portion of the Scripture hath
been given, how they believe in idols and false deities, and how they
say of those (idolaters) who disbelieve: "These are more rightly guided
than those who believe"?

S: Have you not seen those to whom a portion of the Book has been given?
They believe in idols and false deities and say of those who
disbelieve: These are better guided in the path than those who believe.

004.052
Y: They are (men) whom Allah hath cursed: And those whom Allah Hath
cursed, thou wilt find, have no one to help.

P: Those are they whom Allah hath cursed, and he whom Allah hath cursed,
thou (O Muhammad) wilt find for him no helper.

S: Those are they whom Allah has cursed, and whomever Allah curses you
shall not find any helper for him.

004.053
Y: Have they a share in dominion or power? Behold, they give not a
farthing to their fellow-men?

P: Or have they even a share in the Sovereignty? Then in that case, they
would not give mankind even the speck on a date-stone.

S: Or have they a share in the kingdom? But then they would not give to
people even the speck in the date stone.

004.054
Y: Or do they envy mankind for what Allah hath given them of his bounty?
but We had already given the people of Abraham the Book and Wisdom, and
conferred upon them a great kingdom.

P: Or are they jealous of mankind because of that which Allah of His
bounty hath bestowed upon them? For We bestowed upon the house of
Abraham (of old) the Scripture and wisdom, and We bestowed on them a
mighty kingdom.

S: Or do they envy the people for what Allah has given them of His
grace? But indeed We have given to Ibrahim's children the Book and the
wisdom, and We have given them a grand kingdom.

004.055
Y: Some of them believed, and some of them averted their faces from him:
And enough is Hell for a burning fire.

P: And of them were (some) who believed therein and of them were (some)
who turned away from it. Hell is sufficient for (their) burning.

S: So of them is he who believes in him, and of them is he who turns
away from him, and hell is sufficient to burn.

004.056
Y: Those who reject our Signs, We shall soon cast into the Fire: as
often as their skins are roasted through, We shall change them for
fresh skins, that they may taste the penalty: for Allah is Exalted in
Power, Wise.

P: Lo! Those who disbelieve Our revelations, We shall expose them to the
Fire. As often as their skins are consumed We shall exchange them for
fresh skins that they may taste the torment. Lo! Allah is ever Mighty,
Wise.

S: (As for) those who disbelieve in Our communications, We shall make
them enter fire; so oft as their skins are thoroughly burned, We will
change them for other skins, that they may taste the chastisement;
surely Allah is Mighty, Wise.

004.057
Y: But those who believe and do deeds of righteousness, We shall soon
admit to Gardens, with rivers flowing beneath,- their eternal home:
Therein shall they have companions pure and holy: We shall admit them
to shades, cool and ever deepening.

P: And as for those who believe and do good works, We shall make them
enter Gardens underneath which rivers flow - to dwell therein for ever;
there for them are pure companions - and We shall make them enter
plenteous shade.

S: And (as for) those who believe and do good deeds, We will make them
enter gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them for ever;
they shall have therein pure mates, and We shall make them enter a
dense shade.

004.058
Y: Allah doth command you to render back your Trusts to those to whom
they are due; And when ye judge between man and man, that ye judge with
justice: Verily how excellent is the teaching which He giveth you! For
Allah is He Who heareth and seeth all things.

P: Lo! Allah commandeth you that ye restore deposits to their owners,
and, if ye judge between mankind, that ye judge justly. Lo! comely is
this which Allah admonisheth you. Lo! Allah is ever Hearer, Seer.

S: Surely Allah commands you to make over trusts to their owners and
that when you judge between people you judge with justice; surely Allah
admonishes you with what is excellent; surely Allah is Seeing, Hearing.

004.059
Y: O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and those
charged with authority among you. If ye differ in anything among
yourselves, refer it to Allah and His Messenger, if ye do believe in
Allah and the Last Day: That is best, and most suitable for final
determination.

P: O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the messenger and those of you
who are in authority; and if ye have a dispute concerning any matter,
refer it to Allah and the messenger if ye are (in truth) believers in
Allah and the Last Day. That is better and more seemly in the end.

S: O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Messenger and those in
authority from among you; then if you quarrel about anything, refer it
to Allah and the Messenger, if you believe in Allah and the last day;
this is better and very good in the end.

004.060
Y: Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who declare that they
believe in the revelations that have come to thee and to those before
thee? Their (real) wish is to resort together for judgment (in their
disputes) to the Evil One, though they were ordered to reject him. But
Satan's wish is to lead them astray far away (from the right).

P: Hast thou not seen those who pretend that they believe in that which
is revealed unto thee and that which was revealed before thee, how they
would go for judgment (in their disputes) to false deities when they
have been ordered to abjure them? Satan would mislead them far astray.

S: Have you not seen those who assert that they believe in what has been
revealed to you and what was revealed before you? They desire to summon
one another to the judgment of the Shaitan, though they were commanded
to deny him, and the Shaitan desires to lead them astray into a remote
error.

004.061
Y: When it is said to them: "Come to what Allah hath revealed, and to
the Messenger": Thou seest the Hypocrites avert their faces from thee
in disgust.

P: And when it is said unto them: Come unto that which Allah hath
revealed and unto the messenger, thou seest the hypocrites turn from
thee with aversion.

S: And when it is said to them: Come to what Allah has revealed and to
the Messenger, you will see the hypocrites turning away from you with
(utter) aversion.

004.062
Y: How then, when they are seized by misfortune, because of the deeds
which they hands have sent forth? Then they come to thee, swearing by
Allah: "We meant no more than good-will and conciliation!"

P: How would it be if a misfortune smote them because of that which
their own hands have sent before (them)? Then would they come unto
thee, swearing by Allah that they were seeking naught but harmony and
kindness.

S: But how will it be when misfortune befalls them on account of what
their hands have sent before? Then they will come to you swearing by
Allah: We did not desire (anything) but good and concord.

004.063
Y: Those men,-Allah knows what is in their hearts; so keep clear of
them, but admonish them, and speak to them a word to reach their very
souls.

P: Those are they, the secrets of whose hearts Allah knoweth. So oppose
them and admonish them, and address them in plain terms about their
souls.

S: These are they of whom Allah knows what is in their hearts; therefore
turn aside from them and admonish them, and speak to them effectual
words concerning themselves.

004.064
Y: We sent not a messenger, but to be obeyed, in accordance with the
will of Allah. If they had only, when they were unjust to themselves,
come unto thee and asked Allah's forgiveness, and the Messenger had
asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah indeed
Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

P: We sent no messenger save that he should be obeyed by Allah's leave.
And if, when they had wronged themselves, they had but come unto thee
and asked forgiveness of Allah, and asked forgiveness of the messenger,
they would have found Allah Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And We did not send any messenger but that he should be obeyed by
Allah's permission; and had they, when they were unjust to themselves,
come to you and asked forgiveness of Allah and the Messenger had (also)
asked forgiveness for them, they would have found Allah Oft-returning
(to mercy), Merciful.

004.065
Y: But no, by the Lord, they can have no (real) Faith, until they make
thee judge in all disputes between them, and find in their souls no
resistance against Thy decisions, but accept them with the fullest
conviction.

P: But nay, by thy Lord, they will not believe (in truth) until they
make thee judge of what is in dispute between them and find within
themselves no dislike of that which thou decidest, and submit with full
submission.

S: But no! by your Lord! they do not believe (in reality) until they
make you a judge of that which has become a matter of disagreement
among them, and then do not find any straitness in their hearts as to
what you have decided and submit with entire submission.

004.066
Y: If We had ordered them to sacrifice their lives or to leave their
homes, very few of them would have done it: But if they had done what
they were (actually) told, it would have been best for them, and would
have gone farthest to strengthen their (faith);

P: And if We had decreed for them: Lay down your lives or go forth from
your dwellings, but few of them would have done it; though if they did
what they are exhorted to do it would be better for them, and more
strengthening;

S: And if We had prescribed for them: Lay down your lives or go forth
from your homes, they would not have done it except a few of them; and
if they had done what they were admonished, it would have certainly
been better for them and best in strengthening (them);

004.067
Y: And We should then have given them from our presence a great reward;

P: And then We should bestow upon them from Our presence an immense
reward,

S: And then We would certainly have given them from Ourselves a great
reward.

004.068
Y: And We should have shown them the Straight Way.

P: And should guide them unto a straight path.

S: And We would certainly have guided them in the right path.

004.069
Y: All who obey Allah and the messenger are in the company of those on
whom is the Grace of Allah,- of the prophets (who teach), the sincere
(lovers of Truth), the witnesses (who testify), and the Righteous (who
do good): Ah! what a beautiful fellowship!

P: Whoso obeyeth Allah and the messenger, they are with those unto whom
Allah hath shown favour, of the prophets and the saints and the martyrs
and the righteous. The best of company are they!

S: And whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger, these are with those upon
whom Allah has bestowed favors from among the prophets and the truthful
and the martyrs and the good, and a goodly company are they!

004.070
Y: Such is the bounty from Allah: And sufficient is it that Allah
knoweth all.

P: That is bounty from Allah, and Allah sufficeth as Knower.

S: This is grace from Allah, and sufficient is Allah as the Knower.

004.071
Y: O ye who believe! Take your precautions, and either go forth in
parties or go forth all together.

P: O ye who believe! Take your precautions, then advance the proven
ones, or advance all together.

S: O you who believe! take your precaution, then go forth in detachments
or go forth in a body.

004.072
Y: There are certainly among you men who would tarry behind: If a
misfortune befalls you, they say: "Allah did favour us in that we were
not present among them."

P: Lo! among you there is he who loitereth; and if disaster overtook
you, he would say: Allah hath been gracious unto me since I was not
present with them.

S: And surely among you is he who would certainly hang back! If then a
misfortune befalls you he says: Surely Allah conferred a benefit on me
that I was not present with them.

004.073
Y: But if good fortune comes to you from Allah, they would be sure to
say - as if there had never been Ties of affection between you and them-
"Oh! I wish I had been with them; a fine thing should I then have made
of it!"

P: And if a bounty from Allah befell you, he would surely cry, as if
there had been no love between you and him: Oh, would that I had been
with them, then should I have achieved a great success!

S: And if grace from Allah come to you, he would certainly cry out, as
if there had not been any friendship between you and him: Would that I
had been with them, then I should have attained a mighty good fortune.

004.074
Y: Let those fight in the cause of Allah Who sell the life of this world
for the hereafter. To him who fighteth in the cause of Allah,- whether
he is slain or gets victory - Soon shall We give him a reward of great
(value).

P: Let those fight in the way of Allah who sell the life of this world
for the other. Whoso fighteth in the way of Allah, be he slain or be he
victorious, on him We shall bestow a vast reward.

S: Therefore let those fight in the way of Allah, who sell this world's
life for the hereafter; and whoever fights in the way of Allah, then be
he slain or be he victorious, We shall grant him a mighty reward.

004.075
Y: And why should ye not fight in the cause of Allah and of those who,
being weak, are ill-treated (and oppressed)?- Men, women, and children,
whose cry is: "Our Lord! Rescue us from this town, whose people are
oppressors; and raise for us from thee one who will protect; and raise
for us from thee one who will help!"

P: How should ye not fight for the cause of Allah and of the feeble
among men and of the women and the children who are crying: Our Lord!
Bring us forth from out this town of which the people are oppressors!
Oh, give us from thy presence some protecting friend! Oh, give us from
Thy presence some defender!

S: And what reason have you that you should not fight in the way of
Allah and of the weak among the men and the women and the children,
(of) those who say: Our Lord! cause us to go forth from this town,
whose people are oppressors, and give us from Thee a guardian and give
us from Thee a helper.

004.076
Y: Those who believe fight in the cause of Allah, and those who reject
Faith Fight in the cause of Evil: So fight ye against the friends of
Satan: feeble indeed is the cunning of Satan.

P: Those who believe do battle for the cause of Allah; and those who
disbelieve do battle for the cause of idols. So fight the minions of
the devil. Lo! the devil's strategy is ever weak.

S: Those who believe fight in the way of Allah, and those who disbelieve
fight in the way of the Shaitan. Fight therefore against the friends of
the Shaitan; surely the strategy of the Shaitan is weak.

004.077
Y: Hast thou not turned Thy vision to those who were told to hold back
their hands (from fight) but establish regular prayers and spend in
regular charity? When (at length) the order for fighting was issued to
them, behold! a section of them feared men as - or even more than -
they should have feared Allah: They said: "Our Lord! Why hast Thou
ordered us to fight? Wouldst Thou not Grant us respite to our (natural)
term, near (enough)?" Say: "Short is the enjoyment of this world: the
Hereafter is the best for those who do right: Never will ye be dealt
with unjustly in the very least!"

P: Hast thou not seen those unto whom it was said: Withhold your hands,
establish worship and pay the poor due, but when fighting was prescribed
for them behold! a party of them fear mankind even as their fear of
Allah or with greater fear, and say: Our Lord! Why hast Thou ordained
fighting for us? If only Thou wouldst give us respite yet a while! Say
(unto them, O Muhammad): The comfort of this world is scant; the
Hereafter will be better for him who wardeth off (evil); and ye will
not be wronged the down upon a date-stone.

S: Have you not seen those to whom it was said: Withhold your hands, and
keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate; but when fighting is prescribed
for them, lo! a party of them fear men as they ought to have feared
Allah, or (even) with a greater fear, and say: Our Lord! why hast Thou
ordained fighting for us? Wherefore didst Thou not grant us a delay to
a near end? Say: The provision of this world is short, and the
hereafter is better for him who guards (against evil); and you shall
not be wronged the husk of a date stone.

004.078
Y: "Wherever ye are, death will find you out, even if ye are in towers
built up strong and high!" If some good befalls them, they say, "This
is from Allah"; but if evil, they say, "This is from thee" (O Prophet).
Say: "All things are from Allah." But what hath come to these people,
that they fail to understand a single fact?

P: Wheresoever ye may be, death will overtake you, even though ye were
in lofty towers. Yet if a happy thing befalleth them they say: This is
from Allah; and if an evil thing befalleth them they say: This is of
thy doing (O Muhammad). Say (unto them): All is from Allah. What is
amiss with these people that they come not nigh to understand a
happening?

S: Wherever you are, death will overtake you, though you are in lofty
towers, and if a benefit comes to them, they say: This is from Allah;
and if a misfortune befalls them, they say: This is from you. Say: All
is from Allah, but what is the matter with these people that they do
not make approach to understanding what is told (them)?

004.079
Y: Whatever good, (O man!) happens to thee, is from Allah; but whatever
evil happens to thee, is from thy (own) soul. And We have sent thee as
a messenger to (instruct) mankind. And enough is Allah for a witness.

P: Whatever of good befalleth thee (O man) it is from Allah, and
whatever of ill befalleth thee it is from thyself. We have sent thee
(Muhammad) as a messenger unto mankind and Allah is sufficient as
Witness.

S: Whatever benefit comes to you (O man!), it is from Allah, and
whatever misfortune befalls you, it is from yourself, and We have sent
you (O Prophet!), to mankind as a messenger; and Allah is sufficient as
a witness.

004.080
Y: He who obeys the Messenger, obeys Allah: But if any turn away, We
have not sent thee to watch over their (evil deeds).

P: Whoso obeyeth the messenger hath obeyed Allah, and whoso turneth
away: We have not sent thee as a warder over them.

S: Whoever obeys the Messenger, he indeed obeys Allah, and whoever turns
back, so We have not sent you as a keeper over them.

004.081
Y: They have "Obedience" on their lips; but when they leave thee, a
section of them Meditate all night on things very different from what
thou tellest them. But Allah records their nightly (plots): So keep
clear of them, and put thy trust in Allah, and enough is Allah as a
disposer of affairs.

P: And they say: (It is) obedience; but when they have gone forth from
thee a party of them spend the night in planning other than what thou
sayest. Allah recordeth what they plan by night. So oppose them and put
thy trust in Allah. Allah is sufficient as Trustee.

S: And they say: Obedience. But when they go out from your presence, a
party of them decide by night upon doing otherwise than what you say;
and Allah writes down what they decide by night, therefore turn aside
from them and trust in Allah, and Allah is sufficient as a protector.

004.082
Y: Do they not consider the Qur'an (with care)? Had it been from other
Than Allah, they would surely have found therein Much discrepancy.

P: Will they not then ponder on the Qur'an? If it had been from other
than Allah they would have found therein much incongruity.

S: Do they not then meditate on the Quran? And if it were from any other
than Allah, they would have found in it many a discrepancy.

004.083
Y: When there comes to them some matter touching (Public) safety or
fear, they divulge it. If they had only referred it to the Messenger,
or to those charged with authority among them, the proper investigators
would have Tested it from them (direct). Were it not for the Grace and
Mercy of Allah unto you, all but a few of you would have fallen into
the clutches of Satan.

P: And if any tidings, whether of safety or fear, come unto them, they
noise it abroad, whereas if they had referred it to the messenger and
to such of them as are in authority, those among them who are able to
think out the matter would have known it. If it had not been for the
grace of Allah upon you and His mercy ye would have followed Satan,
save a few (of you).

S: And when there comes to them news of security or fear they spread it
abroad; and if they had referred it to the Messenger and to those in
authority among them, those among them who can search out the knowledge
of it would have known it, and were it not for the grace of Allah upon
you and His mercy, you would have certainly followed the Shaitan save a
few.

004.084
Y: Then fight in Allah's cause - Thou art held responsible only for
thyself - and rouse the believers. It may be that Allah will restrain
the fury of the Unbelievers; for Allah is the strongest in might and in
punishment.

P: So fight (O Muhammad) in the way of Allah Thou art not taxed (with
the responsibility for anyone) except thyself - and urge on the
believers. Peradventure Allah will restrain the might of those who
disbelieve. Allah is stronger in might and stronger in inflicting
punishment.

S: Fight then in Allah's way; this is not imposed on you except In
relation to yourself, and rouse the believers to ardor maybe Allah will
restrain the fighting of those who disbelieve and Allah is strongest in
prowess and strongest to give an exemplary punishment.

004.085
Y: Whoever recommends and helps a good cause becomes a partner therein:
And whoever recommends and helps an evil cause, shares in its burden:
And Allah hath power over all things.

P: Whoso interveneth in a good cause will have the reward thereof, and
whoso interveneth in an evil cause will bear the consequence thereof.
Allah overseeth all things.

S: Whoever joins himself (to another) in a good cause shall have a share
of it, and whoever joins himself (to another) in an evil cause shall
have the responsibility of it, and Allah controls all things.

004.086
Y: When a (courteous) greeting is offered you, meet it with a greeting
still more courteous, or (at least) of equal courtesy. Allah takes
careful account of all things.

P: When ye are greeted with a greeting, greet ye with a better than it
or return it. Lo! Allah taketh count of all things.

S: And when you are greeted with a greeting, greet with a better
(greeting) than it or return it; surely Allah takes account of all
things.

004.087
Y: Allah! There is no god but He: of a surety He will gather you
together against the Day of Judgment, about which there is no doubt.
And whose word can be truer than Allah's?

P: Allah! There is no God save Him. He gathereth you all unto a Day of
Resurrection whereof there is no doubt. Who is more true in statement
than Allah?

S: Allah, there is no god but He-- He will most certainly gather you
together on the resurrection day, there is no doubt in it; and who is
more true in word than Allah?

004.088
Y: Why should ye be divided into two parties about the Hypocrites? Allah
hath upset them for their (evil) deeds. Would ye guide those whom Allah
hath thrown out of the Way? For those whom Allah hath thrown out of the
Way, never shalt thou find the Way.

P: What aileth you that ye are become two parties regarding the
hypocrites, when Allah cast them back (to disbelief) because of what
they earned? Seek ye to guide him whom Allah hath sent astray? He whom
Allah sendeth astray, for him thou (O Muhammad) canst not find a road.

S: What is the matter with you, then, that you have become two parties
about the hypocrites, while Allah has made them return (to unbelief)
for what they have earned? Do you wish to guide him whom Allah has
caused to err? And whomsoever Allah causes to err, you shall by no
means find a way for him.

004.089
Y: They but wish that ye should reject Faith, as they do, and thus be on
the same footing (as they): But take not friends from their ranks until
they flee in the way of Allah (From what is forbidden). But if they
turn renegades, seize them and slay them wherever ye find them; and (in
any case) take no friends or helpers from their ranks;-

P: They long that ye should disbelieve even as they disbelieve, that ye
may be upon a level (with them). So choose not friends from them till
they forsake their homes in the way of Allah; if they turn back (to
enmity) then take them and kill them wherever ye find them, and choose
no friend nor helper from among them,

S: They desire that you should disbelieve as they have disbelieved, so
that you might be (all) alike; therefore take not from among them
friends until they fly (their homes) in Allah's way; but if they turn
back, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them, and take
not from among them a friend or a helper.

004.090
Y: Except those who join a group between whom and you there is a treaty
(of peace), or those who approach you with hearts restraining them from
fighting you as well as fighting their own people. If Allah had
pleased, He could have given them power over you, and they would have
fought you: Therefore if they withdraw from you but fight you not, and
(instead) send you (Guarantees of) peace, then Allah Hath opened no way
for you (to war against them).

P: Except those who seek refuge with a people between whom and you there
is a covenant, or (those who) come unto you because their hearts forbid
them to make war on you or make war on their own folk. Had Allah willed
He could have given them power over you so that assuredly they would
have fought you. So, if they hold aloof from you and wage not war
against you and offer you peace, Allah alloweth you no way against
them.

S: Except those who reach a people between whom and you there is an
alliance, or who come to you, their hearts shrinking from fighting you
or fighting their own people; and if Allah had pleased, He would have
given them power over you, so that they should have certainly fought
you; therefore if they withdraw from you and do not fight you and offer
you peace, then Allah has not given you a way against them.

004.091
Y: Others you will find that wish to gain your confidence as well as
that of their people: Every time they are sent back to temptation, they
succumb thereto: if they withdraw not from you nor give you
(guarantees) of peace besides restraining their hands, seize them and
slay them wherever ye get them: In their case We have provided you with
a clear argument against them.

P: Ye will find others who desire that they should have security from
you, and security from their own folk. So often as they are returned to
hostility they are plunged therein. If they keep not aloof from you nor
offer you peace nor hold their hands, then take them and kill them
wherever ye find them. Against such We have given you clear warrant.

S: You will find others who desire that they should be safe from you and
secure from their own people; as often as they are sent back to the
mischief they get thrown into it headlong; therefore if they do not
withdraw from you, and (do not) offer you peace and restrain their
hands, then seize them and kill them wherever you find them; and
against these We have given you a clear authority.

004.092
Y: Never should a believer kill a believer; but (If it so happens) by
mistake, (Compensation is due): If one (so) kills a believer, it is
ordained that he should free a believing slave, and pay compensation to
the deceased's family, unless they remit it freely. If the deceased
belonged to a people at war with you, and he was a believer, the
freeing of a believing slave (Is enough). If he belonged to a people
with whom ye have treaty of Mutual alliance, compensation should be
paid to his family, and a believing slave be freed. For those who find
this beyond their means, (is prescribed) a fast for two months running:
by way of repentance to Allah: for Allah hath all knowledge and all
wisdom.

P: It is not for a believer to kill a believer unless (it be) by
mistake. He who hath killed a believer by mistake must set free a
believing slave, and pay the blood-money to the family of the slain,
unless they remit it as a charity. If he (the victim) be of a people
hostile unto you, and he is a believer, then (the penance is) to set
free a believing slave. And if he cometh of a folk between whom and you
there is a covenant, then the blood-money must be paid unto his folk
and (also) a believing slave must be set free. And whoso hath not the
wherewithal must fast two consecutive months. A penance from Allah.
Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: And it does not behoove a believer to kill a believer except by
mistake, and whoever kills a believer by mistake, he should free a
believing slave, and blood-money should be paid to his people unless
they remit it as alms; but if he be from a tribe hostile to you and he
is a believer, the freeing of a believing slave (suffices), and if he
is from a tribe between whom and you there is a convenant, the
blood-money should be paid to his people along with the freeing of a
believing slave; but he who cannot find (a slave) should fast for two
months successively: a penance from Allah, and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

004.093
Y: If a man kills a believer intentionally, his recompense is Hell, to
abide therein (For ever): And the wrath and the curse of Allah are upon
him, and a dreadful penalty is prepared for him.

P: Whoso slayeth a believer of set purpose, his reward is hell for ever.
Allah is wroth against him and He hath cursed him and prepared for him
an awful doom.

S: And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his punishment is hell;
he shall abide in it, and Allah will send His wrath on him and curse
him and prepare for him a painful chastisement.

004.094
Y: O ye who believe! When ye go abroad in the cause of Allah,
investigate carefully, and say not to any one who offers you a
salutation: "Thou art none of a believer!" Coveting the perishable
goods of this life: with Allah are profits and spoils abundant.
Even thus were ye yourselves before, till Allah conferred on you
His favours: Therefore carefully investigate. For Allah is well
aware of all that ye do.

P: O ye who believe! When ye go forth (to fight) in the way of Allah, be
careful to discriminate, and say not unto one who offereth you peace:
"Thou art not a believer," seeking the chance profits of this life (so
that ye may despoil him). With Allah are plenteous spoils. Even thus
(as he now is) were ye before; but Allah hath since then been gracious
unto you. Therefore take care to discriminate. Allah is ever Informed
of what ye do.

S: O you who believe! when you go to war in Allah's way, make
investigation, and do not say to any one who offers you peace: You are
not a believer. Do you seek goods of this world's life! But with Allah
there are abundant gains; you too were such before, then Allah
conferred a benefit on you; therefore make investigation; surely Allah
is aware of what you do.

004.095
Y: Not equal are those believers who sit (at home) and receive no hurt,
and those who strive and fight in the cause of Allah with their goods
and their persons. Allah hath granted a grade higher to those who
strive and fight with their goods and persons than to those who sit (at
home). Unto all (in Faith) Hath Allah promised good: But those who
strive and fight Hath He distinguished above those who sit (at home) by
a special reward,-

P: Those of the believers who sit still, other than those who have a
(disabling) hurt, are not on an equality with those who strive in the
way of Allah with their wealth and lives. Allah hath conferred on those
who strive with their wealth and lives a rank above the sedentary. Unto
each Allah hath promised good, but He hath bestowed on those who strive
a great reward above the sedentary;

S: The holders back from among the believers, not having any injury, and
those who strive hard in Allah's way with their property and their
persons are not equal; Allah has made the strivers with their property
and their persons to excel the holders back a (high) degree, and to
each (class) Allah has promised good; and Allah shall grant to the
strivers above the holders back a mighty reward:

004.096
Y: Ranks specially bestowed by Him, and Forgiveness and Mercy. For Allah
is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Degrees of rank from Him, and forgiveness and mercy. Allah is ever
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: (High) degrees from Him and protection and mercy, and Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

004.097
Y: When angels take the souls of those who die in sin against their
souls, they say: "In what (plight) Were ye?" They reply: "Weak and
oppressed Were we in the earth." They say: "Was not the earth of Allah
spacious enough for you to move yourselves away (From evil)?" Such men
will find their abode in Hell,- What an evil refuge! -

P: Lo! as for those whom the angels take (in death) while they wrong
themselves, (the angels) will ask: In what were ye engaged? They will
say: We were oppressed in the land. (The angels) will say: Was not
Allah's earth spacious that ye could have migrated therein? As for
such, their habitation will be hell, an evil journey's end;

S: Surely (as for) those whom the angels cause to die while they are
unjust to their souls, they shall say: In what state were you? They
shall say: We were weak in the earth. They shall say: Was not Allah's
earth spacious, so that you should have migrated therein? So these it
is whose abode is hell, and it is an evil resort;

004.098
Y: Except those who are (really) weak and oppressed - men, women, and
children - who have no means in their power, nor (a guide-post) to
their way.

P: Except the feeble among men, and the women, and the children, who are
unable to devise a plan and are not shown a way.

S: Except the weak from among the men and the children who have not in
their power the means nor can they find a way (to escape);

004.099
Y: For these, there is hope that Allah will forgive: For Allah doth blot
out (sins) and forgive again and again.

P: As for such, it may be that Allah will pardon them. Allah is ever
Clement, Forgiving.

S: So these, it may be, Allah will pardon them, and Allah is Pardoning,
Forgiving.

004.100
Y: He who forsakes his home in the cause of Allah, finds in the earth
Many a refuge, wide and spacious: Should he die as a refugee from home
for Allah and His Messenger, His reward becomes due and sure with
Allah: And Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Whoso migrateth for the cause of Allah will find much refuge and
abundance in the earth, and whoso forsaketh his home, a fugitive unto
Allah and His messenger, and death overtaketh him, his reward is then
incumbent on Allah. Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And whoever flies in Allah's way, he will find in the earth many a
place of refuge and abundant resources, and whoever goes forth from his
house flying to Allah and His Messenger, and then death overtakes him,
his reward is indeed with Allah and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

004.101
Y: When ye travel through the earth, there is no blame on you if ye
shorten your prayers, for fear the Unbelievers May attack you: For the
Unbelievers are unto you open enemies.

P: And when ye go forth in the land, it is no sin for you to curtail
(your) worship if ye fear that those who disbelieve may attack you. In
truth the disbelievers are an open enemy to you.

S: And when you journey in the earth, there is no blame on you if you
shorten the prayer, if you fear that those who disbelieve will cause
you distress, surely the unbelievers are your open enemy.

004.102
Y: When thou (O Messenger) art with them, and standest to lead them in
prayer, Let one party of them stand up (in prayer) with thee, taking
their arms with them: When they finish their prostrations, let them
take their position in the rear. And let the other party come up which
hath not yet prayed - and let them pray with thee, taking all
precaution, and bearing arms: the Unbelievers wish, if ye were
negligent of your arms and your baggage, to assault you in a single
rush. But there is no blame on you if ye put away your arms because of
the inconvenience of rain or because ye are ill; but take (every)
precaution for yourselves. For the Unbelievers Allah hath prepared a
humiliating punishment.

P: And when thou (O Muhammad) art among them and arrangest (their)
worship for them, let only a party of them stand with thee (to worship)
and let them take their arms. Then when they have performed their
prostrations let them fall to the rear and let another party come that
hath not worshipped and let them worship with thee, and let them take
their precaution and their arms. Those who disbelieve long for you to
neglect your arms and your baggage that they may attack you once for
all. It is no sin for you to lay aside your arms, if rain impedeth you
or ye are sick. But take your precaution. Lo! Allah prepareth for the
disbelievers shameful punishment.

S: And when you are among them and keep up the prayer for them, let a
party of them stand up with you, and let them take their arms; then
when they have prostrated themselves let them go to your rear, and let
another party who have not prayed come forward and pray with you, and
let them take their precautions and their arms; (for) those who
disbelieve desire that you may be careless of your arms and your
luggage, so that they may then turn upon you with a sudden united
attack, and there is no blame on you, if you are annoyed with rain or
if you are sick, that you lay down your arms, and take your
precautions; surely Allah has prepared a disgraceful chastisement for
the unbelievers.

004.103
Y: When ye pass (Congregational) prayers, celebrate Allah's praises,
standing, sitting down, or lying down on your sides; but when ye are
free from danger, set up Regular Prayers: For such prayers are enjoined
on believers at stated times.

P: When ye have performed the act of worship, remember Allah, standing,
sitting and reclining. And when ye are in safety, observe proper
worship. Worship at fixed times hath been enjoined on the believers.

S: Then when you have finished the prayer, remember Allah standing and
sitting and reclining; but when you are secure (from danger) keep up
prayer; surely prayer is a timed ordinance for the believers.

004.104
Y: And slacken not in following up the enemy: If ye are suffering
hardships, they are suffering similar hardships; but ye have Hope from
Allah, while they have none. And Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom.

P: Relent not in pursuit of the enemy. If ye are suffering, lo! they
suffer even as ye suffer and ye hope from Allah that for which they
cannot hope. Allah is ever Knower, Wise.

S: And be not weak hearted in pursuit of the enemy; if you suffer pain,
then surely they (too) suffer pain as you suffer pain, and you hope
from Allah what they do not hope; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

004.105
Y: We have sent down to thee the Book in truth, that thou mightest judge
between men, as guided by Allah: so be not (used) as an advocate by
those who betray their trust;

P: Lo! We reveal unto thee the Scripture with the truth, that thou mayst
judge between mankind by that which Allah showeth thee. And be not thou
a pleader for the treacherous;

S: Surely We have revealed the Book to you with the truth that you may
judge between people by means of that which Allah has taught you; and
be not an advocate on behalf of the treacherous.

004.106
Y: But seek the forgiveness of Allah; for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.

P: And seek forgiveness of Allah. Lo! Allah is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And ask forgiveness of Allah; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

004.107
Y: Contend not on behalf of such as betray their own souls; for Allah
loveth not one given to perfidy and crime:

P: And plead not on behalf of (people) who deceive themselves. Lo! Allah
loveth not one who is treacherous and sinful.

S: And do not plead on behalf of those who act unfaithfully to their
souls; surely Allah does not love him who is treacherous, sinful;

004.108
Y: They may hide (Their crimes) from men, but they cannot hide (Them)
from Allah, seeing that He is in their midst when they plot by night,
in words that He cannot approve: And Allah Doth compass round all that
they do.

P: They seek to hide from men and seek not to hide from Allah. He is
with them when by night they hold discourse displeasing unto Him. Allah
ever surroundeth what they do.

S: They hide themselves from men and do not hide themselves from Allah,
and He is with them when they meditate by night words which please Him
not, and Allah encompasses what they do.

004.109
Y: Ah! These are the sort of men on whose behalf ye may contend in this
world; but who will contend with Allah on their behalf on the Day of
Judgment, or who will carry their affairs through?

P: Ho! ye are they who pleaded for them in the life of the world. But
who will plead with Allah for them on the Day of Resurrection, or who
will then be their defender?

S: Behold! you are they who (may) plead for them in this world's life,
but who will plead for them with Allah on the resurrection day, or who
shall be their protector?

004.110
Y: If any one does evil or wrongs his own soul but afterwards seeks
Allah's forgiveness, he will find Allah Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Yet whoso doeth evil or wrongeth his own soul, then seeketh pardon of
Allah, will find Allah Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And whoever does evil or acts unjustly to his soul, then asks
forgiveness of Allah, he shall find Allah Forgiving, Merciful.

004.111
Y: And if any one earns sin, he earns it against His own soul: for Allah
is full of knowledge and wisdom.

P: Whoso committeth sin committeth it only against himself. Allah is
ever Knower, Wise.

S: And whoever commits a sin, he only commits it against his own soul;
and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

004.112
Y: But if any one earns a fault or a sin and throws it on to one that is
innocent, He carries (on himself) (Both) a falsehood and a flagrant
sin.

P: And whoso committeth a delinquency or crime, then throweth (the
blame) thereof upon the innocent, hath burdened himself with falsehood
and a flagrant crime.

S: And whoever commits a fault or a sin, then accuses of it one
innocent, he indeed takes upon himself the burden of a calumny and a
manifest sin.

004.113
Y: But for the Grace of Allah to thee and his Mercy, a party of them
would certainly have plotted to lead thee astray. But (in fact) they
will only Lead their own souls astray, and to thee they can do no harm
in the least. For Allah hath sent down to thee the Book and wisdom and
taught thee what thou Knewest not (before): And great is the Grace of
Allah unto thee.

P: But for the grace of Allah upon thee (Muhammad), and His mercy, a
party of them had resolved to mislead thee, but they will mislead only
themselves and they will hurt thee not at all. Allah revealeth unto
thee the Scripture and wisdom, and teacheth thee that which thou
knewest not. The grace of Allah toward thee hath been infinite.

S: And were it not for Allah's grace upon you and His mercy a party of
them had certainly designed to bring you to perdition and they do not
bring (aught) to perdition but their own souls, and they shall not harm
you in any way, and Allah has revealed to you the Book and the wisdom,
and He has taught you what you did not know, and Allah's grace on you
is very great.

004.114
Y: In most of their secret talks there is no good: But if one exhorts to
a deed of charity or justice or conciliation between men, (Secrecy is
permissible): To him who does this, seeking the good pleasure of Allah,
We shall soon give a reward of the highest (value).

P: There is no good in much of their secret conferences save (in) him
who enjoineth almsgiving and kindness and peace-making among the
people. Whoso doeth that, seeking the good pleasure of Allah, We shall
bestow on him a vast reward.

S: There is no good in most of their secret counsels except (in his) who
enjoins charity or goodness or reconciliation between people; and
whoever does this seeking Allah's pleasure, We will give him a mighty
reward.

004.115
Y: If anyone contends with the Messenger even after guidance has been
plainly conveyed to him, and follows a path other than that becoming to
men of Faith, We shall leave him in the path he has chosen, and land
him in Hell,- what an evil refuge!

P: And whoso opposeth the messenger after the guidance (of Allah) hath
been manifested unto him, and followeth other than the believer's way,
We appoint for him that unto which he himself hath turned, and expose
him unto hell - a hapless journey's end!

S: And whoever acts hostilely to the Messenger after that guidance has
become manifest to him, and follows other than the way of the
believers, We will turn him to that to which he has (himself) turned
and make him enter hell; and it is an evil resort.

004.116
Y: Allah forgiveth not (The sin of) joining other gods with Him; but He
forgiveth whom He pleaseth other sins than this: one who joins other
gods with Allah, Hath strayed far, far away (from the right).

P: Lo! Allah pardoneth not that partners should be ascribed unto Him. He
pardoneth all save that to whom He will. Whoso ascribeth partners unto
Allah hath wandered far astray.

S: Surely Allah does not forgive that anything should be associated with
Him, and He forgives what is besides this to whom He pleases; and
whoever associates anything with Allah, he indeed strays off into a
remote error.

004.117
Y: (The Pagans), leaving Him, call but upon female deities: They call
but upon Satan the persistent rebel!

P: They invoke in His stead only females; they pray to none else than
Satan, a rebel.

S: They do not call besides Him on anything but idols, and they do not
call on anything but a rebellious Shaitan.

004.118
Y: Allah did curse him, but he said: "I will take of Thy servants a
portion Marked off;"

P: Whom Allah cursed, and he said: Surely I will take of Thy bondmen an
appointed portion,

S: Allah has cursed him; and he said: Most certainly I will take of Thy
servants an appointed portion:

004.119
Y: "I will mislead them, and I will create in them false desires; I will
order them to slit the ears of cattle, and to deface the (fair) nature
created by Allah." Whoever, forsaking Allah, takes Satan for a friend,
hath of a surety suffered a loss that is manifest.

P: And surely I will lead them astray, and surely I will arouse desires
in them, and surely I will command them and they will cut the cattle'
ears, and surely I will command them and they will change Allah's
creation. Whoso chooseth Satan for a patron instead of Allah is verily
a loser and his loss is manifest.

S: And most certainly I will lead them astray and excite in them vain
desires, and bid them so that they shall slit the ears of the cattle,
and most certainly I will bid them so that they shall alter Allah's
creation; and whoever takes the Shaitan for a guardian rather than
Allah he indeed shall suffer a manifest loss.

004.120
Y: Satan makes them promises, and creates in them false desires; but
Satan's promises are nothing but deception.

P: He promiseth them and stirreth up desires in them, and Satan
promiseth them only to beguile.

S: He gives them promises and excites vain desires in them; and the
Shaitan does not promise them but to deceive.

004.121
Y: They (his dupes) will have their dwelling in Hell, and from it they
will find no way of escape.

P: For such, their habitation will be hell, and they will find no refuge
therefrom.

S: These are they whose abode is hell, and they shall not find any
refuge from it.

004.122
Y: But those who believe and do deeds of righteousness,- we shall soon
admit them to gardens, with rivers flowing beneath,-to dwell therein
for ever. Allah's promise is the truth, and whose word can be truer
than Allah's?

P: But as for those who believe and do good works We shall bring them
into Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide for
ever. It is a promise from Allah in truth; and who can be more truthful
than Allah in utterance?

S: And (as for) those who believe and do good, We will make them enter
into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide therein for ever; (it
is) a promise of Allah, true (indeed), and who is truer of word than
Allah?

004.123
Y: Not your desires, nor those of the People of the Book (can prevail):
whoever works evil, will be requited accordingly. Nor will he find,
besides Allah, any protector or helper.

P: It will not be in accordance with your desires, nor the desires of
the People of the Scripture. He who doeth wrong will have the
recompense thereof, and will not find against Allah any protecting
friend or helper.

S: (This) shall not be in accordance with your vain desires nor in
accordance with the vain desires of the followers of the Book; whoever
does evil, he shall be requited with it, and besides Allah he will find
for himself neither a guardian nor a helper.

004.124
Y: If any do deeds of righteousness,- be they male or female - and have
faith, they will enter Heaven, and not the least injustice will be done
to them.

P: And whoso doeth good works, whether of male or female, and he (or
she) is a believer, such will enter paradise and they will not be
wronged the dint in a date-stone.

S: And whoever does good deeds whether male or female and he (or she) is
a believer-- these shall enter the garden, and they shall not be dealt
with a jot unjustly.

004.125
Y: Who can be better in religion than one who submits his whole self to
Allah, does good, and follows the way of Abraham the true in Faith? For
Allah did take Abraham for a friend.

P: Who is better in religion than he who surrendereth his purpose to
Allah while doing good (to men) and followeth the tradition of Abraham,
the upright? Allah (Himself) chose Abraham for friend.

S: And who has a better religion than he who submits himself entirely to
Allah? And he is the doer of good (to others) and follows the faith of
Ibrahim, the upright one, and Allah took Ibrahim as a friend.

004.126
Y: But to Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth: And He it
is that Encompasseth all things.

P: Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is
in the earth. Allah ever surroundeth all things.

S: And whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
Allah's; and Allah encompasses all things.

004.127
Y: They ask thy instruction concerning the women say: Allah doth
instruct you about them: And (remember) what hath been rehearsed unto
you in the Book, concerning the orphans of women to whom ye give not
the portions prescribed, and yet whom ye desire to marry, as also
concerning the children who are weak and oppressed: that ye stand firm
for justice to orphans. There is not a good deed which ye do, but Allah
is well-acquainted therewith.

P: They consult thee concerning women. Say: Allah giveth you decree
concerning them, and the Scripture which hath been recited unto you
(giveth decree), concerning female orphans and those unto whom ye give
not that which is ordained for them though ye desire to marry them, and
(concerning) the weak among children, and that ye should deal justly
with orphans. Whatever good ye do, lo! Allah is ever Aware of it.

S: And they ask you a decision about women. Say: Allah makes known to
you His decision concerning them, and that which is recited to you in
the Book concerning female orphans whom you do not give what is
appointed for them while you desire to marry them, and concerning the
weak among children, and that you should deal towards orphans with
equity; and whatever good you do, Allah surely knows it.

004.128
Y: If a wife fears cruelty or desertion on her husband's part, there is
no blame on them if they arrange an amicable settlement between
themselves; and such settlement is best; even though men's souls are
swayed by greed. But if ye do good and practise self-restraint, Allah
is well-acquainted with all that ye do.

P: If a woman feareth ill treatment from her husband, or desertion, it
is no sin for them twain if they make terms of peace between
themselves. Peace is better. But greed hath been made present in the
minds (of men). If ye do good and keep from evil, lo! Allah is ever
Informed of what ye do.

S: And if a woman fears ill usage or desertion on the part of her
husband, there is no blame on them, if they effect a reconciliation
between them, and reconciliation is better, and avarice has been made
to be present in the (people's) minds; and if you do good (to others)
and guard (against evil), then surely Allah is aware of what you do.

004.129
Y: Ye are never able to be fair and just as between women, even if it is
your ardent desire: But turn not away (from a woman) altogether, so as
to leave her (as it were) hanging (in the air). If ye come to a
friendly understanding, and practise self-restraint, Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Ye will not be able to deal equally between (your) wives, however
much ye wish (to do so). But turn not altogether away (from one),
leaving her as in suspense. If ye do good and keep from evil, lo! Allah
is ever Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And you have it not in your power to do justice between wives, even
though you may wish (it), but be not disinclined (from one) with total
disinclination, so that you leave her as it were in suspense; and if
you effect a reconciliation and guard (against evil), then surely Allah
is Forgiving, Merciful.

004.130
Y: But if they disagree (and must part), Allah will provide abundance
for all from His all-reaching bounty: for Allah is He that careth for
all and is Wise.

P: But if they separate, Allah will compensate each out of His
abundance. Allah is ever All-Embracing, All-Knowing.

S: And if they separate, Allah will render them both free from want out
of His ampleness, and Allah is Ample-giving, Wise.

004.131
Y: To Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth. Verily we
have directed the People of the Book before you, and you (O Muslims) to
fear Allah. But if ye deny Him, lo! unto Allah belong all things in the
heavens and on earth, and Allah is free of all wants, worthy of all
praise.

P: Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is
in the earth. And We charged those who received the Scripture before
you, and (We charge) you, that ye keep your duty toward Allah. And if
ye disbelieve, lo! unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens
and whatsoever is in the earth, and Allah is ever Absolute, Owner of
Praise.

S: And whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
Allah's and certainly We enjoined those who were given the Book before
you and (We enjoin) you too that you should be careful of (your duty
to) Allah; and if you disbelieve, then surely whatever is in the
heavens and whatever is in the earth is Allah's and Allah is
Self-sufficient, Praise-worthy.

004.132
Y: Yea, unto Allah belong all things in the heavens and on earth, and
enough is Allah to carry through all affairs.

P: Unto Allah belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is
in the earth. And Allah is sufficient as Defender.

S: And whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth is
Allah's, and Allah is sufficient as a Protector.

004.133
Y: If it were His will, He could destroy you, O mankind, and create
another race; for He hath power this to do.

P: If He will, He can remove you, O people, and produce others (in your
stead). Allah is Able to do that.

S: If He please, He can make you pass away, O people! and bring others;
and Allah has the power to do this.

004.134
Y: If any one desires a reward in this life, in Allah's (gift) is the
reward (both) of this life and of the hereafter: for Allah is He that
heareth and seeth (all things).

P: Whoso desireth the reward of the world, (let him know that) with
Allah is the reward of the world and the Hereafter. Allah is ever
Hearer, Seer.

S: Whoever desires the reward of this world, then with Allah is the
reward of this world and the hereafter; and Allah is Hearing, Seeing.

004.135
Y: O ye who believe! stand out firmly for justice, as witnesses to
Allah, even as against yourselves, or your parents, or your kin, and
whether it be (against) rich or poor: for Allah can best protect both.
Follow not the lusts (of your hearts), lest ye swerve, and if ye
distort (justice) or decline to do justice, verily Allah is
well-acquainted with all that ye do.

P: O ye who believe! Be ye staunch in justice, witnesses for Allah, even
though it be against yourselves or (your) parents or (your) kindred,
whether (the case be of) a rich man or a poor man, for Allah is nearer
unto both (them ye are). So follow not passion lest ye lapse (from
truth) and if ye lapse or fall away, then lo! Allah is ever Informed of
what ye do.

S: O you who believe! be maintainers of justice, bearers of witness of
Allah's sake, though it may be against your own selves or (your)
parents or near relatives; if he be rich or poor, Allah is nearer to
them both in compassion; therefore do not follow (your) low desires,
lest you deviate; and if you swerve or turn aside, then surely Allah is
aware of what you do.

004.136
Y: O ye who believe! Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and the
scripture which He hath sent to His Messenger and the scripture which
He sent to those before (him). Any who denieth Allah, His angels, His
Books, His Messengers, and the Day of Judgment, hath gone far, far
astray.

P: O ye who believe! Believe in Allah and His messenger and the
Scripture which He hath revealed unto His messenger, and the Scripture
which He revealed aforetime. Whoso disbelieveth in Allah and His angels
and His scriptures and His messengers and the Last Day, he verily hath
wandered far astray.

S: O you who believe! believe in Allah and His Messenger and the Book
which He has revealed to His Messenger and the Book which He revealed
before; and whoever disbelieves in Allah and His angels and His
messengers and the last day, he indeed strays off into a remote error.

004.137
Y: Those who believe, then reject faith, then believe (again) and
(again) reject faith, and go on increasing in unbelief,- Allah will not
forgive them nor guide them nor guide them on the way.

P: Lo! those who believe, then disbelieve and then (again) believe, then
disbelieve, and then increase in disbelief, Allah will never pardon
them, nor will He guide them unto a way.

S: Surely (as for) those who believe then disbelieve, again believe and
again disbelieve, then increase in disbelief, Allah will not forgive
them nor guide them in the (right) path.

004.138
Y: To the Hypocrites give the glad tidings that there is for them (but)
a grievous penalty;-

P: Bear unto the hypocrites the tidings that for them there is a painful
doom;

S: Announce to the hypocrites that they shall have a painful
chastisement:

004.139
Y: Yea, to those who take for friends unbelievers rather than believers:
is it honour they seek among them? Nay,- all honour is with Allah.

P: Those who chose disbelievers for their friends instead of believers!
Do they look for power at their hands? Lo! all power appertaineth to
Allah.

S: Those who take the unbelievers for guardians rather than believers.
Do they seek honor from them? Then surely all honor is for Allah.

004.140
Y: Already has He sent you Word in the Book, that when ye hear the signs
of Allah held in defiance and ridicule, ye are not to sit with them
unless they turn to a different theme: if ye did, ye would be like
them. For Allah will collect the hypocrites and those who defy faith -
all in Hell:-

P: He hath already revealed unto you in the Scripture that, when ye hear
the revelations of Allah rejected and derided, (ye) sit not with them
(who disbelieve and mock) until they engage in some other conversation.
Lo! in that case (if ye stayed) ye would be like unto them. Lo! Allah
will gather hypocrites and disbelievers, all together, into hell;

S: And indeed He has revealed to you in the Book that when you hear
Allah's communications disbelieved in and mocked at do not sit with
them until they enter into some other discourse; surely then you would
be like them; surely Allah will gather together the hypocrites and the
unbelievers all in hell.

004.141
Y: (These are) the ones who wait and watch about you: if ye do gain a
victory from Allah, they say: "Were we not with you?"- but if the
unbelievers gain a success, they say (to them): "Did we not gain an
advantage over you, and did we not guard you from the believers?" but
Allah will judge betwixt you on the Day of Judgment. And never will
Allah grant to the unbelievers a way (to triumphs) over the believers.

P: Those who wait upon occasion in regard to you and, if a victory
cometh unto you from Allah, say: Are we not with you? and if the
disbelievers meet with a success say: Had we not the mastery of you,
and did we not protect you from the believers? - Allah will judge
between you at the Day of Resurrection, and Allah will not give the
disbelievers any way (of success) against the believers.

S: Those who wait for (some misfortune to befall) you; then if you have a
victory from Allah they say: Were we not with you? And if there is a
chance for the unbelievers, they say: Did we not acquire the mastery
over you and defend you from the believers? So Allah shall Judge
between you on the day of resurrection, and Allah will by no means give
the unbelievers a way against the believers.

004.142
Y: The Hypocrites - they think they are over-reaching Allah, but He will
over-reach them: When they stand up to prayer, they stand without
earnestness, to be seen of men, but little do they hold Allah in
remembrance;

P: Lo! the hypocrites seek to beguile Allah, but it is He Who beguileth
them. When they stand up to worship they perform it languidly and to be
seen of men, and are mindful of Allah but little;

S: Surely the hypocrites strive to deceive Allah, and He shall requite
their deceit to them, and when they stand up to prayer they stand up
sluggishly; they do it only to be seen of men and do not remember Allah
save a little.

004.143
Y: (They are) distracted in mind even in the midst of it,- being
(sincerely) for neither one group nor for another whom Allah leaves
straying,- never wilt thou find for him the way.

P: Swaying between this (and that), (belonging) neither to these nor to
those. He whom Allah causeth to go astray, thou (O Muhammad) wilt not
find a way for him:

S: Wavering between that (and this), (belonging) neither to these nor to
those; and whomsoever Allah causes to err, you shall not find a way for
him.

004.144
Y: O ye who believe! Take not for friends unbelievers rather than
believers: Do ye wish to offer Allah an open proof against yourselves?

P: O ye who believe! Choose not disbelievers for (your) friends in place
of believers. Would ye give Allah a clear warrant against you?

S: O you who believe! do not take the unbelievers for friends rather
than the believers; do you desire that you should give to Allah a
manifest proof against yourselves?

004.145
Y: The Hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire: no helper
wilt thou find for them;-

P: Lo! the hypocrites (will be) in the lowest deep of the Fire, and thou
wilt find no helper for them;

S: Surely the hypocrites are in the lowest stage of the fire and you
shall not find a helper for them.

004.146
Y: Except for those who repent, mend (their lives) hold fast to Allah,
and purify their religion as in Allah's sight: if so they will be
(numbered) with the believers. And soon will Allah grant to the
believers a reward of immense value.

P: Save those who repent and amend and hold fast to Allah and make their
religion pure for Allah (only). Those are with the believers. And Allah
will bestow on the believers an immense reward.

S: Except those who repent and amend and hold fast to Allah and are
sincere in their religion to Allah, these are with the believers, and
Allah will grant the believers a mighty reward.

004.147
Y: What can Allah gain by your punishment, if ye are grateful and ye
believe? Nay, it is Allah that recogniseth (all good), and knoweth all
things.

P: What concern hath Allah for your punishment if ye are thankful (for
His mercies) and believe (in Him)? Allah was ever Responsive, Aware.

S: Why should Allah chastise you if you are grateful and believe? And
Allah is the Multiplier of rewards, Knowing.

004.148
Y: Allah loveth not that evil should be noised abroad in public speech,
except where injustice hath been done; for Allah is He who heareth and
knoweth all things.

P: Allah loveth not the utterance of harsh speech save by one who hath
been wronged. Allah is ever Hearer, Knower.

S: Allah does not love the public utterance of hurtful speech unless (it
be) by one to whom injustice has been done; and Allah is Hearing,
Knowing.

004.149
Y: Whether ye publish a good deed or conceal it or cover evil with
pardon, verily Allah doth blot out (sins) and hath power (in the
judgment of values).

P: If ye do good openly or keep it secret, or forgive evil, lo! Allah is
ever Forgiving, Powerful.

S: If you do good openly or do it in secret or pardon an evil then
surely Allah is Pardoning, Powerful.

004.150
Y: Those who deny Allah and His messengers, and (those who) wish to
separate Allah from His messengers, saying: "We believe in some but
reject others": And (those who) wish to take a course midway,-

P: Lo! those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers, and seek to
make distinction between Allah and His messengers, and say: We believe
in some and disbelieve in others, and seek to choose a way in between;

S: Surely those who disbelieve in Allah and His messengers and (those
who) desire to make a distinction between Allah and His messengers and
say: We believe in some and disbelieve in others, and desire to take a
course between (this and) that.

004.151
Y: They are in truth (equally) unbelievers; and we have prepared for
unbelievers a humiliating punishment.

P: Such are disbelievers in truth; and for disbelievers We prepare a
shameful doom.

S: These it is that are truly unbelievers, and We have prepared for the
unbelievers a disgraceful chastisement.

004.152
Y: To those who believe in Allah and His messengers and make no
distinction between any of the messengers, we shall soon give their
(due) rewards: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: But those who believe in Allah and His messengers and make no
distinction between any of them, unto them Allah will give their wages;
and Allah was ever Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And those who believe in Allah and His messengers and do not make a
distinction between any of them-- Allah will grant them their rewards;
and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

004.153
Y: The people of the Book ask thee to cause a book to descend to them
from heaven: Indeed they asked Moses for an even greater (miracle), for
they said: "Show us Allah in public," but they were dazed for their
presumption, with thunder and lightning. Yet they worshipped the calf
even after clear signs had come to them; even so we forgave them; and
gave Moses manifest proofs of authority.

P: The people of the Scripture ask of thee that thou shouldst cause an
(actual) Book to descend upon them from heaven. They asked a greater
thing of Moses aforetime, for they said: Show us Allah plainly. The
storm of lightning seized them for their wickedness. Then (even after
that) they chose the calf (for worship) after clear proofs (of Allah's
Sovereignty) had come unto them. And We forgave them that! And We
bestowed on Moses evident authority.

S: The followers of the Book ask you to bring down to them a book from
heaven; so indeed they demanded of Musa a greater thing than that, for
they said: Show us Allah manifestly; so the lightning overtook them on
account of their injustice. Then they took the calf (for a god), after
clear signs had come to them, but We pardoned this; and We gave to Musa
clear authority.

004.154
Y: And for their covenant we raised over them (the towering height) of
Mount (Sinai); and (on another occasion) we said: "Enter the gate with
humility"; and (once again) we commanded them: "Transgress not in the
matter of the Sabbath." And we took from them a solemn covenant.

P: And We caused the Mount to tower above them at (the taking of) their
covenant: and We bade them: Enter the gate, prostrate! and We bode
them: Transgress not the Sabbath! and We took from them a firm
covenant.
