from whence it did first spring and begin.  For hardly at any time do
they well agree between themselves: except it be peradventure as, in
times past, the Pharisees and Sadducees; or as Herod and Pilate did
accord against Christ.

They were best, therefore, to go and set peace at home rather among their
own selves.  Of a truth, unity and concord doth best become religion: yet
is not unity the sure and certain mark whereby to know the Church of God.
For there was the greatest consent that might be amongst them that
worshipped the golden calf; and among them which with one voice jointly
cried against our Saviour Jesus Christ, "Crucify Him."  Neither, because
the Corinthians were unquieted with private dissensions: or because Paul
did square with Peter, or Barnabas with Paul: or, because the Christians,
upon the very beginning of the Gospel, were at mutual discord touching
some one matter or other, may we therefore think there was no Church of
God amongst them.  And as for those persons, whom they upon spite call
Zuinglians and Lutherians, in very deed they of both sides be Christians,
good friends and brethren.  They vary not betwixt themselves upon the
principles and foundations of our religion, nor as touching God, nor
Christ, nor the Holy Ghost, nor of the means of justification, nor yet
everlasting life, but upon one only question, which is neither weighty
nor great: neither mistrust we, or make doubt at all, but they will
shortly be agreed.  And if there be any of them which have other opinion
than is meet, we doubt not but ere it be long they will put apart all
affections and names of parties, and that God will reveal it unto them:
so that by better considering and searching out of the matter, as once it
came to pass in the Council of Chalcedon, all causes and seeds of
dissension shall be thoroughly plucked up by the root, and be buried, and
quite forgotten for ever.  Which God grant.

But this is the most grievous and heavy case, that they call us wicked
and ungodly men, and say we have thrown away all care of religion.  Though
this ought not to trouble us much, whilst they themselves that thus have
charged us know full well how spiteful and false a saying it is: for
Justin the martyr is a witness, how that all Christians were called
[Greek text], that is, godless, as soon as the Gospel first began to be
published, and the Name of Christ to be openly declared.  And when
Polycarpus stood to be judged, the people stirred up the president to
slay and murder all them which professed the Gospel, with these words,
[Greek text], that is to say, "Rid out of the way these wicked and
godless creatures."  And this was not because it was true that the
Christians were godless, but because they would not worship stones and
stocks which were then honoured as God.  The whole world seeth plainly
enough already, what we and ours have endured at these men's hands for
religion and our only God's cause.  They have thrown us into prison, into
water, into fire, and imbrued themselves in our blood: not because we
were either adulterers, or robbers, or murderers, but only for that we
confessed the Gospel of Jesu Christ, and put our confidence in the living
God; and for that we complained too justly and truly (Lord, thou
knowest), that they did break the law of God for their own most vain
traditions; and that our adversaries were the very foes to the Gospel,
and enemies to Christ's Cross, who so wittingly and willingly did
obstinately despise God's commandments.

Wherefore, when these men saw they could not rightly find fault with our
doctrine, they would needs pick a quarrel and inveigh and rail against
our manners, surmising, how that we do condemn all well-doings: that we
set open the door to all licentiousness and lust, and lead away the
people from all love of virtue.  And in very deed, the life of all men,
even of the devoutest and most Christian, both is, and evermore hath
been, such as one may always find some lack, even in the very best and
purest conversation.  And such is the inclination of all creatures unto
evil, and the readiness of all men to suspect that the things which
neither have been done, nor once meant to be done, yet may be easily both
heard and credited for true.  And like as a small spot is soon espied in
the neatest and whitest garment, even so the least stain of dishonesty is
easily found out in the purest and sincerest life.  Neither take we all
them which have at this day embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, to be
angels, and to live clearly without any mote or wrinkle; nor yet think we
these men either so blind, that if anything may be noted in us, they are
not able to perceive the same even through the least crevice: nor so
friendly, that they will construe aught to the best: nor yet so honest of
nature nor courteous, that they will look back upon themselves, and weigh
our fashions by their own.  If so be we list to search this matter from
the bottom, we know in the very Apostles' times there were Christians,
through whom the Name of the Lord was blasphemed and evil spoken of among
the Gentiles.  Constantius the emperor bewaileth, as it is written in
Sozomenus, that many waxed worse after they had fallen to the religion of
Christ.  And Cyprian, in a lamentable oration, setteth out the corrupt
manners in his time: "The wholesome discipline," saith he, "which the
Apostles left unto us, hath idleness and long rest now utterly marred:
everyone studied to increase his livelihood; and clean forgetting either
what they had done before whilst they were under the Apostles, or what
they ought continually to do, having received the faith they earnestly
laboured to make great their own wealth with an unsatiable desire of
covetousness.  There is no devout religion," saith he, "in priests, no
sound faith in ministers, no charity showed in good works, no form of
godliness in their conditions: men are become effeminate, and women's
beauty is counterfeited."  And before his days, said Tertullian, "O how
wretched be we, which are called Christians at this time! for we live as
heathens under the Name of Christ."  And without reciting of many more
writers, Gregory Nazianzen speaketh thus of the pitiful state of his own
time: "We," saith he, "are in hatred among the heathen for our own vices'
sake; we are also become now a wonder, not only to angels and men, but
even to all the ungodly."  In this case was the Church of God, when the
Gospel first began to shine, and when the fury of tyrants was not as yet
cooled, nor the sword taken off from the Christians' necks.  Surely it is
no new thing that men be but men, although they be called by the name of
Christians.



PART IV.


But will these men, I pray you, think nothing at all of themselves, while
they accuse us so maliciously?  And while they have leisure to behold so
far off, and see both what is done in Germany and in England, have they
either forgotten, or can they not see what is done at Rome? or be they
our accusers, whose life is such as no man is able to make mention
thereof but with shame and uncomeliness?  Our purpose here is, not to
take in hand, at this present, to bring to light and open to the world
those things which were meet rather to be hid and buried with the workers
of them.  It beseemeth neither our religion, nor our modesty, nor our
shamefastness.  But yet he, which giveth commandment that he should be
called the "Vicar of Christ," and the "Head of the Church;" who also
heareth that such things be done in Rome, who seeth them, who suffereth
them (for we will go no further), he can easily consider with himself
what manner of things they be.  Let him on God's Name call to mind, let
him remember that they be of his own canonists, which have taught the
people that fornication between single folk is no sin (as though they had
fette that doctrine from Mitio in Terence), whose words be: "It is no sin
(believe me) for a young man to haunt harlots."  Let him remember they be
of his own which have decreed, that a priest ought not to be put out of
his cure for fornication.  Let him remember also how Cardinal Campegius,
Albertus Pighius, and others many more of his own, have taught, that the
priest which "keepeth a concubine" doth live more holily and chastely
than he which hath a "wife in matrimony."  I trust he hath not yet
forgotten that there be many thousands of common harlots in Rome; and
that himself doth gather yearly of the same harlots upon, a thirty
thousand ducats, by the way of an annual pension.  Neither can he forget,
how himself doth maintain openly brothel houses, and by a most filthy
lucre doth filthily and lewdly serve his own lust.  Were all things then
pure and holy in Rome, when "Joan a woman," rather of perfect age than of
perfect life, was Pope there, and bare herself as the "head of the
Church:" and after that for two whole years in that holy see she had
played the naughty pack, at last, going in procession about the city, in
the sight of all the cardinals and bishops, fell in travail openly in the
streets.

But what need we rehearse concubines and bawds? as for that is now an
ordinary and a gainful sin at Rome.  For harlots sit there now-a-days,
not as they did in times past, without the city walls, and with their
faces hid and covered, but they dwell in palaces and fair houses: they
stray about in court and market, and that with bare and open face: as who
say, they may not only lawfully do it, but ought also to be praised for
so doing.  What should we say any more of this?  Their vicious and
abominable life is now thoroughly known to the whole world.  Bernard
writeth roundly and truly of the Bishop of Rome's house, yea, and of the
Bishop of Rome himself.  "Thy palace," saith he, "taketh in good men, but
it maketh none; naughty persons thrive there, and the good appayre and
decay."  And whosoever he were which wrote the Tripartite work, annexed
to the Council Lateranense, saith thus: "So excessive at this day is the
riot, as well in the prelates and bishops as in the clerks and priests,
that it is horrible to be told."

But these things be not only grown in ure, and so by custom and continual
time well allowed, as all the rest of their doings in manner be, but they
are now waxen old and rotten ripe.  For who hath not heard what a heinous
act Peter Aloisius, Pope Paul the Third's son, committed against Cosmus
Cherius, the Bishop of Fanum; what John, Archbishop of Beneventum, the
Pope's legate at Venice, wrote in the commendation of a most abominable
filthiness: and how he set forth, with most loathsome words and wicked
eloquence, the matter which ought not once to proceed out of anybody's
mouth!  To whose ears hath it not come, that N. Diasius, a Spaniard,
being purposely sent from Rome into Germany, so shamefully and devilishly
murdered his own brother John Diasius, a most innocent and a most godly
man, only because he had embraced the Gospel of Jesu Christ, and would
not return again to Rome?

But it may chance to this they will say: These things may sometime happen
in the best governed commonwealths, yea, and against the magistrates'
wills: and besides, there be good laws made to punish such.  I grant it
be so: but by what good laws (I would know) have these great mischiefs
been punished amongst them?  Petrus Aloisius, after he had done that
notorious act that I spake of, was always cherished in his father's
bosom, Pope Paul the Third, and made his very derling.  Diasius, after he
had murdered his own brother, was delivered by the Pope's means, to the
end he might not be punished by good laws.  John Casus, the Archbishop of
Beneventum, is yet alive, yea, and liveth at Rome, even in the eyes and
sight of the most holy father.

They have put to death infinite numbers of our brethren, only because
they believed truly and sincerely in Jesu Christ.  But of that great and
foul number of harlots, fornicators, adulterers, what one have they at
any time (I say not killed, but) either excommunicated, or once attached?
Why! voluptuousness, adultery, ribaldry, whoredom, murdering of kin,
incest, and others more abominable parts, are not these counted sin at
Rome?  Or, if they be sin, ought "Christ's vicar, Peter's successor, the
most holy father," so lightly and slightly to bear them, as though they
were no sin, and that in the city of Rome, and in that principal tower of
all holiness?

O holy Scribes and Pharisees, which knew not this kind of holiness! what
a Catholic faith is this!  Peter did not thus teach at Rome: Paul did not
so live at Rome: they did not practise brothelry, which these do openly:
they made not a yearly revenue and profit of harlots: they suffered no
common adulterers and wicked murderers to go unpunished.  They did not
receive them into their entire familiarity, into their council, into
their household, nor yet into the company of Christian men.  These men
ought not therefore so unreasonably to triumph against our living.  It
had been more wisdom for them either first to have proved good their own
life before the world, or at least to have cloaked it a little more
cunningly.  For we do use still the old and ancient laws, and (as much as
men may do, in the manners used at these days, all things are so wholly
corrupt) we diligently and earnestly put in execution the ecclesiastical
discipline: we have not common brothel-houses of strumpets, nor yet
flocks of concubines, nor herds of harlot-hunters: neither do we prefer
adultery before matrimony: neither do we exercise beastly sensuality:
neither do we gather ordinary rents and stipends of stews: nor do we
suffer to escape unpunished incest and abominable naughtiness, nor yet
such manquellers as the Aloisians, Casians, and Diazians were.  For if
these things would have pleased us, we needed not to have departed from
these men's fellowship, amongst whom such enormities be in their chief
pride and price.  Neither needed we, for leaving them, to run into the
hatred of men, and into most wilful dangers.  Paul the Fourth, not many
months sithence, had at Rome in prison certain Augustine friars, many
bishops, and a great number of other devout men, for religion's sake.  He
racked them and tormented them: to make them confess, he left no means
unassayed.  But in the end how many brothels, how many whoremongers, how
many adulterers, how many incestuous persons could he find of all those?
Our God be thanked, although we be not the men we ought and profess to
be, yet, whosoever we be, compare us with these men, and even our own
life and innocency will soon prove untrue and condemn their malicious
surmises.  For we exhort the people to all virtue and well-doing, not
only by books and preachings, but also with our examples and behaviour.
We also teach that the Gospel is not a boasting or bragging of knowledge,
but that it is the law of life, and that a Christian man (as Tertullian
saith) "ought not to speak honourably, but ought to live honourably; nor
that they be the hearers of the law, but the doers of the law, which are
justified before God."

Besides all these matters wherewith they charge us, they are wont also to
add this one thing, which they enlarge with all kind of spitefulness:
that is, that we be men of trouble, that we pluck the "sword and sceptre
out of kings' hands;" that we arm the people: that we overthrow judgment
places, destroy the laws, make havoc of possessions, seek to make the
people princes, turn all things upside down: and, to be short, that we
would have nothing in good frame in a commonwealth.  Good Lord, how often
have they set on fire princes' hearts with these words, to the end they
might quench the light of the Gospel in the very first appearing of it,
and might begin to hate the same ere ever they were able to know it, and
to the end that every magistrate might think he saw his deadly enemy as
often as he saw any of us!

Surely it should exceedingly grieve us to be so maliciously accused of
most heinous treason, unless we knew that Christ Himself, the Apostles,
and a number of good and Christian men, were in times past blamed and
envied in manner for the same faults.  For although Christ taught "they
should give unto Caesar that which was Caesar's," yet was He charged with
sedition, in that He was accused to devise some conspiracy and covet the
kingdom.  And hereupon they cried out with open mouth against him in the
place of judgment: "If thou let this man escape, thou art not Caesar's
friend."  And though the Apostles did likewise evermore and steadfastly
teach, that magistrates ought to be obeyed, "that every soul ought to be
subject to the higher powers, not only for fear of wrath and punishment,
but even for conscience sake;" yet bare they the name to disquiet the
people, and to stir up the multitude to rebel.  After this sort did Haman
specially bring the nation of the Jews into the hatred of the king
Assuerus, because, said he, "they were a rebellious and stubborn people,
and despised the ordinances and commandments of princes."  Wicked King
Ahab said to Elie [Elijah] the prophet of God, "It is thou that troublest
Israel."  Amasias, the priest at Bethel, laid a conspiracy to the prophet
Amos' charge before King Jeroboam, saying, "See, Amos hath made a
conspiracy against thee in the midst of the house of Israel."  To be
brief, Tertullian saith, this was the general accusation of all
Christians while he lived, that they were traitors, they were rebels, and
the enemies of mankind.  Wherefore, if now-a-days the truth be likewise
evil spoken of, and being the same truth it was then, if it be now like
despitefully used as it was in times past, though it be a grievous and
unkind dealing, yet can it not seem unto us a new or an unwonted matter.

Forty years ago and upward, was it an easy thing for them to devise
against us these accursed speeches, and other, too, sorer than these;
when, in the midst of the darkness of that age, first began to spring and
to give shine some one glimmering beam of truth, unknown at that time and
unheard of: when also Martin Luther and Hulderic Zuinglius, being most
excellent men, even sent of God to give light to the whole world, first
came unto the knowledge and preaching of the Gospel; whereas yet the
thing was but new, and the success thereof uncertain; and when men's
minds stood doubtful and amazed, and their ears open to all slanderous
tales; and when there could be imagined against us no fact so detestable,
but the people then would soon believe it for the novelty and strangeness
of the matter.  For so did Symmachus, so did Celsus, so did Julianus, so
did Porphyrius, the old foes to the Gospel, attempt in times past to
accuse all Christians of sedition and treason, before that either prince
or people were able to know who those Christians were, what they
professed, what they believed, or what was their meaning.  But now,
sithence our very enemies do see, and cannot deny, but we ever in all our
words and writings have diligently put the people in mind of their duty,
to obey their princes and magistrates, yea, though they be wicked (for
this doth very trial and experience sufficiently teach, and all men's
eyes, whosoever and wheresoever they be, do well enough see and witness
for us), it was a foul part of them to charge us with these things; yea,
seeing they could find no new and late faults, therefore to seek to
procure us envy only with stale and out worn lies.

We give our Lord God thanks, whose only cause this is, there hath yet at
no time been any such example in all the realms, dominions, and
commonweals, which have received the Gospel.  For we have overthrown no
kingdom, we have decayed no man's power or right, we have disordered no
commonwealth.  There continue in their own accustomed state and ancient
dignity, the kings of our country of England, the kings of Denmark, the
kings of Sweden, the dukes of Saxony, the counts palatine, the marquesses
of Brandenburg, the landgraves of Hesse, the commonwealth of the
Helvetians and Rhaetians, and the free cities, as Argentine, Basil,
Frankfort, Ulm, Augusta, and Nuremberg; do all, I say, abide in the same
authority and estate wherein they have been heretofore, or rather in a
much better, for that by means of the Gospel they have their people more
obedient unto them.  Let them go, I pray you, into those places where at
this present through God's goodness the Gospel is taught.  Where is there
more majesty?  Where is there less arrogancy and tyranny?  Where be the
prince more honoured?  Where is the people less unruly?  Where hath there
at any time the commonwealth or the Church been in more quiet?  Perhaps
ye will say, from the first beginning of this doctrine the common sort
everywhere began to rage and to rise throughout Germany.  Allow it were
so, yet Martin Luther, the publisher and setter forward of this doctrine,
did write marvellous vehemently and sharply against them, and reclaimed
them, home to peace and obedience.

But whereas it is wont sometime to be objected by persons wanting skill
touching the Helvetians' change of state, and killing of Leopoldus the
Duke of Austria, and restoring by force their country to liberty, that
was done, as appeareth plainly by all stories, for two hundred and
threescore years past or above, under Boniface the Eighth, when the
authority of the "Bishop of Rome" was in greatest jollity; about two
hundred years before Huldericus Zuinglius either began to teach the
Gospel, or yet was born: and ever since that time they have had all
things still and quiet, not only from foreign enemies, but also from
civil dissension.  And if it were a sin in the Helvetians to deliver
their own country from foreign government, specially when they were so
proudly and tyrannously oppressed, yet to burden us with other men's
faults, or them with the faults of their forefathers, is against all
right and reason.

But O immortal God! and will the Bishop of Rome accuse us of treason?
Will he teach the people to obey and follow their magistrates? or hath he
any regard at all of the majesty of princes?  Why doth he then, as none
of the old bishops of Rome heretofore ever did, suffer himself to be
called of his flatterers "lord of lords," as though he would have all
kings and princes, who and whatsoever they are, to be his underlings?  Why
doth he vaunt himself to be "king of kings," and to have kingly royalty
over his subjects?  Why compelleth he all emperors and princes to swear
to him fealty and true obedience?  Why doth he boast that the "emperor's
majesty's is a thousandfold inferior to him:" and for this reason
specially, because God hath made two lights in heaven, and because heaven
and earth were created not at two beginnings, but in one?  Why hath he
and his complices (like Anabaptists and Libertines, to the end they might
run on more licentiously and carelessly) shaken off the yoke, and
exempted themselves from being under a civil power?  Why hath he his
legates (as much to say as most subtle spies) lying in wait in all kings'
courts, councils, and privy chambers?  Why doth he, when he list, set
Christian princes one against another, and at his own pleasure trouble
the whole world with debate and discord?  Why doth he excommunicate, and
command to be taken as a heathen and a Pagan any Christian prince that
renounceth his authority?  And why promiseth he his "indulgences and his
pardons" so largely to any that will (what way soever it be) kill any of
his enemies?  Doth he maintain empires and kingdoms? or doth he once
desire that common quiet should be provided for?  You must pardon us,
good reader, though we seem to utter these things more bitterly and
bitingly than it becometh divines to do.  For both the shamefulness of
the matter, and the desire of rule in the Bishop of Rome is so exceeding
and outrageous, that it could not well be uttered with other words, or
more mildly.  For he is not ashamed to say in open assembly, "that all
jurisdiction of all kings doth depend upon himself."  And to feed his
ambition and greediness of rule, he hath pulled in pieces the "empire of
Rome," and vexed and rent whole Christendom asunder.  Falsely and
traitorously also did he release the Romans, the Italians, and himself
too, of the oath whereby they and he were straitly bound to be true to
the "emperor of Greece," and stirred up the emperor's subjects to forsake
him: and calling Carolus Martellus out of France into Italy, made him
emperor, such a thing as never was seen before.  He put Chilpericus, the
French king, being no evil prince, beside his realm, only because he
fancied him not, and wrongfully placed Pipin in his room.  Again, after
he had cast out King Philip, if he could have brought it to pass, he had
determined and appointed the kingdom of France to Albertus King of
Romans.  He utterly destroyed the state of the most nourishing city and
commonweal of Florence, his own native country, and brought it out of a
free and peaceable state, to be governed at the pleasure of one man: he
brought to pass by his procurement, that whole Savoy on the one side was
miserably spoiled by the Emperor Charles the Fifth, and on the other side
by the French king, so as the unfortunate duke had scant one city left
him to hide his head in.

We are cloyed with examples in this behalf, and it should be very tedious
to reckon up all the notorious deeds of the bishops of Rome.  Of which
side were they, I beseech you, which poisoned Henry the Emperor even in
the receiving of the sacrament? which poisoned Victor the Pope even in
the receiving of the chalice? which poisoned our King John, king of
England, in a drinking cup?  Whosoever at least they were and of what
sect soever, I am sure they were neither Lutherans nor Zuinglians.  What
is he at this day, which alloweth the mightiest kings and monarchs of the
world to kiss his blessed feet?  What is he that commandeth the emperor
to go by him at his horse bridle, and the French king to hold his
stirrup?  Who hurled under his table Francis Dandalus the duke of Venice,
king of Crete and Cyprus, fast bound with chains, to feed of bones among
his dogs?  Who set the imperial crown upon the Emperor Henry the Sixth's
head, not with his hand, but with his foot; and with the same foot again
cast the same crown off, saying withal, "he had power to make emperors,
and to unmake them again at his pleasure"?  Who put in arms Henry the son
against the emperor his father Henry the Fourth, and wrought so that the
father was taken prisoner of his own son, and being shorn and shamefully
handled, was thrust into a monastery, where with hunger and sorrow he
pined away to death?  Who so ill-favouredly and monstrously put the
