sympathy.--Story of Virudhaka.

This (prince) feels for the welfare of the multitude.--Nalaka-sutta.

The Royal Prince, perceiving the tired oxen, ... the men toiling
beneath the midday sun, and the birds devouring the hapless insects,
his heart was filled with grief, as a man would feel upon seeing his
own household bound in fetters: thus was he touched with sorrow for
the whole family of sentient creatures--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

This king felt the weal and the woe of his subjects as his
own.--Jatakamala.

What is a true gift?
One for which nothing is expected in return.--Prasnottaramalika.

There is a way of giving, seeking pleasure by it (or) coveting to get
more; some also give to gain a name for charity, some to gain the
happiness of heaven.... But yours, O friend, is a charity free from
such thoughts, the highest and best degree of charity, free from
self-interest or thought of getting more.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

'Tis thus men generally think and speak, they have a reference in all they
do to their own advantage. But with this one it is not so: 'tis the good of
others and not his own that he seeks.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Above all things be not careless; for carelessness is the great foe to
virtue.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

You say that while young a man should be gay, and when old then
religious.... Death, however, as a robber, sword in hand, follows us
all, desiring to capture his prey: how then should we wait for old
age, ere we turn our minds to religion?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If you urge that I am young and tender, and that the time for seeking
wisdom is not yet, then you should know that to seek true religion,
there never is a time not fit.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Work out your own salvation with diligence.--Mahaparinibbana-sutta.

No man can purify another.--Dhammapada.

The good man's love ends in love; the bad man's love in
hate.--Kshemendra's Kalpalata.

He who holds up a torch to (lighten) mankind is always honored by
me.--Rahula-sutta.

Where there is uprightness, wisdom is there, and where there is
wisdom, uprightness is there.--Sonadanda-sutta.

Liberty, courtesy, benevolence, unselfishness, under all circumstances
towards all people--these qualities are to the world what the linchpin
is to the rolling chariot.--Sigalovada-sutta.

Let us be knit together ... as friends.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Since even animals can live together in mutual reverence, confidence,
and courtesy, much more should you, O Brethren, so let your light
shine forth that you ... may be seen to dwell in like manner
together.--Cullavagga.

Trust is the best of relationships.--Dhammapada.

Faithful and trustworthy, he injures not his fellow-man by
deceit.--Tevijja-sutta.

Worship consists in fulfilling the design (of the person honored), not
in offerings of perfumes, garlands, and the like.--Jatakamala.

Compassion for all creatures is the true religion.--Buddha-charita.

The wise firmly believe that in Mercy the whole of Righteousness is
contained. What virtue ... does there exist which is not the
consequence of Mercy?--Jatakamala.

Even if a man have done evil a hundred times, let him not do it
again.--Udanavarga.

He who, having been angered, gives way to anger no more, has achieved
a mighty victory.--Udanavarga.

Better than sovereignty over this earth, ... better than lordship over
all worlds, is the recompense of the first step in holiness.--Dhammapada.

Now many distinguished warriors thought: we who go (to war) and find
our delight in fighting, do evil.... What shall we do that we may
cease from evil and do good?--Mahavagga.

Victory breeds hatred.--Dhammapada.

Therefore has this pious inscription been carved here (on the rock),
to the end that posterity may not suppose that any further conquest
ought to be made by them. Let them not hold that conquest by the sword
is worthy the name of conquest; let them see in it only confusion and
violence. Let them reckon as true conquests none save the triumphs of
religion.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

He walks not in religion in a quarrelsome spirit.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Nay, ... let not quarrel arise, nor strife, nor discord, nor
dispute.--Mahavagga.

Thus he lives as a binder together of those who are divided, an
encourager of those who are friends, a peace-maker, a lover of peace,
impassioned for peace, a speaker of words that make for
peace.--Tevijja-sutta.

It is not as a means of procuring my own happiness that I give in charity,
but I love charity that I may do good to the world.--Jatakamala.

Benevolence is the doing of righteous acts of help to living creatures
whether of high or low degree; as when we help a tortoise in trouble,
or a sick sparrow, without looking for any reward.--Tenets of the Soto
Sect.

'Tis out of mercy, not with the desire of gain, that the virtuous take
care of a person in distress, nor do they mind whether the other
understands this or not.--Jatakamala.

Let him that has a merciful character be my friend.--Bhakti Sataka.

If a man thus walks in the ways of compassion, is it possible that he
should hurt anything intentionally?--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

Living in the world, and doing no harm to aught that
lives.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

As he said so he acted.--Vangisa-sutta.

Those who have sin at heart, but are sweet of speech, are like a
pitcher smeared with nectar, but full of poison.--Lalita Vistara.

Like a ... flower that is rich in color, but has no scent, so are the
fine ... words of him who does not act accordingly.--Dhammapada.

The mind must be brought under perfect subjection.--Inscription on
Votive Images.

He whose mind is subdued and perfectly controlled is
happy.--Udanavarga.

If only the thoughts be directed to that which is right, then
happiness must necessarily follow.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

Evil he overcame by righteousness.--Questions of King Milinda.

He felt compassion towards those who tormented him.--Attanagalu-vansa.

The bearer of ill-will towards them that bear ill-will can never
become pure; but he who bears no ill-will pacifies them that
hate.--Udanavarga.

The man who foolishly does me wrong, I will return him the protection
of my ungrudging love.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

Whether of the higher class of beings, as ... a perfect man, ... or of the
lower class of beings, as a grasshopper or the smallest insect--in one
word, whatever hath life thou shalt not kill.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

To whom even the life of a serpent is sacred.--Lalita Vistara.

I love living things that have no feet, ... four-footed creatures, and
things with many feet.... May all creatures, all things that live, all
beings of whatever kind, may they all behold good fortune.--Cullavagga.

You do not well enticing me to a sinful act. And what you say, that
"nobody else will know of it"--will it be less sinful for this
reason?--Jatakamala.

There is no such thing as secrecy in wrongdoing.--Jataka.

Even could she have kept it secret from men, ... could she have kept
it secret from spirit, ... could she have kept it secret from the
gods, yet she could not have escaped herself from the knowledge of her
sin.--Questions of King Milinda.

Clad in garments pure as the moonbeams, ... her ornaments modesty and
virtuous conduct.--Ajanta Cave Inscriptions.

If you speak ... to a woman, do it with pureness of heart.... Say to
yourself: "Placed in this sinful world, let me be as the spotless
lily, unsoiled by the mire in which it grows." Is she old? regard her
as your mother. Is she honorable? as your sister. Is She of small
account? as a younger sister. Is she a child? then treat her with
reverence and politeness.--Sutra of Forty-two Sections.

    Gentle and true, simple and kind was she,
    Noble of mien, with gracious speech to all,
    And gladsome looks--a pearl of womanhood.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Do not have evil-doers for friends.... Take as your friends the best
of men.--Dhammapada.

    Briefly I will tell you the marks of a friend--
    When doing wrong, to warn; when doing well, to exhort to perseverance;
    When in difficulty or danger, to assist, relieve, and deliver.
    Such a man is indeed a true and illustrious friend.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

His friendship is prized by the gentle and the
good.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Living ... without cruelty among the cruel.--Udanavarga.

The Scripture said: "Be kind and benevolent to every being, and spread
peace in the world.... If it happen that thou see anything to be
killed, thy soul shall be moved with pity and compassion. Ah, how
watchful should we be over ourselves!"--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

I desire to produce in myself a loving heart towards all living
creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Let us then practice good works, and inspect our thoughts that we do
no evil.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Now, therefore, it behooves me to examine into my faults; and if I
find anything wrong in me, to put it away, and practice virtue
only.--Jataka.

Therefore ... we would humble ourselves and repent us of our sins. Oh!
that we may have strength to do so aright!--Liturgy of Kwan-yin.

If we know that we have done wrong, and yet refuse to acknowledge it,
we are guilty of prevarication.--Chinese Pratimoksha.

From the very first, ... having no wish to benefit others, or to do
good in the least degree, we have been adding sin unto sin; and even
though our actual crimes have not been so great, yet a wicked heart
has ruled us within. Day and night, without interval or hesitation,
have we continually contrived how to do wrong.--Liturgy of Kwan-yin.

Accept the confession I make of my sin in its sinfulness, to the end
that in future I may restrain myself therefrom.--Cullavagga.

He who offends an offenseless man, ... against such a fool the evil
reverts, like fine dust thrown against the wind.--Kokaliya-sutta.

May wisdom be with me always.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

The fool who knows his foolishness is wise at any rate so far. But the
fool who thinks himself wise, he is a fool indeed.--Dhammapada.

He who holds back rising anger like a rolling chariot--him I call a
real driver: other people are merely holding the reins.--Dhammapada.

Anger, alas! how it changes the comely face! how it destroys the
loveliness of beauty!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The fool who is angered, and thinks to triumph by the use of abusive
language, is always vanquished by him whose words are patient.--Udanavarga.

He who lives far from me yet walks righteously, is ever near
me.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He sought after the good of those dependent on him.--Questions of King
Milinda.

Who, though he be lord over others, is patient with those that are
weak.--Udanavarga.

Loving her maids and dependents even as herself.--Lalita Vistara.

Loving all things which live even as themselves.--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Hear ye all this moral maxim, and having heard it keep it well: Whatsoever
