to leave that tale alone, and to cease to class under the title of
religious suggestion two orders of facts completely distinct--superficial
and momentary modifications, and constitutional modifications so profound
that science cannot explain them. I repeat: to make of an hysterical
patient one whose equilibrium is perfect ... is a thing more difficult
than the cure of a wound."

So he wrote at the time of her apparent cure, hesitating still as to its
permanence. And here, before my eyes and his, she stood again, healthy
and well.

And so at last I went back to dinner. A very different scene followed.
For a couple of hours we had been materialists, concerning ourselves not
with what Mary had done by grace--at least not in that aspect--but with
what nature showed to have been done, by whatever agency, in itself. Now
once more we turned to Mary.

It was dark when we arrived at the square, but the whole place was alive
with earthly lights. High up to our left hung the church, outlined in
fire--tawdry, I dare say, with its fairy lights of electricity, yet
speaking to three-quarters of this crowd in the highest language they
knew. Light, after all, is the most heavenly thing we possess. Does it
matter so very much if it is decked out and arranged in what to superior
persons appears a finikin fashion?

The crowd itself had become a serpent of fire, writhing here below in
endlessly intricate coils; up there along the steps and parapets, a
long-drawn, slow-moving line; and from the whole incalculable number
came gusts and roars of singing, for each carried a burning torch and
sang with his group. The music was of all kinds. Now and again came the
_Laudate Mariam_ from one company, following to some degree the general
movement of the procession, and singing from little paper-books which
each read by the light of his wind-blown lantern; now the _Gloria
Patri_, as a band came past reciting the Rosary; but above all pealed
the ballad of Bernadette, describing how the little child went one day
by the banks of the Gave, how she heard the thunderous sound, and,
turning, saw the Lady, with all the rest of the sweet story, each stanza
ending with that

    Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!

that I think will ring in my ears till I die.

It was an astounding sight to see that crowd and to hear that singing,
and to watch each group as it came past--now girls, now boys, now
stalwart young men, now old veteran pilgrims, now a bent old woman; each
face illumined by the soft paper-shrouded candle, and each mouth singing
to Mary. Hardly one in a thousand of those came to be cured of any
sickness; perhaps not one in five hundred had any friend among the
patients; yet here they were, drawn across miles of hot France, to give,
not to get. Can France, then, be so rotten?

As I dropped off to sleep that night, the last sound of which I was
conscious was, still that cannon-like chorus, coming from the direction
of the square:

    Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!
    Ave, Ave, Ave Maria!

FOOTNOTES:

[2] _La Voix de Lourdes_, a semi-official paper, gives the following
account of her, in its issue of the 23rd: "... Marguerite Vandenabeele,
10 ans, de Nieurlet, hameau de Hedezeele, (Nord), est arrivee avec un
des trains de Paris, portant un certificat du Docteur Dantois, date de
St. Momeleu (Nord) le 25 mai, 1908, la declarant atteinte _d'atrophie de
la jambe gauche_ avec _pied-bot equin_. Elle ne marchait que tres
difficilement et tres peniblement. A la sortie de la piscine, vendredi
soir, elle a pu marcher facilement. Amenee au Bureau Medical, on l'a
debarrassee de l'appareil dans lequel etait enferme son pied. Depuis,
elle marche bien, et parait guerie."

[3] This was written in the autumn of the year 1908, in which this visit
of mine took place.

[4] Since 1888 the registered cures are estimated as follows: '88, 57;
'89, 44; '90, 80; '91, 53; '92, 99; '93, 91; '94, 127; '95, 163; '96,
145; '97, 163; '98, 243; '99, 174; 1900, 160; '01, 171; '02, 164; '03,
161; '04, 140; '05, 157; '06, 148; '07, 109.

[5] My notes are rather illegible at this point, but I make no doubt
that this was Marie Cools.




IV.


I awoke to that singing again, in my room above the door of the hotel;
and went down presently to say my Mass in the Rosary Church, where, by
the kindness of the Scottish priest of whom I have spoken, an altar had
been reserved for me. The Rosary Church is tolerably fine within. It has
an immense flattened dome, beyond which stands the high altar; and round
about are fifteen chapels dedicated to the Fifteen Mysteries, which are
painted above their respective altars.

But I was to say Mass in a little temporary chapel to the left of the
entrance, formed, I suppose, out of what usually serves as some kind of
a sacristy. The place was hardly forty feet long; its high altar, at
which I both vested and said Mass, was at the farther end; but each
side, too, was occupied by three priests, celebrating simultaneously
upon altar-stones laid on long, continuous boards that ran the length of
the chapel. The whole of the rest of the space was crammed to
overflowing; indeed it had been scarcely possible to get entrance to the
chapel at all, so vast was the crowd in the great church outside.

After breakfast I went down to the Bureau once more, and found business
already begun. The first case, which was proceeding as I entered, was
that of a woman (whose name I could not catch) who had been cured of
consumption in the previous year, and who now came back to report a
state of continued good health. Her brother-in-law came with her, and
she remarked with pleasure that the whole family was now returning to
the practice of religion. During this investigation I noticed also
Juliette Gosset seated at the table, apparently in robust health.

There followed Natalie Audivin, a young woman who declared that she had
been cured in the previous year, and that she supposed her case had been
entered in the books; but at the moment, at any rate, her name could not
be found, and for the present the case was dismissed.

I now saw a Capuchin priest in the room--a small, rosy, bearded man--and
supposed that he was present merely as a spectator; but a minute or two
later Dr. Boissarie caught sight of him, and presently was showing him
off to me, much to his smiling embarrassment. He had caught consumption
of the intestines, it seemed, some years before, from attending upon two
of his dying brethren, and had come to Lourdes almost at his last gasp
in the year 1900 A. D. Here he stood, smiling and rosy.

There followed Mademoiselle Madeleine Laure, cured of severe internal
troubles (I did not catch the details) in the previous year.

Presently the Bishop of Dalmatia came in, and sat in his chair opposite
me, while we heard the account of Miss Noemie Nightingale, of Upper
Norwood, cured in the previous June of deafness, rising, in the case of
one ear at least, from a perforation of the drum. She was present at the
_piscines_, when on a sudden she had felt excruciating pains in the
ears. The next she knew was that she heard the _Magnificat_ being sung
in honour of her cure.

Mademoiselle Marie Bardou came in about this time, and passed through to
the inner room to be examined; while we received from a doctor a report
of the lame child whom we had seen on the previous day. All was as had
been said. She could now put her heels to the ground and walk. It seemed
she had been conscious of a sensation of hammering in her feet at the
moment of the cure, followed by a feeling of relief.

And so they went on. Next came Mademoiselle Eugenie Meunier, cured two
months before of fistula. She had given her certificate into the care of
her _cure_, who could not at this moment be found--naturally enough, as
she had made no appointment with him!--but she was allowed to tell her
story, and to show a copy of her parish magazine in which her story was
given. She had had in her body one wound of ten centimetres in size.
After bathing one evening she had experienced relief; by the next
morning the wound, which had flowed for six months, was completely
closed, and had remained so. Her strength and appetite had returned.
This cure had taken place in her own lodging, since her state was such
that she was forbidden to go to the Grotto.

The next case was that of a woman with paralysis, who was entered
provisionally as one of the "ameliorations." She was now able to walk,
but the use of her hand was not yet fully restored. She was sent back to
the _piscines_, and ordered to report again later.

The next was a boy of about twelve years old, Hilaire Ferraud, cured of
a terrible disease of the bone three years before. Until that time he
was unable to walk without support. He had been cured in the _piscines_.
He had been well ever since. He followed the trade of a carpenter. And
now he hopped solemnly, first on one leg and then on the other, to the
door and back, to show his complete recovery. Further, he had had
running wounds on one leg, now healed. His statements were verified.

The next was an oldish man, who came accompanied by his tall,
black-bearded son, to report on his continued good health since his
recovery, eight years previously, from neurasthenia and insanity. He had
had the illusion of being persecuted, with suicidal tendencies; he had
been told he could not travel twenty miles, and he had travelled over
eight hundred kilometres, after four years' isolation. He had stayed a
few months in Lourdes, bathing in the _piscines_, and the obsession had
left him. His statements were verified; he was congratulated and
dismissed.

There followed Emma Mourat to report; and then Madame Simonet, cured
eight years ago of a cystic tumour in the abdomen. She had been sitting
in one of the churches, I think, when there was a sudden discharge of
matter, and a sense of relief. On the morrow, after another bath, the
sense of discomfort had finally disappeared. During Madame Simonet's
examination, as the crowd was great, several persons were dismissed till
a later hour.

There followed another old patient to report. She had been cured two
years before of myelitis and an enormous tumour that, after twenty-two
years of suffering, had been declared "incurable" in her certificate.
The cure had taken place during the procession, in the course of which
she suddenly felt herself, she said, impelled to rise from her litter.
Her appetite had returned and she had enjoyed admirable health ever
since. Her name was looked up, and the details verified.

There followed Madame Francois and some doctor's evidence. Nine years
ago she had been cured of fistula in the arm. She had been operated upon
five times; finally, as her arm measured a circumference of seventy-two
centimetres, amputation had been declared necessary. She had refused,
and had come to Lourdes. Her cure occupied three days, at the end of
which her arm had resumed its normal size of twenty-five centimetres.
She showed her arm, with faint scars visible upon it; it was again
measured and found normal.

It was an amazing morning. Here I had sat for nearly three hours, seeing
with my own eyes persons of all ages and both sexes, suffering from
every variety of disease, present themselves before sixty or seventy
doctors, saying that they had been cured miraculously by the Mother of
God. Various periods had elapsed since their cures--a day, two or three
months, one year, eight years, nine years. These persons had been
operated upon, treated, subjected to agonizing remedies; one or two had
been declared actually incurable; and then, either in an instant, or
during the lapse of two or three days, or two or three months, had been
restored to health by prayer and the application of a little water in
no way remarkable for physical qualities.

What do the doctors say to this? Some confess frankly that it is
miraculous in the literal sense of the term, and join with the patients
in praising Mary and her Divine Son. Some say nothing; some are content
to say that science at its present stage cannot account for it all, but
that in a few years, no doubt ... and the rest of it. I did not hear any
say that: "He casteth out devils by Beelzebub, the prince of devils";
but that is accounted for by the fact that those who might wish to say
it do not believe in Beelzebub.

But will science ever account for it all? That I leave to God. All that
I can say is that, if so, it is surely as wonderful as any miracle, that
the Church should have hit upon a secret that the scientists have
missed. But is there not a simpler way of accounting for it? For read
and consider the human evidence as regards Bernadette--her age, her
simplicity, her appearance of ecstasy. She said that she saw this Lady
eighteen times; on one of these occasions, in the presence of
bystanders. She was bidden, she said, to go to the water. She turned to
