
XII.  Their burials are performed with the same simplicity.  If the body
of the deceased be near any public meeting-place, it is usually carried
thither, for the more convenient reception of those that accompany it to
the burying-ground.  And it so falls out sometimes, that while the
meeting is gathering for the burial, {27} some or other has a word of
exhortation, for the sake of the people there met together.  After which
the body is borne away by young men, or else those that are of their
neighbourhood, or those that were most of the intimacy of the deceased
party: the corpse being in a plain coffin, without any covering or
furniture upon it.  At the ground they pause some time before they put
the body into its grave, that if any there should have anything upon them
to exhort the people, they may not be disappointed; and that the
relations may the more retiredly and solemnly take the last leave of the
body of their departed kindred, and the spectators have a sense of
mortality, by the occasion then given them, to reflect upon their own
latter end.  Otherwise, they have no set rites or ceremonies on those
occasions.  Neither do the kindred of the deceased ever wear mourning;
{28} they looking upon it as a worldly ceremony and piece of pomp; and
that what mourning is fit for a Christian to have, at the departure of a
beloved relation or friend, should be worn in the mind, which is only
sensible of the loss: and the love they had to them, and remembrance of
them, to be outwardly expressed by a respect to their advice, and care of
those they have left behind them, and their love of that they loved.
Which conduct of theirs, though unmodish or unfashionable, leaves nothing
of the substance of things neglected or undone; and as they aim at no
more, so that simplicity of life is what they observe with great
satisfaction; though it sometimes happens not to be without the mockeries
of the vain world they live in.

These things gave them a rough and disagreeable appearance with the
generality; who thought them turners of the world upside down, as,
indeed, in some sense they were: but in no other than that wherein Paul
was so charged, viz. To bring things back into their primitive and right
order again.  For these and such like practices of theirs were not the
result of humour, or for civil distinction, as some have fancied; but a
fruit of inward sense, which God through his holy fear, had begotten in
them.  They did not consider how to contradict the world, or distinguish
themselves as a party from others; it being none of their business, as it
was not their interest; no, it was not the result of consultation, or a
framed design, by which to declare or recommend schism or novelty.  But
God having given them a sight of themselves, they saw the whole world in
the same glass of truth; and sensibly discerned the affections and
passions of men, and the rise and tendency of things; what it was that
gratified the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of
life, which are not of the Father, but of the world.  And from thence
sprang, in the night of darkness and apostacy, which hath been over
people through their degeneration from the light and Spirit of God, these
and many other vain customs, which are seen, by the heavenly day of
Christ that dawns in the soul, to be either wrong in their original, or,
by time and abuse, hurtful in their practice.  And though these things
seemed trivial to some, and rendered these people stingy and conceited in
such persons' opinion; there was and is more in them, than they were, or
are, aware of.

It was not very easy to our primitive friends to make themselves sights
and spectacles, and the scorn and derision of the world; which they
easily foresaw must be the consequence of so unfashionable a conversation
in it: but here was the wisdom of God seen in the foolishness of these
things; first, that they discovered the satisfaction and concern that
people had in and for the fashions of this world, notwithstanding their
high pretences to another: in that any disappointment about them came so
very near them, as that the greatest honesty, virtue, wisdom, and
ability, were unwelcome without them.  Secondly, it seasonably and
profitably divided conversation; for this making their society uneasy to
their relations and acquaintance, it gave them the opportunity of more
retirement and solitude; wherein they met with better company, even the
Lord God their Redeemer; and grew strong in his love, power, and wisdom;
and were thereby better qualified for his service.  And the success
abundantly showed it, blessed be the name of the Lord.

And though they were not great and learned in the esteem of this world,
(for then they had not wanted followers upon their own credit and
authority,) yet they were generally of the most sober of the several
persuasions they were in, and of the most repute for religion; and many
of them of good capacity, substance, and account among men.

And also some among them wanted not for parts, learning, or estate;
though then as of old, not many wise, or noble, &c, were called; or, at
least, received the heavenly call, because of the cross that attended the
profession of it in sincerity.  But neither do parts or learning make men
the better Christians, though the better orators and disputants; and it
is the ignorance of people about the divine gift, that causes that vulgar
and mischievous mistake.  Theory and practice, speculation and enjoyment,
words and life, are two things.  O! it is the penitent, the reformed, the
lowly, the watchful, the self-denying, and holy soul, that is the
Christian!  And that frame is the fruit and work of the Spirit, which is
the life of Jesus; whose life, though hid in the fulness of it in God the
Father, is shed abroad in the hearts of them that truly believe,
according to their capacity.  O that people did but know this to cleanse
them, to circumcise them, to quicken them, and to make them new creatures
indeed! recreated, or regenerated, after Christ Jesus unto good works;
that they might live to God, and not to themselves; and offer up living
prayers and living praises to the living God, through his own living
Spirit, in which he is only to be worshipped in this gospel day.

O that they that read me could but feel me! for my heart is affected with
this merciful visitation of the Father of lights and spirits to this poor
nation, and the whole world through the same testimony.  Why should the
inhabitants thereof reject it?  Why should they lose the blessed benefit
of it?  Why should they not turn to the Lord with all their hearts, and
say from the heart, Speak Lord, for now thy poor servants hear: O that
thy will may be done, thy great, thy good, and holy will, in earth as it
is in heaven! do it in us, do it upon us, do what thou wilt with us; for
we are thine, and desire to glorify thee our Creator, both for that, and
because thou art our Redeemer; for thou art redeeming us from the earth,
from the vanities and pollutions of it, to be a peculiar people unto
thee.  O! this were a brave day for England, if so she could say in
truth! but alas, the case is otherwise! for which some of thine
inhabitants, O land of my nativity! have mourned over thee with bitter
wailing and lamentation.  Their heads have been, indeed, as waters, and
their eyes as fountains of tears, because of thy transgression and
stiffneckedness; because thou wilt not hear, and fear, and return to the
Rock, even thy Rock, O England! from whence thou art hewn.  But be thou
warned, O land of great profession, to receive him into thy heart.
Behold, at that door it is he hath stood so long knocking; but thou wilt
yet have none of him.  O! be thou awakened! lest Jerusalem's judgments do
swiftly overtake thee, because of Jerusalem's sins that abound in thee.
For she abounded in formality, but made void the weighty things of God's
law, as thou daily dost.

She withstood the Son of God in the flesh, and thou resistest the Son of
God in the Spirit.  He would have gathered her, as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings, and she would not; so would he have gathered
thee out of thy lifeless profession, and have brought thee to inherit
substance; to have known his power and kingdom: for which he often
knocked within, by his grace and Spirit; and without, by his servants and
witnesses: but, on the contrary, as Jerusalem of old persecuted the
manifestation of the Son of God in the flesh, and crucified him, and
whipped and imprisoned his servants; so hast thou, O land! crucified to
thyself afresh the Lord of life and glory, and done despite to his Spirit
of grace; slighting the fatherly visitation, and persecuting the blessed
dispensers of it by thy laws and magistrates: though they have early and
late pleaded with thee in the power and Spirit of the Lord; in love and
meekness, that thou mightest know the Lord, and serve him, and become the
glory of all lands.

But thou hast evilly entreated and requited them, thou hast set at nought
all their counsel, and wouldst have none of their reproof, as thou
shouldst have had.  Their appearance was too straight, and their
qualifications were too mean for thee to receive them; like the Jews of
old, that cried, Is not this the Carpenter's Son, and are not his
brethren among us; which of the scribes, of the learned (the orthodox)
believe in him?  Prophesying their fall in a year or two, and making and
executing of severe laws to bring it to pass: endeavouring to terrify
them out of their holy way, or destroy them for abiding faithful to it.
But thou hast seen how many governments that rose against them, and
determined their downfall, have been overturned and extinguished, and
that they are still preserved, and become a great and a considerable
people, among the middle sort of thy numerous inhabitants.  And
notwithstanding the many difficulties without and within, which they have
laboured under, since the Lord God eternal first gathered them, they are
an increasing people; the Lord still adding unto them, in divers parts,
such as shall be saved, if they persevere to the end.  And to thee, O
England! were they, and are they lifted up as a standard, and as a city
set upon a hill, and to the nations round about thee, that in their light
thou mayst come to see light, even in Christ Jesus the light of the
world, and, therefore, thy light and life too, if thou wouldst but turn
from thy many evil ways, and receive and obey it.  "For in the light of
the Lamb must the nations of them that are saved walk," as the scripture
testifies.

Remember, O nation of great profession! how the Lord has waited upon thee
since the dawning reformation, and the many mercies and judgments by
which he has pleaded with thee; and awake and arise out of thy deep
sleep, and yet hear his word in thy heart, that thou mayst live.

Let not this thy day of visitation pass over thy head, nor neglect thou
so great salvation as is this which is come to thy house, O England! for
why shouldst thou die?  O land that God desires to bless, be assured it
is he that has been in the midst of this people, in the midst of thee,
and not a delusion, as thy mistaken teachers have made thee believe.  And
this thou shalt find by their marks and fruits, if thou wilt consider
them in the spirit of moderation.



CHAP.  III.


_Of the Qualifications of their Ministry_.  _Eleven marks that it is
Christian_.

I.  They were changed men themselves, before they went about to change
others.  Their hearts were rent, as well as their garments; and they knew
the power and work of God upon them.  And this was seen by the great
alteration it made, and their stricter course of life, and more godly
conversation that immediately followed upon it.

II.  They went not forth, or preached, in their own time or will, but in
the will of God; and spoke not their own studied matters, but as they
were opened and moved of his Spirit, with which they were well acquainted
in their own conversion: which cannot be expressed to carnal men, so as
to give them any intelligible account; for to such it is, as Christ said,
like the blowing of the wind, which no man knows whence it cometh, or
whither it goeth.  Yet this proof and seal went along with their
ministry, that many were turned from their lifeless professions, and the
evil of their ways, to an inward and experimental knowledge of God, and a
holy life, as thousands can witness.  And as they freely received what
they had to say from the Lord, so they freely administered it to others.

III.  The bent and stress of their ministry was conversion to God;
regeneration and holiness.  Not schemes of doctrines and verbal creeds,
or new forms of worship: but a leaving off in religion the superfluous,
and reducing the ceremonious and formal part, and pressing earnestly the
substantial, the necessary and profitable part to the soul; as all, upon
a serious reflection, must and do acknowledge.

IV.  They directed people to a principle in themselves, though not of
themselves, by which all that they asserted, preached, and exhorted
others to, might be wrought in them, and known to them, through
experience, to be true; which is a high and distinguishing mark of the
truth of their ministry, both that they knew what they said, and were not
afraid of coming to the test.  For as they were bold from certainty, so
they required conformity upon no human authority, but upon conviction,
and the conviction of this principle, which they asserted was in them
that they preached unto: and unto that they directed them, that they
might examine and prove the reality of those things which they had
affirmed of it, as to its manifestation and work in man.  And this is
more than the many ministers in the world pretended to.  They declare of
religion, say many things true, in words, of God, Christ, and the Spirit;
of holiness and heaven; that all men should repent and amend their lives,
or they will go to hell, &c.  But which of them all pretend to speak of
their own knowledge and experience; or ever directed to a divine
principle, or agent, placed of God in man, to help him; and how to know
it, and wait to feel its power to work that good and acceptable will of
God in them?

Some of them, indeed, have spoken of the spirit, and the operations of it
to sanctification, and performance of worship to God; but where and how
to find it, and wait in it, to perform our duty to God, was yet as a
mystery to be declared by this farther degree of reformation.  So that
this people did not only in words, more than equally press repentance,
conversion, and holiness, but did it knowingly and experimentally; and
directed those, to whom they preached, to a sufficient principle; and
told them where it was, and by what tokens they might know it, and which
way they might experience the power and efficacy of it to their souls'
happiness.  Which is more than theory and speculation, upon which most
other ministers depend: for here is certainty; a bottom upon which man
may boldly appear before God in the great day of account.

V.  They reached to the inward state and condition of people; which is an
evidence of the virtue of their principle, and of their ministering from
it, and not from their own imaginations, glosses, or comments upon
scripture.  For nothing reaches the heart, but what is from the heart; or
pierces the conscience, but what comes from a living conscience; insomuch
as it hath often happened, where people have under secrecy revealed their
state or condition to some choice friends, for advice or ease, they have
been so particularly directed in the ministry of this people, that they
have challenged their friends with discovering their secrets, and telling
their preachers their cases, to whom a word hath not been spoken.  Yea,
the very thoughts and purposes of the hearts of many have been so plainly
detected, that they have, like Nathaniel, cried out, of this inward
appearance of Christ, "Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of
Israel."  And those that have embraced this divine principle, have found
this mark of its truth and divinity, that the woman of Samaria did of
Christ when in the flesh, to be the Messiah, viz. It had told them all
that ever they had done; shown them their insides, the most inward
secrets of their hearts, and laid judgment to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet; of which thousands can at this day give in their witness.
So that nothing has been affirmed by this people, of the power and virtue
of this heavenly principle, that such as have turned to it have not found
true, and more; and that one half had not been told to them of what they
have seen of the power, purity, wisdom, and goodness of God therein.

VI.  The accomplishments, with which this principle fitted even some of
the meanest of this people for their work and service, furnishing some of
them with an extraordinary understanding in divine things, and an
admirable, fluency, and taking-way of expression, gave occasion to some
to wonder, saying of them, as of their Master, "Is not this such a
mechanic's son, how came he by this learning?"  As from thence others
took occasion to suspect and insinuate they were Jesuits in disguise, who
had the reputation of learned men for an age past; though there was not
the least ground of truth for any such reflection; in that their
ministers are known, the places of their abode, their kindred and
education.

VII.  That they came forth low, and despised, and hated, as the primitive
Christians did; and not by the help of worldly wisdom or power, as former
reformations in part have done: but in all things it may be said, this
people were brought forth in the cross; in a contradiction to the ways,
