
"The equality of taxes entailing equality of burdens, as equality of
duties entails that of rights, Christian subjects, and those of
other non-Mussulman sects, as it has been already decided, shall, as
well as Mussulmans, be subject to the obligations of the Law of
Recruitment. The principle of obtaining substitutes, or of
purchasing exemption, shall be admitted. A complete law shall be
published, with as little delay as possible, respecting the
admission into and service in the army of Christian and other
non-Mussulman subjects.

"Proceedings shall be taken for a reform in the constitution of the
provincial and communal councils, in order to insure fairness in the
choice of the deputies of the Mussulman, Christian, and other
communities, and freedom of voting in the councils. My Sublime Porte
will take into consideration the adoption of the most effectual
means for ascertaining exactly and for controlling the result of the
deliberations of the decisions arrived at.

"As the laws regulating the purchase, sale, and disposal of real
property are common to all the subjects of my empire, it shall be
lawful for foreigners to possess landed property in my dominions,
conforming themselves to the laws and police regulations, and
bearing the same charges as the native inhabitants, and after
arrangements have been come to with foreign powers.

"The taxes are to be levied under the same denomination from all the
subjects of my empire, without distinction of class or of religion.
The most prompt and energetic means for remedying the abuses in
collecting the taxes, and especially the tithes, shall be
considered. The system of direct collection shall gradually, and as
soon as possible, be substituted for the plan of farming, in all the
branches of the revenues of the State. As long as the present system
remains in force, all agents of the government and all members of
the medjlis shall be forbidden, under the severest penalties, to
become lessees of any farming contracts which are announced for
public competition, or to have any beneficial interest in carrying
them out. The local taxes shall, as far as possible, be so imposed
as not to affect the sources of production, or to hinder the
progress of internal commerce.

"Works of public utility shall receive a suitable endowment, part of
which shall be raised from private and special taxes, levied in the
provinces which shall have the benefit of the advantages arising
from the establishment of ways of communication by land and sea.

"A special law having been already passed, which declares that the
budget of the revenue and expenditure of the state shall be drawn up
and made known every year, the said law shall be most scrupulously
observed. Proceedings shall be taken for revising the emoluments
attached to each office.

"The heads of each community and a delegate, designated by my
Sublime Porte, shall be summoned to take part in the deliberations
of the Supreme Council of Justice on all occasions which might
interest the generality of the subjects of my empire. They shall be
summoned specially for this purpose by my Grand Vizier. The
delegates shall hold office for one year; they shall be sworn on
entering upon their duties. All the members of the council, at the
ordinary and extraordinary meetings, shall freely give their
opinions and their votes, and no one shall ever annoy them on this
account.

"The laws against corruption, extortion, or malversation, shall
apply, according to the legal forms, to all the subjects of my
empire, whatever may be their class and the nature of their duties.

"Steps shall be taken for the formation of banks and other similar
institutions, so as to effect a reform in the monetary and financial
system, as well as to create funds to be employed in augmenting the
sources of the material wealth of my empire.

"Steps shall also be taken for the formation of roads and canals to
increase the facilities of communication and increase the sources of
the wealth of the country. Everything that can impede commerce or
agriculture shall be abolished. To accomplish these objects, means
shall be sought to profit by the science, the art, and the funds of
Europe, and thus gradually to execute them.

"Such being my wishes and my commands, you, who are my Grand Vizier,
will, according to custom, cause this Imperial Firman to be
published in my capital, and in all parts of my empire; and you will
watch attentively and take all the necessary measures that all the
orders which it contains be henceforth carried out with the most
rigorous punctuality."

Lord Stratford, in replying to a congratulatory address from the
missionaries, declared his agreement with them in the opinion, that
something great had been gained; though he believed the principles
involved would require persevering efforts to carry them into
practice. He said that he was himself but an humble instrument in
the hands of divine Providence, and that he had never felt the hand
of God so sensibly in any other measure he had carried through, as
in this, which, after he had given it up for lost, had succeeded all
at once, in a way that filled him with astonishment.[1]

[1] That the Hatti Humaioun was really intended to include the death
penalty, is made exceedingly probable by the official correspondence
which preceded it, and which was in fact its procuring cause. Only a
few brief extracts can be given in this note.

Referring to the punishment of death as applied to apostates from
Islamism, the Earl of Clarendon, English Minister of Foreign
Affairs, writes thus to Lord Stratford de Redcliffe: "As the Turkish
empire is, by treaty stipulations, to be declared part and parcel of
the European system, it is quite impossible for the powers of Europe
to acquiesce in the continuance in Turkey of a law, and a practice,
which is a standing insult to every other nation in Europe."

Again, on the 17th of September, 1853, the Earl of Clarendon writes
thus to Lord Stratford: "Her Majesty's Government distinctly demands
that no punishment whatever shall attach to the Mohammedan who
becomes a Christian, whether originally a Mohammedan, or originally
a Christian, any more than any punishment attaches to a Christian
who embraces Mohammedanism. In all such cases the movements of human
conscience must be left free, and the temporal arm must not
interfere to coerce the spiritual decision."

Referring to the Imperial Rescript, February 12, 1856, Lord
Stratford says, writing to the Earl:--

"If no one is to be molested on account of the religion he
professes, and no one to be punished as a renegade, whatever form of
faith he denies, I do not see what room there can possibly be for
any practical persecutions in future within the limits of the
Sultan's empire." See _Correspondence respecting Christian
Privileges in Turkey, in Parliamentary Papers for_ 1856, pp. 15, 24,
25, 33, 55, 60, 66, 67, 77-80.

The plenipotentiaries of Great Britain, Austria, France, Russia,
Sardinia, and Turkey, assembled in February, 1856, at the close of
the Crimean war, to negotiate what is known as the Treaty of Paris.
It is evident from the Protocols of their Conference, that, having
the Earl of Clarendon and Lord Cowley among them, they were intent
on giving weight and perpetuity to this firman of the Sultan, by a
formal recognition of it in the treaty. This was done in article
ninth, after much deliberation, and with the full concurrence of all
the plenipotentiaries, including the representative of the
Sultan.[1]

[1] "NINTH ARTICLE. His Imperial Majesty the Sultan, having, in his
constant solicitude for the welfare of his subjects, issued a
firman, which, while, ameliorating their condition without
distinction of religion or race, records his generous intentions
towards the Christian population of his empire, and wishing to give
a further proof of his sentiments in that respect, has resolved to
communicate to the Contracting Parties the said firman, emanating
spontaneously from his sovereign will.

"The Contracting Powers recognize the high value of this
communication. It is clearly understood, that it cannot, in any
case, give to said Powers the right to interfere, either
collectively or separately, in the relations of his Majesty, the
Sultan, with his subjects, nor in the internal administration of his
Empire." See _Treaty of Paris_, March 30, 1856, in _Parliamentary
State Papers_, vol. lxi. p. 20. Also, appended, _Protocols of
Conferences_, pp. 8, 13, 51, 57, 58.

The Hatti Humaioun of 1855 was much more than a confirmation of the
Imperial Firman of 1850, nor was it a dead letter. A year afterwards
Dr. Jewett, while admitting that it was inefficient in certain
respects, declared it to have been in an important sense, a
quickening spirit. "Never," he says, "within the same space of time,
has there been as much religious discussion with the Mussulmans as
since the issue of the late firman, and never before, I think, has
there been such a spirit of religious inquiry among Mohammedans, and
readiness to discuss the merits of the Christian religion, as has
been evident during the past year. It has awakened hope of a good
day even for the Moslems." A few years later, Dr. Goodell, speaking
of it says: "To the Protestant communities here, and to all who live
godly in Christ Jesus, this Hatti Humaioun is a boon of priceless
value. Heretofore its principal use was to secure us from the
molestation of these corrupt churches, but we have now begun to test
its importance with reference to the Mohammedans themselves. Only a
few years since, the headless bodies of apostates from the
Mohammedan faith might be seen lying in the streets of the great
city. But now such apostates may be seen at all hours of the day
walking these same streets without any apparent danger, urging the
claims of Christianity even in the very courts of the royal mosques,
and teaching and preaching in the chapel, in the private circle, and
sometimes even in the palaces of the great, that Jesus Christ is
Lord, to the glory of God the Father. And all this wonderful
security is, under God, owing entirely to the Hatti Humaioun." He
adds, "It is said that the Turkish government is sometimes guilty of
violating some of the great principles of that document. And who
that knows anything of human nature, or of the history of our race,
ever supposed they would not be guilty of it? To suppose the
contrary would be to suppose the Turk advanced very much farther
towards perfection than any other nation on the face of the earth."

A correspondence arose, about this time, in the old Armenian Church,
between those who inclined towards the Papal Church and those who
were opposed, and it was gratifying to see that the principal
Armenian newspaper, published under the sanction of the Patriarch,
drew its arguments almost wholly from the Scriptures, scarcely
anything being said of the Councils, or of the Fathers.

The out-stations of Nicomedia, Adabazar, Rodosto, Baghchejuk, and
Broosa were prosperous. A Protestant Greek community at Demirdesh
stood firm under persecution, though without a spiritual guide. The
Pasha did little for their protection, but divine Providence had
other instruments for their deliverance. The French Vice Consul,
having to feed immense herds of cattle for the French army, selected
the principal Greek Protestant of the place as the most competent
overseer, and empowered him to employ the needful agents. This
brought to his feet some who had beaten him and even threatened him
with death. He freely employed them and paid them honestly, thus
returning good for evil.

The training-school at Tocat was composed of pious young men who
made considerable progress in their studies. A footing was gained at
Tarsus and Bitias, south of the Taurus range, and a native pastor
was ordained at Kessab. Here was a Protestant community of more than
four hundred.

At Aintab and in its neighboring villages, after only nine years of
labor, there were twelve stated religious services, nearly half of
them conducted by native preachers, two thousand Protestants, old
and young, two hundred and sixty-eight church-members, a large
congregation on the Sabbath, three promising young men in the
pastoral office, and two more prepared for that office. The year
1856 was one of unbroken prosperity in all temporal concerns at
Aintab. The influence of this prosperity, however, had its usual
effect in developing a love of the world, and a feeling of
self-consequence, resulting in some perplexities within the church.
Such results are known in much older communities, and ought to be
expected in the early religious life of such a people. Between the
pastor Kara Krikor and his people there was all that could be
expected of mutual confidence and harmony, and his monthly salary
was paid with a promptness unusual in such cases.

The death of Mrs. Schneider on the 29th of September was a great
loss to the mission. This excellent woman had an earnest desire for
the salvation of every one she met, and old and young listened with
pleasure to her instructions. It became known, soon after her
decease, that three or four small companies of native sisters had
begun of their own accord to hold meetings in various quarters. The
progress among the women of Aintab had been great. When the first
missionary arrived, only one woman was known who was able to read.
It was now ascertained that nearly three hundred could read the New
Testament.

The boarding-school pupils at Constantinople received a pupil this
year from each of the following places--Trebizond, Diarbekir,
Rodosto, Haskeuy, Scutari, and Baghchejuk. The chief difficulty in
teaching was the want of suitable text-books in the modern language.
In addition to the usual studies, the pupils were allowed an
opportunity to acquaint themselves with domestic duties, and they
did it in most cases with hearty good-will. Dr. Goodell exercised a
fatherly care over the institution.

During most of the year Mr. Clark had charge of the Seminary at
Bebek. The prescribed course of study embraced four years in the
scholastic department and three in the theological, and was designed
to secure to the pupils a systematic training. The qualifications
required for entering, raised the character of the common schools
connected with the mission. During vacations the students were
required to support themselves. The average number was forty-five,
and it was necessary to reject no less than sixty applicants, mainly
from inability to support them. Among them were Bulgarians,
Albanians, Wallachians, and Servians. Seven students were in the
theological department, and three others went through a part of the
course, one of whom was a Turk, and another a Greek. Dr. Hamlin gave
instruction in this department after his return, assisted by Dr.
Schauffler in Turkish. Nine of the students in the seminary were
church-members, and others gave evidence of piety.

The growth of the Armenian Mission, along with its great extent, of
territory, required a division for the more convenient
administration of its affairs. Hence a Southern Armenian Mission was
organized in November, 1856, having the Taurus for its boundary on
the north, and embracing the stations of Aintab, Marash, Antioch,
Aleppo, and Oorfa. Its printing was to be done at Constantinople.
The members of this mission were Messrs. Schneider, Pratt, Beebee,
Perkins, Morgan, Nutting, Cotting, and White. The field of the
Northern Mission extended from the Balkans in European Turkey to the
eastern waters of the Euphrates.

The "Turkish Missions Aid Society" was formed in England in 1854;
"not to originate a new mission, but to aid the existing evangelical
missions in the Turkish empire, especially American." The funds
contributed to the American missions were given expressly for a
Native Agency; and important aid has thus been rendered down to the
present time. The funds of the Society having suffered diminution in
1857, Dr. Dwight was invited to visit England. He arrived in March
of the following year, and visited the principal cities, in company
with the Secretary. "I was everywhere received," says Dr. Dwight,
"with the most overflowing kindness, and my simple story was
listened to with the most intense interest. Clergymen and laymen of
all evangelical denominations were usually present at the meetings,
which were held on week days, and I saw nowhere anything like a
sectarian spirit, but uniformly the very reverse. Ministers of the
Church of England, as well as others, publicly advocated the plan of
aiding the American Mission in Turkey, rather than sending forth a
mission of their own." Valuable as the cooeperation of this Society
has been in the bestowment of funds, its moral influence in Turkey,
as a visible illustration of fraternal feeling among Protestant
Christians of various names and countries has been of far greater
value.[1]

[1] The aid afforded by the Turkish Missions Aid Society to the
missions of the Board in Western Asia, has averaged about ten
thousand dollars a year.

An account was given, in a former chapter, of the conversion, in
1842, of a "Papal Armenian.[1] His name was Bedros Kamaghielyan, and
his death occurred in 1857, fifteen years afterward. His conversion
was remarkable, and so was his subsequent life. He was for some
years an efficient helper at Salonica among the Jews, and ever after
that, he was a successful assistant of Dr. Dwight in Constantinople.
Eminently wise to win souls to Christ, it is believed that many,
among the different races in Turkey, will rise up and call him
blessed. The first Turkish convert who became a preacher, received
his first impressions from Bedros at Salonica. Years later, the
missionaries learned that the origin of an interesting work of grace
among the Greeks of Cassandra, in that region, was traceable to him.
Though suffering from bodily infirmity in the later years of his
life, his labors were unceasing for the salvation of souls, and for
the edification of the church. He was noted for his humility and
self-denial, and his piety was a steady glow of light. His views of
the gospel method of salvation were clear, and his manner of
presenting it exceedingly happy. He was eminently a peacemaker in
the church, and his good sense was in constant demand in the
settlement of difficulties. As a deacon in the Yeni Kapoo church he
was constantly looking after the sick and infirm, visiting families
in the Protestant community, and instructing their women in the
doctrines and duties of Christianity. When attacked by his last
sickness, Bedros very soon received the impression that it would be
fatal. Once, in great bodily suffering, he exclaimed, "O, what a
Saviour is my Saviour! He scatters all my darkness, and gives me
peace." At another time, he wished the missionaries might all be
called to his bedside, that he might declare to them his great joy,
and what things the Lord was doing for his soul. A Mohammedan of
some distinction, who had often had religious conversations with
Bedros, called upon him without knowing of his sickness. The sick
man, though in extreme bodily weakness, spoke very faithfully to his
visitor, and told him of his joy in view of death, and his hope of
going to be forever with the Lord Jesus Christ, and added: "This is
the only way of peace and salvation, and Christ is the only Saviour
of sinners for you, and for me, and for all the world." The eyes of
the Turk filled with tears. He had never seen a Christian die
before; and to hear a man talk with so much gladness of his
departure from the world overcame him, and he hurried from the room.
An aged Moslem called, who had known Bedros, and gave some evidence
of being a Christian. Going to his bedside, his eyes streaming with
tears, he embraced and kissed him in the most affectionate manner.
Dr. Dwight closes his statement with the following testimony: "Thus
has passed away one of the choicest spirits this world ever saw. I
feel that I have many lessons to learn from his quiet, humble, and
most useful life; and I trust that his death may be greatly blessed
to all the missionaries, and to all the people."

[1] Chapter ix. p. 130. See, also, _Missionary Herald_, 1857, pp.
387-390.

The second Mrs. Hamlin died suddenly, on the 6th of November, 1857.
Though not permitted to give her dying testimony, the record of her
life was that of a meek, lowly, and quiet spirit; diligent,
faithful, and affectionate in every duty.[1]

[1] See Memoir, _The Missionary Sisters_, written by Mrs. Benjamin.

The region, of which Arabkir is the centre, was now rising in
importance. The territory dependent on this station for instruction
extended from northeast and southwest, along the western bank of the
Euphrates, one hundred and seventy-five miles, with a population of
one hundred thousand; about equally divided between Armenians and
Mussulmans, with few Greeks, no Roman Catholics, and no Jews. A
large number of the Mussulmans were known as Kuzzelbashes. The field
was first occupied in 1853, and churches had been organized in three
cities and two villages, all of which enjoyed the stated preaching
of the Word.

Sivas, west of Arabkir, and Tocat on the northwest, were missionary
centres of populous fields, extensively accessible; the former
containing a population of more than a hundred thousand, and the
latter of nearly half a million,--Armenians, Turks, Kuzzelbashes,
Koords, and Greeks.

Harpoot lies cast of Arabkir, on the other side of the Euphrates.
Mr. Dunmore commenced this station in 1855, and was alone in this
city of twenty-five thousand inhabitants; the failure of his wife's
health having obliged her to return to the United States. He had
been usefully employed here nearly three years,--the last with
Messrs. Wheeler and Allen,--when, having a taste for exploration and
pioneer labors, he was transferred, in 1858, to Erzroom, with
special reference to the region south of that city; and Messrs.
Wheeler and Allen were joined at Harpoot, in 1859, by Mr. H. N.
Barnum. The city is the centre of a population of about one hundred
thousand, and stands on a lofty hill, looking to the distant range
of the Taurus on the south, and scores of villages on the
intervening plain. Northward, across the eastern branch of the
Euphrates, is the still loftier range of the Anti-Taurus; while the
distant horizon to the east and west is shut in by mountains.
Arabkir was occupied for several years by Messrs. Clark, Pollard,
and Richardson, but in 1865 was included in the Harpoot field.[1]

[1] Mr. Wheeler's _Ten Years on the Euphrates_.

Geghi is about ninety miles from Harpoot, in the direction of
Erzroom. It was visited by Mr. Peabody and Mr. Bliss in 1848 and
1851. Mr. Peabody found the Vartabed of the place and ten of the
people deeply interested in reading the Scriptures. Mr. Wheeler
visited Geghi in the summer of 1858 and found the truth much
opposed, but taking a firm hold among the sixteen hundred Armenians
of the place. He was touched by their earnest entreaties to remain
with them a few mouths; or if that might not be, that he would leave
his native helper till some one else could come among them. As with
the Apostle Paul at Troas, the eagerness of the people to hear led
him to protract his labors on one occasion, till an hour and a half
past midnight, and on another till the breaking day.

The year 1859 was signalized by a revival in the Bebek Seminary. At
its commencement, nearly half the students were regarded as
hopefully pious, and these all seemed at once to have new views of
spiritual things. The Holy Spirit not only revived the graces of
such, but put forth a converting power. Within a few weeks nearly
all the students gave credible evidence of piety. There were several
cases, also, of hopeful conversion in the girls' boarding school;
and similar awakenings were reported at Marsovan, Yozgat,
Baghchejuk, Broosa, and Marash. At the last place thirty-seven were
added to the church at one time, making eighty-six by profession
since the beginning of 1858.

Mr. Parsons had received frequent complaints from the brethren of
Nicomedia, that their girls had not been properly cared for by the
teacher, and from the teacher that the brethren were intermeddling.
He answered by withdrawing all aid until they could agree among
themselves. The effect was immediate. They began to pay a tuition
fee, and made special efforts to render the school attractive. The
number of pupils was increased to seventy-eight, and the school
ceased any longer to need aid.

A fire destroyed the mission premises at Tocat in 1859. The flames
were so rapid as not only to consume the buildings, but the clothing
and bedding of the pupils, the books and apparatus of the school, a
portion of the furniture of Messrs. Pettibone and Winchester, who
had been recently placed at the head of the school, and all the
effects of Mr. Van Lennep, including a large and valuable library,
and a manuscript Armenian translation of a commentary on the Bible,
made, and to have been printed, at the expense of the Prince of
Schoenberg. In view of this calamity, it was deemed expedient to
close the training-school. A similar one was opened in the fall of
the same year, at Harpoot. Mr. Clark returning to the United States,
Dr. Hamlin renewed his connection with the Bebek Seminary.

Mr. Dunmore, after describing a tour he had made of twelve hundred
miles from Erzroom to Oroomiah in Persia, and from thence, on his
return, through Russian Armenia, gives the following summary of his
missionary travels: "I have travelled on horseback over six thousand
miles in Turkey, and one thousand in Persia and Russia, between two
and three hundred on goat skins upon the Tigris, and over fifteen
hundred by steamer, without sickness by the way, without accident,
or the loss of an article of value. And I have never taken a guard
when travelling alone, for protection from robbers. Surely we may
safely trust Him who says: 'Believe in God, believe also in me.'"[1]

[1] _Missionary Herald_ for 1859, pp. 306-313.

The missionaries at Cesarea were much encouraged by the progress of
the work there. Mr. Leonard thus writes: "The church, though
constantly dismissing members to other churches, still maintains its
numbers by fresh accessions from without, and is at the same time
evidently advancing in consistent, intelligent Christian character.
Here are some noble exemplars of faith and piety, who search the
Scriptures daily, and adorn their doctrines by a godly life. I have
often wished I might introduce some of our American friends into our
