
138. He will have cruel suffering, loss, injury of the body, heavy
affliction, or loss of mind,

139. Or a misfortune coming from the king, or a fearful accusation, or
loss of relations, or destruction of treasures,

140. Or lightning-fire will burn his houses; and when his body is
destroyed, the fool will go to hell.

141. Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not fasting, or lying on
the earth, not rubbing with dust, not sitting motionless, can purify a
mortal who has not overcome desires.

142. He who, though dressed in fine apparel, exercises tranquillity, is
quiet, subdued, restrained, chaste, and has ceased to find fault with
all other beings, he indeed is a Brahmana, an ascetic (sramana), a friar
(bhikshu).

143. Is there in this world any man so restrained by humility that he
does not mind reproof, as a well-trained horse the whip?

144. Like a well-trained horse when touched by the whip, be ye active
and lively, and by faith, by virtue, by energy, by meditation, by
discernment of the law you will overcome this great pain (of reproof),
perfect in knowledge and in behaviour, and never forgetful.

145. Well-makers lead the water (wherever they like); fletchers bend the
arrow; carpenters bend a log of wood; good people fashion themselves.




Chapter XI. Old Age

146. How is there laughter, how is there joy, as this world is always
burning? Why do you not seek a light, ye who are surrounded by darkness?

147. Look at this dressed-up lump, covered with wounds, joined together,
sickly, full of many thoughts, which has no strength, no hold!

148. This body is wasted, full of sickness, and frail; this heap of
corruption breaks to pieces, life indeed ends in death.

149. Those white bones, like gourds thrown away in the autumn, what
pleasure is there in looking at them?

150. After a stronghold has been made of the bones, it is covered with
flesh and blood, and there dwell in it old age and death, pride and
deceit.

151. The brilliant chariots of kings are destroyed, the body also
approaches destruction, but the virtue of good people never approaches
destruction,--thus do the good say to the good.

152. A man who has learnt little, grows old like an ox; his flesh grows,
but his knowledge does not grow.

153, 154. Looking for the maker of this tabernacle, I shall have to run
through a course of many births, so long as I do not find (him); and
painful is birth again and again. But now, maker of the tabernacle, thou
hast been seen; thou shalt not make up this tabernacle again. All thy
rafters are broken, thy ridge-pole is sundered; the mind, approaching
the Eternal (visankhara, nirvana), has attained to the extinction of all
desires.

155. Men who have not observed proper discipline, and have not gained
treasure in their youth, perish like old herons in a lake without fish.

156. Men who have not observed proper discipline, and have not gained
treasure in their youth, lie, like broken bows, sighing after the past.




Chapter XII. Self

157. If a man hold himself dear, let him watch himself carefully; during
one at least out of the three watches a wise man should be watchful.

158. Let each man direct himself first to what is proper, then let him
teach others; thus a wise man will not suffer.

159. If a man make himself as he teaches others to be, then, being
himself well subdued, he may subdue (others); one's own self is indeed
difficult to subdue.

160. Self is the lord of self, who else could be the lord? With self
well subdued, a man finds a lord such as few can find.

161. The evil done by oneself, self-begotten, self-bred, crushes the
foolish, as a diamond breaks a precious stone.

162. He whose wickedness is very great brings himself down to that state
where his enemy wishes him to be, as a creeper does with the tree which
it surrounds.

163. Bad deeds, and deeds hurtful to ourselves, are easy to do; what is
beneficial and good, that is very difficult to do.

164. The foolish man who scorns the rule of the venerable (Arahat), of
the elect (Ariya), of the virtuous, and follows false doctrine, he bears
fruit to his own destruction, like the fruits of the Katthaka reed.

165. By oneself the evil is done, by oneself one suffers; by oneself
evil is left undone, by oneself one is purified. Purity and impurity
belong to oneself, no one can purify another.

166. Let no one forget his own duty for the sake of another's, however
great; let a man, after he has discerned his own duty, be always
attentive to his duty.




Chapter XIII. The World

167. Do not follow the evil law! Do not live on in thoughtlessness! Do
not follow false doctrine! Be not a friend of the world.

168. Rouse thyself! do not be idle! Follow the law of virtue! The
virtuous rests in bliss in this world and in the next.

169. Follow the law of virtue; do not follow that of sin. The virtuous
rests in bliss in this world and in the next.

170. Look upon the world as a bubble, look upon it as a mirage: the king
of death does not see him who thus looks down upon the world.

171. Come, look at this glittering world, like unto a royal chariot; the
foolish are immersed in it, but the wise do not touch it.

172. He who formerly was reckless and afterwards became sober, brightens
up this world, like the moon when freed from clouds.

173. He whose evil deeds are covered by good deeds, brightens up this
world, like the moon when freed from clouds.

174. This world is dark, few only can see here; a few only go to heaven,
like birds escaped from the net.

175. The swans go on the path of the sun, they go through the ether by
means of their miraculous power; the wise are led out of this world,
when they have conquered Mara and his train.

176. If a man has transgressed one law, and speaks lies, and scoffs at
another world, there is no evil he will not do.

177. The uncharitable do not go to the world of the gods; fools only do
not praise liberality; a wise man rejoices in liberality, and through it
becomes blessed in the other world.

178. Better than sovereignty over the earth, better than going to
heaven, better than lordship over all worlds, is the reward of the first
step in holiness.




Chapter XIV. The Buddha (The Awakened)

179. He whose conquest is not conquered again, into whose conquest no
one in this world enters, by what track can you lead him, the Awakened,
the Omniscient, the trackless?

180. He whom no desire with its snares and poisons can lead astray,
by what track can you lead him, the Awakened, the Omniscient, the
trackless?

181. Even the gods envy those who are awakened and not forgetful, who
are given to meditation, who are wise, and who delight in the repose of
retirement (from the world).

182. Difficult (to obtain) is the conception of men, difficult is the
life of mortals, difficult is the hearing of the True Law, difficult is
the birth of the Awakened (the attainment of Buddhahood).

183. Not to commit any sin, to do good, and to purify one's mind, that
is the teaching of (all) the Awakened.

184. The Awakened call patience the highest penance, long-suffering the
highest Nirvana; for he is not an anchorite (pravragita) who strikes
others, he is not an ascetic (sramana) who insults others.

185. Not to blame, not to strike, to live restrained under the law,
to be moderate in eating, to sleep and sit alone, and to dwell on the
highest thoughts,--this is the teaching of the Awakened.

186. There is no satisfying lusts, even by a shower of gold pieces; he
who knows that lusts have a short taste and cause pain, he is wise;

187. Even in heavenly pleasures he finds no satisfaction, the disciple
who is fully awakened delights only in the destruction of all desires.

188. Men, driven by fear, go to many a refuge, to mountains and forests,
to groves and sacred trees.

189. But that is not a safe refuge, that is not the best refuge; a man
is not delivered from all pains after having gone to that refuge.

190. He who takes refuge with Buddha, the Law, and the Church; he who,
with clear understanding, sees the four holy truths:--

191. Viz. pain, the origin of pain, the destruction of pain, and the
eightfold holy way that leads to the quieting of pain;--

192. That is the safe refuge, that is the best refuge; having gone to
that refuge, a man is delivered from all pain.
