receive this blessed gift of God which he offers to you: And can God
give you a greater gift than the Son of his Love? And will not you
gladly receive him, and that great salvation which he hath purchased for
you with his own blood! But, say some people, we have received Christ,
and believe in him, and believe the divine authority of the Holy
Scriptures. But let me ask you, Who keeps house all this while? What
have you done for Christ? Christ hath died for you; but hast thou lived
to him? And hast thou died to the world, and died to thy sins and lusts?
Consider with yourselves, It is both your great duty and interest to die
to sin, and live to Christ that died for you. And we must stand at
Christ's tribunal, and give an account to him, of whatsoever we have
done, whether good or bad; and he will judge us at the great day of his
appearing. Blessed are you, that receive the blessed Son of God, that
now stands in Spirit at the door, and knocks: Open your heart, and make
room for him, and let not the world keep him out, and he will come in,
and sup with you, and you with him: And he will do that for you, which
you cannot do for yourselves. "The spirit is willing, but the flesh is
weak:" He will give thee power over sin, and over the world, and over
the Devil: Whenever he shall assault thee with his temptations, say,
"Get thee behind me Satan, thou savourest not the things that be of
God." When people come to be spiritually minded they will taste and
savour the things that are spiritual and heavenly: if they be not things
of God, do not touch with them, have nothing to do with them; but walk
in the Spirit, and savour the things of the Spirit. And hearken to the
counsel of Christ, who speaks to you in the name of Wisdom; "O ye simple
ones understand wisdom, and ye fools be of an understanding heart; hear,
for I will speak of excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall
be right things: Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching daily at
my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors: For whoso findeth me findeth
life." Hearken to the blessed counsel of Christ, hear his voice and obey
it: They that do his will, shall know his doctrine: "The secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and he will shew them his covenant."

They that have the saving knowledge of God, and Christ Jesus, which is
life eternal, they will walk in a correspondent and suitable manner to
that knowledge, and be holy in all manner of conversation: They will not
be only nominal Christians, but true Christians, Israelites indeed in
whom there is no guile; They will receive Christ Jesus who is God's
gift, and knows [_sic._] the operation of his power in their
souls. These persons are fit to live and prepared to die; when Christ,
who is their life, shall appear, they shall appear with him in glory.
When the sound of the last trumpet shall be heard at the end of the
world, Time shall be no more; Come away! that day shall not be terrible
to them that have put off the old man, and put on the new man; and have
begun to live a new life, and to have new affections, new thoughts and
resolutions, and have laid up their treasure in heaven, where their
hearts are also: They have that peace, which the world cannot give, and
which death cannot take away. Blessed are they that take sanctuary in
the name of Jesus, as in a strong tower; they shall get power over their
sins, and over the vanity of their minds, that die to sin and live to
God, and feel the constraining power and efficacy of the love of Christ,
"who hath loved them, and washed them from their sins, in his own blood,
and made them kings and priests to God."

My friends, hear the voice of Wisdom, who hath said, "Whoso findeth me,
findeth life, and shall obtain favour of the Lord: but he that sinneth
against me, wrongeth his own soul." Be you early seekers: seek the
kingdom of God in the first place. The Lord calls from heaven; "My son,
give me thine heart:" Let thy answer be, Lord, take my heart, purify and
cleanse it; break it, and make it new, make it fit for thy acceptance,
that I may find favour in thy sight. "Without me (saith our Saviour) ye
can do nothing:" Therefore desire him to do it for thee, and to work in
thee both to will and to do of his own good pleasure. How dreadful is it
to appear at the bar of God's justice as miserable sinners! Those that
have not Christ, the great Mediator, to plead for them, are miserable
indeed: Therefore lay hold on Christ now; believe in him, lay hold on
his power and Spirit in this day of your visitation. If thou art under
the power of sin and Satan, thou mayst [_sic._] receive power from
Christ, to overcome all the power of darkness: If the strong man armed
hath got possession of thy heart, Christ will lay siege to it; and if
thou be willing to open the door, Christ will come in and cast out the
strong man, and spoil him of all his goods. He will cast out the grand
enemy of thy soul, and take possession for himself; that thou mayest be
delivered from the power of Satan, and from the bondage of corruption,
and brought into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: And if the Son
of God make thee free, thou shalt be free indeed. For this end Christ
came into the world, "for this purpose was the Son of God manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil:" And he will not lose the
design of his coming, but will "finish transgression, and make an end of
sin, and bring in everlasting righteousness."

Let us all come to Christ, and let none deceive themselves, and live in
their sins, and yet think to come to heaven: "Be not deceived, (saith
the Apostle,) God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows, that shall
he also reap: He that soweth to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
