a _sine qua non_ to Virtuous Actions, an Indifferency to right motives
must _incapacitate_ us for Virtuous Actions, or render us in that
particular not moral agents.  I do indeed think that no Rational Creature
is _strictly speaking Indifferent_ to Right Motives, but yet there seems
to be somewhat which to all intents of the present question is the same,
viz. _a stronger disposition to be influenced by contrary or wrong
motives_, and this I take to be always the Case when any vice is
committed.  But since it may be said, as you hint, that this stronger
disposition to be influenced by Vicious Motives may have been contracted
by repeated Acts of Wickedness, we will pitch upon the _first Vicious
Action_ any one is guilty of.  No man would have committed this first
Vicious Action if he had not had a _stronger_ (at least as strong)
_disposition_ in him to be influenced by the _Motives of the Vicious
Action_, than by the _motives of the contrary Virtuous Action_; from
whence I infallibly conclude, that since every man has committed some
first Vice, every man had, _antecedent_ to the commission of it, a
_stronger disposition_ to be influenced by the _Vicious_ than the
_Virtuous_ motive.  My difficulty upon this is, that a _stronger natural
disposition_ to be influenced by the Vicious than the Virtuous Motive
(which every one has antecedent to his first vice), seems, to all
purposes of the present question, to put the Man in the same condition as
though he was _indifferent to the Virtuous Motive_; and since an
_indifferency to the Virtuous Motive_ would have _incapacitated_ a Man
from being a _moral Agent_, or _contracting guilt_, is not a _stronger
disposition_ to be influenced by the _Vicious_ Motive as great an
_Incapacity_?  Suppose I have two diversions offered me, _both_ of which
I could not enjoy, I like both of them, but yet have a _stronger_
inclination to one than to the other, I am not indeed strictly
_indifferent_ to either, because I should be glad to _enjoy both_; but am
I not exactly _in the same case_, _to all intents and purposes of
acting_, as though I was _absolutely indifferent_ to that diversion which
I have the _least_ inclination to?  You suppose Man to be endued
naturally with a _disposition to be influenced by Virtuous Motives_, and
that _this Disposition is a sine qua non to Virtuous Actions_, both which
I fully believe; but then you _omit_ to consider the natural Inclination
to be influenced by Vicious Motives, which, _whenever a Vice is
committed_, is at least _equally strong_ with the other, and in the first
Vice _is not affected by Habits_, but is as _natural_, and as much _out
of a man's power_ as the other.  I am much obliged to your offer of
writing to Mr. Laughton, which I shall very thankfully accept of, but am
not certain when I shall go to Cambridge; however, I believe it will be
about the middle of the next month.

I am, Rev. Sir,
Your most obliged humble Servant,

J. BUTLER.

Oriel, Oct. the 6th.


THE ANSWER.


Your objection seems indeed very dexterous, and yet I really think that
there is at bottom nothing in it.  But of this you are to judge, not from
my assertion, but from the reason I shall endeavour to give to it.

I think then, that a _disposition to be influenced by right motives_
being what we call _rationality_, there cannot be on the contrary
(properly speaking) any such thing naturally in rational creatures as a
_disposition to be influenced by wrong motives_.  This can be nothing but
mere _perverseness of will_; and whether even that can be said to amount
to a disposition to be influenced by wrong motives, _formally_, and as
such, may (I think) well be doubted.  Men have by nature strong
inclinations to certain objects.  None of these inclinations are vicious,
but vice consists in pursuing the inclination towards any object in
certain circumstances, notwithstanding _reason_, or the natural
disposition to be influenced by right motives, declares to the man's
conscience at the same time (or would do, if he attended to it) that the
object ought not to be pursued in those circumstances.  Nevertheless,
where the man commits the crime, the _natural disposition_ was only
towards the _object_, not formally towards the doing it upon wrong
motives; and generally the very essence of the crime consists in the
liberty of the will forcibly overruling the _actual disposition towards
being influenced by right motives_, and not at all (as you suppose) in
the man's having any _natural disposition to be influenced by wrong
motives_, as such.



III.


From the original, now in the library at the British Museum.  [Add. MS.
12,101.]

REV. SIR,

I had the honour of your kind letter yesterday, and must own that I do
now see a _difference_ between the nature of _that disposition which we
have to be influenced by virtuous motives_, and _that contrary
disposition_, (or whatever else it may _properly_ be called,) which is
the _occasion_ of our committing _sin_; and hope in time to get a
thorough insight into this Subject by means of those helps you have been
pleased to afford me.  I find it necessary to consider such very abstruse
questions at different times and in different dispositions; and have
found particular use of this method upon that abstract subject of
_Necessity_: for tho' I did not see the force of your argument for the
_unity of the Divine Nature_ when I had done writing to you upon that
subject, I am now _fully satisfied_ that it is conclusive.  I will only
just add that I suppose somewhat in my last letter was not clearly
expressed, for I did not at all _design_ to say, that _the essence of any
crime consisted in the man's having a natural disposition to be
influenced by wrong motives_.

I was fully resolved to have gone to Cambridge some time in this Term,
not in the least expecting but that I might have the Terms allowed there
which I have kept here, but I am informed by one who has been there that
it is not at all to be depended upon; but that it's more likely to be
refused than granted me.  My design was this; when I had taken the Degree
of Batchelor of Arts at Cambridge, (which I would have done to have the
Priviledge of that Gown,) to take that of Batchelor of Law a year
afterwards, but if I cannot have the Terms I have kept for Batchelor of
Arts allowed there, it will be highly proper for me to stay at Oxford to
take that degree here, before I go to Cambridge to take Batchelor of Law.
I will inquire concerning the truth of what the gentleman told me, and if
I find he is mistaken and that I can take the degree of Batchelor of Arts
at Cambridge next June, which is the time I shall be standing for it, and
Batchelor of Law a year after that; I will make bold to accept of your
