and Prayer: and this certainly is the effect of the double setting in
the Churching Service.




{24}

CHAPTER IV.

MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER.

It must not be supposed that these Services were composed suddenly in
their present shape.  They are indeed formed on the pattern given by
the Lord's Prayer; and they make use of the methods which we have
described--Intention, Setting, Key-note, Worship-forms--which have
always been the methods used by the Church as far back as we have any
evidence.  But from time to time alterations have been made in the
details.  The Lord's Prayer has, for example, been used as a key-note
for Praise without its Doxology; or Confession has been placed amongst
the Prayers; or Psalms have been more used, and Lessons less used.  In
spite of such variations, the general principles may be traced in all
Church Services; and much interesting study may be spent on the
comparison of our Services with those which preceded them.

We have already said something (Chap. II.) about this, and when we
study these two Services in detail, it is very important to remember
that they grew out of the older Services.  The daily Psalms and Lessons
{25} might be rearranged, the number of versicles increased or
diminished, the rule about varying the saying of a Creed, or an
Alleluia, might be altered: but it is the same pattern with the same
methods of worship now, as it was when the Services were all said in
Latin and when each Diocese in this country had some differences from
all the other Dioceses.

We will now proceed to consider these two Services in their details.


  THE ORDER FOR
  MORNING AND EVENING PRAYER,
  DAILY TO BE SAID AND USED THROUGHOUT
  THE YEAR.

_The Morning and Evening Prayer shall be used in the accustomed Place
of the Church, Chapel, or Chancel: except it shall be otherwise
determined by the Ordinary of the Place.  And the Chancels shall remain
as they have done in times past._

_And here is to be noted, that such ornaments of the Church, and of the
Ministers thereof, at all times of their Ministration, shall be
retained, and be in use, as were in this Church of England, by the
authority of Parliament, in the second year of the reign of King Edward
the Sixth._


The importance of the above heading has been lost sight of, through the
manner of its printing.  In most Prayer Books it will be found on a
page by itself or at the foot of a Table of the Golden Numbers.  It is
really the heading of a chapter which contains both {26} Morning and
Evening Service.  Until the last Revision of the Book in 1662, the
chapter containing Morning and Evening Prayer was closed after the
Athanasian Creed with a Rubric _Thus endeth the Order of Morning and
Evening Prayer throughout the whole Year_.  Although that Rubric has
been omitted, this heading includes both Services in one Chapter.

EVENING PRAYER]  This part of the chapter, prior to 1662, was not
printed out in full; only the variations from Morning Prayer were set
forth.

DAILY TO BE SAID AND USED]  See Preface--_And all Priests and Deacons
are to say daily the Morning and Evening Prayer, either privately or
openly . . . the Curate . . . shall say the same in the Parish Church
or Chapel where he ministereth_.

ornaments of the Church]  The Canons of 1604 order a number of things
to be provided at the charges of the parish, which may be included
under this head, such as Communion Table, Pulpit, Reading-desk, Font,
Alms-chest, Alms-basin, Vessels for Holy Communion, Bible, Common
Prayer Book, Book of Homilies, Parchment Register Book and Coffer.  It
would not be easy to make a complete list of things authorised by this
Rubric and elsewhere.

and of the Ministers thereof]  The discussion of the meaning of the
Ornaments of the Ministers belongs chiefly to the Communion Service.
There has been no question that for Morning and Evening Service a
Surplice and Hood are ordered to be worn.

the second year of the reign of King Edward the Sixth]  The reference
is to the {27} statute of the year 1548-9, whereby the first (English)
Revision was enabled to be enforced by law.  Edward VI.'s reign began
on Jan. 29, 1547.  This statute passed the House of Lords on Jan. 15th,
1548-9, and is referred to in the statute of 1552 as belonging to the
second year of King Edward VI., although the session lasted into his
third year.


THE ORDER FOR MORNING PRAYER, DAILY THROUGHOUT THE YEAR.

This fresh heading is necessary because the former included the Order
for Evening Service.  Morning and Evening Prayer (called also Mattins
and Evensong: see Table of Proper Lessons) are two divisions of the
same chapter.

These two Services are very much alike.  The map on the next page shows
their construction.

An examination of this map will show that the plan of the Lord's Prayer
is closely followed.  There are two parts and an introduction.  Of the
two parts Praise comes first, as in the Lord's Prayer.

Each of the two parts begins with the Lord's Prayer, which is arranged
with a setting so as to mark the character of what follows.

Every piece of the Praise portion is set with a Praise-Termination, or
Doxology: and this portion includes both kinds of Praise, viz.
Outspoken Praise, and Reverent Hearing of God's Word.  In like manner
the Prayer portion includes the two kinds of Prayer, viz. Petition for
the wants of men, and Thanksgiving for what they have received.

{28}

Thus these two Services are formed in obedience to the rule that we are
to take the Lord's Prayer as our model (S. Matth. vi. 9).


INTRODUCTION.

  TEXT and SERMON on Confession.
  The act of CONFESSION.
  GOD'S ANSWER to Confession.

PRAISE.

                                  _Praise-terminations_
  THE LORD'S PRAYER  . . . . . .   Thine is the kingdom.

          (  1. Interjected Verses    )
  PSALMS  (  2. xcv. (at Mattins)     )  Gloria Patri.
          (  3. Special, i.--cl. (as  )
          (     appointed)            )

  LESSONS (  1. Old Testament . . . Canticle 1 or 2,
          (  2. New Testament . . . Canticle 3 or 4.

  THE APOSTLES' CREED . . . . . . Amen.


PRAYER.

  THE LORD'S PRAYER.

  PRECES or Interjected Verses anticipating the Collects.

           (  1.  for spiritual needs,
  COLLECTS (        ANTHEM or Choral Prayer uniting the
           (        two kinds of Collect,
           (  2.  for physical needs and earthly relations.

{29}

In 1552 the Introductory portion was prefixed.  _Confession_, which
formerly occurred in the Prayers, had been omitted in 1549.  It now
forms the Introduction.

The reason for this beginning is set forth in a short sermon which is
usually known as the _Exhortation_, and has, like other sermons, a
Text, commonly known as a _Sentence_ (see Rubric at the head of the
Sentences).  This is in accordance with very ancient custom[1], and
with the very natural sense that man must receive permission before he
approaches God.

God's answer to Confession is The _Absolution_ or _Remission_ of Sins.

As an illustration of this we may think of Esther, when she went to
make her petition of the King (Esther iv. 2, v. 1-3).  The King
extending his sceptre gave her permission to speak.


The Sentences

are 11 verses, chosen, 5 from the Psalms, 4 from the Prophets, 2 from
the Gospels, 1 from the Epistles.  They represent either man's cry to
God (Nos. 2, 3, 7, 9, 10) or God's call to man (Nos. 1, 4, 5, 8, 11) or
both (No. 6).


{30}

The Exhortation.

_The Scripture moveth us_]  The Sentences supply 11 such places, but
there are many more to be found in the Bible.  The word "moveth" has
the same meaning as when a resolution is moved at a meeting.

_When we assemble and meet together_ in Church]  Four reasons are
given, viz. the four great occupations of Worship, without regard to
their order in the Service.  We have already pointed out that
_Thanksgiving_ and _Prayer_ spring from the sense of man's wants and
his dependence on God; and that the _Reading of God's Word_ in these
Services is not for study but for _Praise_.  We shall therefore find
the Thanksgiving after the Prayers, and the Lessons (or Lections) of
Holy Scripture amongst the Praises.


The Confession.

The capital letters indicate that this was to be, as it were, dictated
to the people, sentence by sentence: and the Rubric implies the same.
It will be remembered that books were scarce when this Rubric was
prepared.  Literal obedience to it is often very impressive, and a real
addition to the solemnity of the act.  On ordinary occasions in some
Churches, the Minister leads the Confession without the formal
separation of each clause from the next.

The expressions, used here to acknowledge the wickedness of sin and the
defects of human life, will seem to be excessive whenever we are making
light of {31} our faults.  But in proportion as we realise the
perfection of God's holiness, we shall find them suitable to every
shade of defect and sin.

The comprehensive humility of this Confession is designed to include
both modified faults and grave offences--whether by commission,
omission or indolence.  The full acknowledgment of the different forms
of sin is followed by prayer for mercy and recovery, relying upon the
promises declared in Jesus Christ.


The Absolution.

As God's answer to Confession, this is pronounced by God's own
messenger.  The messenger must have full credentials; i.e. a Deacon
must not say the Absolution.

Both here and in the Confession, the _Titles and Attributes_ of God
should be noticed.  His power and mercy were made the grounds of our
appeal to Him.  His mercy and authority are now made the grounds of His
answer.  The fulness of the declaration of them gives emphasis to the
declaration of pardon which follows.

We find four parts in the Confession and the same parts in the
Absolution, viz.

1. The Title and Attributes of God.

2. The substantial part, i.e. Confession or Absolution.

3. The prayer which is founded thereon.

4. The appeal through our Lord.


{32}

Rubrics.

Before the invention of printing (15th century), the directions in Law
Manuscripts had been written in red, in order to distinguish them from
the Statutes.  This distinction had been made also in Service Books and
it has been continued to our own time.  But every sheet which contains
both black and red letters requires to be twice passed over a printing
press.  Hence, for cheap books, italics are used instead of red letters
to distinguish the directions from the prayers, &c.  The directions are
called Rubrics (from Lat. _ruber_=red) whether the distinction is made
by the colour or the type.

The rubrics about the Confession and the Absolution were in 1662 made
more clear.  The habit had grown up in some churches for the Priest to
say the Absolution kneeling.  The word _all_ was therefore inserted in
the rubric about Confession, and the words _standing, the people still
kneeling_ were added to the rubric about Absolution.  Thus _all
kneeling_ includes the minister.

This Introductory Part of the Service was composed for the Revision of
1552, and was then printed only in the Morning Service, with a rubric
ordering it to be used _at the beginning of Morning Prayer, and
likewise of Evening Prayer_.  In 1662 it was first printed out in full
in the Evening Service, and the rubric was altered to agree therewith.

_Simplification of rubrics_.  One aim of the Revisers was simplicity of
rules.  As they sought Variety of worship without excess, so they
desired Order of {33} worship without complexity of regulations.
Anyone, looking casually over the Prayer Books of the Sarum and other
Uses before 1549, will be struck at once by the redness of many of the
pages.  This redness indicates rubrics, and helps us to realise what is
meant in the Prayer Book Preface (Concerning the Service of the Church,
Section 2) by _the number and hardness of the rules called the Pie, and
the manifold changings of the Service_[2].

In order to provide for the many occasions when a difference was to be
made, rubrics had been multiplied and inserted at the places to which
they applied.  The Revisers (1) collected as many as possible at the
beginning of each Service, or at the end; and (2) reduced the number of
rubrics thus collected together, by reducing the number of variations
which were to be provided for.


Duplication of Phrases.

It has often been noticed that pairs of words having nearly the same
meaning frequently occur in the Prayer Book.  This doubling of an idea
may be called 'Duplication'.

Duplication is of two kinds: either the words coupled together are so
nearly identical in meaning that one is but a repetition of the other;
or else the {34} second word shows an advance upon the first.  The
former kind may be called 'parallel duplication' and is used for
emphasis: the latter kind may be called 'progressive duplication',
because it is used to represent the living idea which advances even
while it is being uttered.  Instances of both abound in this part of
the Service, as well as in the Collects and other prayers which we
shall notice later on.


Examples of Duplication.

1. _Exhortation_.

  Parallel.  _goodness_ and _mercy_.
             _assemble_ and _meet together_.

  Progressive.

    ( _acknowledge_  . . . . . suggesting reluctance.
    ( _confess_  . . . . . . .     "      willingness.

    ( _sins_ . . . . . . . . . the outward act.
    ( _wickedness_ . . . . . . the inward fault.

    ( _dissemble_  . . . . . . pretend they are not there.
    ( _cloke_  . . . . . . . . cover them up.

    ( _requisite_  . . . . . . what we should like.
    ( _necessary_  . . . . . . what we must have.

    ( _pray_ . . . . . . . . . ask earnestly.
    ( _beseech_  . . . . . . .  "  more earnestly.
