10:29. Hence, the blood of the Saviour, which was shed for their sakes,
cries aloud for vengeance against them; and this it does by the righteous
judgment of God, which they thus draw down upon themselves,--a
consideration that ought to strike a terror into every one that names the
name of Christ. Indeed, "it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the living God" (Heb. 10:31); for he is a _living_ God, and not a lifeless
idol, incapable of punishing so scornful a contempt of his grace and
mercy.

10. With this divine wrath and vengeance, even their own consciences
threaten them, as inevitably following those who (though they know that it
was to atone for sin that the Son of God died so ignominious a death) are
yet not careful to put away their sins.

11. It was for this reason that, soon after the death of Christ,
repentance was preached over all the world; namely, both because he died
"for the sins of the whole world" (1 John 2:2); and because _in all
places_ of the world men should repent. Acts 17:30. Thus it is said, "God
now commandeth all men _every where_ to repent," and to receive with a
contrite, penitent, and believing heart the sovereign medicine purchased
by the death of Christ, in order that the grace of God be not frustrated,
but answer the end designed.

12. Remission of sins immediately follows true repentance; but how shall a
man have his sins remitted when he does not repent of them, nay, when he
still rejoices in them? Nothing surely could be more preposterous than to
expect that sins should be pardoned which a man has no design to renounce;
and nothing can be more absurd than to seek consolation in the sufferings
of Christ, and yet continue in the mire of sin which caused Christ's
death.

13. But certain and obvious as these truths are in themselves, there are
many that call themselves Christians who never repented, and who yet will
presume to lay claim to a share in the merits of Christ, and in the
remission of sins which he has purchased. They have not ceased to indulge
their accustomed wrath, covetousness, pride, malice, envy, hypocrisy, and
unrighteousness, but have rather become more and more enslaved by them;
and yet, alas! they expect forgiveness of sin, and presumptuously apply to
themselves the merits of Christ as a defence against the impending
judgment of Almighty God. And though this is one of the grossest and most
palpable of errors, yet they do not hesitate to bestow upon it the
specious name of _faith_, by which they hope for salvation. These are they
that flatter themselves to their own destruction; fondly supposing that
they are true Christians because they have a speculative knowledge of the
Gospel, and because they believe that Jesus died for their sins. This,
alas! is not _faith_, but _fancy_; and thou art an unhappy, and most
awfully infatuated _false Christian_, if thou canst suffer thyself to be
deluded in this manner! Never did the Word of God teach such a doctrine;
but the unvarying language of the inspired writers is: "If thou earnestly
desirest the pardon of thy sins, _repent_ of them, and firmly resolve to
give up the practice of them; and thus, grieving from thy heart that thou
hast so greatly offended God, and determining to lead a new life, believe
on Jesus Christ, the great propitiation for the sins of the whole world."

14. But how should that man feel sorrow for his sins, who will not be
induced to quit them? and how should he quit them, while he remains
unconcerned about committing them? Christ, and all his apostles and
prophets, unite in teaching thee, O man! that thou must die to the world
and to thy sins; die to thy pride, thy covetousness, thy lust, and thy
wrath; and that thou must return to the Lord with all thy heart, and
implore his gracious pardon. And this being sincerely done, thou art
absolved, and thy sins are forgiven. _Then_, the heavenly physician looks
upon thee graciously; for he is come to revive those that are of a
contrite spirit, and to bind up the broken in heart. Ps. 147:3. But if
thou seekest for some other way to be saved, than that which is here
pointed out, then Christ will profit thee nothing, and the boasting of thy
faith is altogether vain. For _true_ faith renews him who possesses it; it
mortifies sin, and raises the soul, with Christ, into a new life; for such
a man lives, by faith in Christ, in his love, his humility, his meekness,
and his patience. It is thus, O man! that Jesus becomes unto thee the way
of life, and thus thou becomest in him a "new creature." But if thou
continuest to commit thy favorite sins, and remainest unwilling to die to
the corrupt bent of "the old man" (Rom. 6:6; Eph. 4:22), how wilt thou
pretend to be a new creature? How is it possible for thee to belong to
Christ, when thou dost not "crucify the flesh, with its affections and
lusts?" Gal. 5:24.

15. Even if thou shouldst listen to ten sermons in one day, shouldst
confess thy sins every month, and receive the Lord's Supper, thou wouldst
derive no benefit from such exercises, nor obtain the remission of sins;
the reason is, that thou hast not a penitent, contrite, and believing
heart, which can be reached by the healing influences of the medicine. The
Word of God and the Sacraments are, indeed, salutary remedies; but they
are such to those alone who unfeignedly repent and believe. What would it
profit, to anoint a stone with costly ointment? What harvest shalt thou
reap, if thou sowest among briers and thorns? First pull up the thorns and
thistles that choke the good seed, and, then, thou mayest reasonably
expect the precious fruit. Luke 8:7. And, in fine, Christ will never
profit thee at all, if thou continuest to love sin rather than Him. The
_birth_ of the Saviour is of no advantage to a man whose aim it is not to
be _born_ with him; nor shall his _death_ avail for any, who are not
disposed to _die_ to sin, and to mortify the deeds of the flesh. Rom.
6:11. So, the _resurrection_ of Christ will benefit none who will not
_rise_ from sin, and live unto righteousness; nor will his _ascension_
prove a blessing to any who refuse to _ascend_ with him, and to have their
conversation in heaven.

16. But when, on the contrary, a man, like the Prodigal Son, truly returns
to his offended father, deploring, hating, and forsaking his sins; when he
earnestly seeks forgiveness, and, with the eye of faith, beholds Christ
and his bleeding wounds, as the Israelites beheld the serpent of brass,
and lived (Numb. 21:9); when, at last, under a real sense of guilt, he
cries out with the penitent publican, "God be merciful to me a sinner"
(Luke 18:13); then, _then_, the pardon is granted, the absolution is
sealed, however great and many the sins be which he has committed against
his God.

17. Such is the efficacy of the redemption which the blood of Christ has
effected, and of so extensive a nature is his merit, that it is fully
imputed, through faith, to every penitent soul. Thus is brought to pass
the scripture, "He giveth repentance and forgiveness of sins" (Acts 5:31);
that is, he pardons the repentant sinner freely and wholly, for Christ's
sake. For it is a pleasure with God to exercise mercy, and to forgive a
sinner. "My bowels are troubled for him; I will surely have mercy upon
him, saith the Lord." Jer. 31:20; Hosea 11:8. Then it is, that the death
of Christ is rendered truly effectual; and then it is, that the angels of
God rejoice in heaven (Luke 15:7), because the blood of Christ was not
shed in vain for the poor sinner for whom He had died. 1 Cor. 8:11.




Chapter IX.


    The Unchristian Walk Of Many Persons In Our Day, Is A Cause Of The
                Rejection Of Christ And Of The True Faith.


    _Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof._--2.
    TIM. 3:5.


Every one calls himself by the Christian name, even though he do not
perform the least part of what he thereby professes; and, by this means,
the Saviour is denied, contemned, blasphemed, scourged, crucified, and, as
it were, cast out of the sight of men, as dead. The Apostle expressly
declares, that some persons "crucify the Son of God afresh." Heb. 6:6.

2. Would to God that Christ were not, even in _our_ days, crucified again
and again among those who call themselves after his name, and honor him
with their lips; and yet, by their anti-christian lives and actions,
utterly reject and deny him. His most holy, humble, and exemplary life is,
at this day, to be found among but few; and wherever there is not the
_life_ of Christ, _there_ Christ is not himself, however loudly the faith
and the doctrine may be commended. For the Christian faith without a
Christian life is a tree without fruit. True faith works by love (Gal.
5:6); and wherever it is found, there Christ dwells, with all his divine
graces and virtues. Eph. 3:17.

3. But when these are not expressed in the lives of those who profess his
doctrine, there Christ himself is rooted up and denied; for it is only
where true faith exists that Christ dwells.

4. Now Christ hath said, "Whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I
also deny before my Father and the angels." Matt. 10:33; Luke 12:9. This
denial of Christ is not only made in words (as by those who renounce
Christ and Christianity), but it is also done when, by our lives and
actions, we wilfully sin against the Saviour and resist the Holy Ghost.
St. Paul speaks of some who "profess that they know God, but _in works
deny him_" (Tit. 1:16); and it is certain that Christ is no less denied by
a wicked and satanic life, than he is by a verbal abjuration. It is with
hypocrisy and an empty profession of the faith as it is with open
wickedness; and this is strikingly illustrated by our Lord's parable of
the two sons, who were commanded by their father to go and work in his
vineyard. The one (_openly_ denying) said, "I will not;" while the other
(_professing_ obedience) said, "I go, sir," and went not. Matt. 21:28-30.

5. This is a forcible representation of those Christians who make religion
to consist in empty profession without obedience. They will cry "Yea,
yea," and "Lord, Lord!" (Matt. 7:21), and yet are worse than others,
because they pretend to be children of the Father, and yet do not, in any
respect, obey his will. Their character is thus given by St. Paul: "Having
a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof." 2 Tim. 3:5. Now, what
is it to deny the power of godliness but to deny Christ himself, and to
shake off allegiance to him, and thus to act the part of a heathen under
the mask and name of a Christian? These are "the children of unbelief or
disobedience," in whom the spirit, not of Christ, but _of this world_,
worketh. Eph. 2:2. They, therefore, who usurp a Christian's name, and yet
do not a Christian's work, shall be denied, in their turn, by the Saviour
when he shall pronounce the sentence: "I never knew you: depart from me,
ye that work iniquity." Matt. 7:23.




Chapter X.


  The Children Of The World Are Against Christ, And, Consequently, Their
            Life And Their Christianity Are Both Alike False.


    _He that is not with me is against me._--MATT. 12:30.


If the conduct of the generality of men in the present age be examined by
the standard of life and doctrine left us by Christ, we must soon come to
the conclusion that it is wholly _unchristian_, and totally repugnant to
his example. The lives of men in our day are, in too many cases, made up
of insatiable avarice, sordid and self-seeking manners,
worldly-mindedness, worldly cares, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, and the pride of life; disobedience, wrath, strife, hatred, malice,
contentions, and a violent thirst after human applause, pomps, and
dignities. Add to these the jealousies, the revenge, the secret feuds and
envyings, the unforgiving spirit, the injustice and hypocrisy, the frauds
and calumnies, the lies and perjuries, together with all the impurity and
unrighteousness with which the world so exceedingly abounds. In short, the
whole life of the children of this generation consists of the love of the
world, self-love, self-honor, and self-seeking.

2. To all this the life of Christ is entirely opposed; it can have no sort
of communion with it. His life is nothing else but pure and sincere love
to God and men. It is composed of humanity and kindness, of meekness and
patience, of humility and obedience even unto death, of mercy and
righteousness, of truth and simplicity, of purity and holiness, of
contempt of the world, its honors, wealth, and pleasures; of self-denial;
of the cross, tribulations, and afflictions; of fervent desires after the
kingdom of God, and after the fulfilment of the divine will. This is the
life of Christ, to which the false Christianity of the present age is so
greatly opposed.

3. If, then, it be the truth that he who is not _with_ Christ is accounted
as one that is _against_ him; and he that _standeth_ not _in_ the will of
God, as he that _withstandeth_ it (and we know that this is the meaning of
the language of our Lord himself), it is most evident that the generality
of those who make a public profession of the Christian faith, not being
with Christ, must be against him. They have no communion with him, but are
contrary to him; they are not led by a Christian, but by an antichristian
spirit. Scarcely any, indeed, are to be found who are of one soul, one
will, one mind, and one spirit with him; and yet only these can be
Christ's, or be accounted his disciples. It is in reference to the latter
that the apostle speaks when he says, they have "the mind of Christ" (1
Cor. 2:16); and, in another place, "Let this mind be in you which was also
in Christ Jesus." Phil. 2:5. The children of the world have not this mind,
and it is hence certain that they are not _with_ but _against_ Christ. Now
whatever any man's profession and doctrine be, he who is thus _against_
Christ in his life and actions, is most undoubtedly an antichrist. 1 John
2:18.

4. Where, alas! shall we now find true Christians, in the midst of so many
_unchristian_ disorders that universally abound? How justly may they be
termed "a little flock!" (Luke 12:32) as they were called by our Lord
himself. How justly has the prophet Isaiah compared the church to a
solitary cottage in a vineyard, and to a wasted city! Isa. 1:8. "Woe is
me!" exclaims Micah, "I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits,
as the grape-gleanings of the vintage: there is no cluster to eat: my soul
desires the first ripe fruit. The good man is perished out of the earth;
and there is none upright among men." Micah 7:1, 2. See also Ps. 74:19;
102:7.

5. God alone knows where and who these are: but be they where and who they
may, assuredly Christ is with them, yea, in them, "alway, even unto the
end of the world." Matt. 28:20. Nor will he ever leave them without
sufficient succor; "I will not leave you comfortless," he says; "I will
come unto you." John 14:18. For he knoweth them that are his, and those
whom he is said to _know_, he watches over with never-ceasing and
distinguishing care. "The foundation of God standeth sure, having this
seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his." But who _are his_? The answer
is immediately annexed: "Let every one that nameth the name of Christ
depart from iniquity." 2 Tim. 2:19. But let those who are not disposed to
obey this injunction, assume some _other_ name that shall better accord
with their conduct; and let them not name _His_ name, until they conform
to His life by a living faith.




Chapter XI.


Showing That He Does Not Truly Repent, Is Not A Christian, And Not A Child
  Of God, Who Does Not, In _His Life And Conduct_, Follow Christ; Also,
          Wherein The New Birth And The Yoke Of Christ Consist.


    _Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that ye
    should follow his steps._--1 PET. 2:21.


God has appointed our Lord Jesus Christ to be our prophet or teacher; and,
by a voice from heaven, has commanded us to hear him; saying, "This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: hear ye him." Matt. 17:5. This
office was most faithfully executed by the Son of God, not only in words,
but (as became a teacher engaged in so sacred a function) by a most holy
and unblemished life. In allusion to this, St. Luke thus prefaces his
account of the Acts of the Apostles: "The former treatise have I made, O
Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to _do_ and teach, etc."; where,
it is to be remarked, that he places _doing_ before _teaching_; intimating
that these ought never to be separated. It certainly is the duty of every
true teacher, first, to practise himself the duties which he purposes to
teach others. Such a teacher was our Lord Jesus; and his conduct is the
pattern of teaching, and the book of life which we ought to study.

2. It was for this cause, that the Son of God became man, and conversed
with men upon earth, that he might give us a visible example of an
innocent, perfect, and divine life; and that we might follow him as a
light that shineth in darkness, to lead us in the way in which we should
go. Hence he calls himself "the light of the world;" and promises that "he
who followeth him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life." John 8:12.

3. Hence it clearly appears, that they who refuse to follow Christ in his
life, and to tread by faith in his steps, remain in darkness, and are not
in the way to obtain "the light of life." But what is this _darkness_? It
is an impenitent and depraved life, called by the apostle "works of
darkness," which are to be cast off, that so we may put on "the armor of
light" (Rom. 13:12); and in genuine repentance both these duties are
comprised.

4. It has been abundantly proved above, that godly sorrow and true faith
thoroughly change a man; that they crucify the flesh, effect an entire
transformation in the soul, and beget, through the Holy Ghost, a new life.
Lest, however, this should be a mere theoretical knowledge, devoid of life
and practice, God has been pleased to set before us his own Son, not only
as a ransom and a Mediator, but also as a _mirror_ of perfect godliness,
and as a most finished pattern of the new man, who is regenerated after
the image of God. In him, the fleshly Adam, the corrupt nature, never
reigned; but the blessed God alone. Him it hath pleased God to set forth
before our eyes, that, contemplating him and his righteous life, we might
be daily more and more renewed after his image. Let us explain this point
more fully.

5. Sad experience teaches us continually, that our whole nature, body and
soul, is polluted with every kind of sin, vice, and corruption. These are
the works of the devil appearing in the carnal man; and it is principally
in the depraved and perverted _will_, that these diabolical operations are
most visibly discerned. For the depraved will is the root of all sin: if
that were removed, there would be sin no more. With regard to the power
and natural bias of this will, it consists chiefly in turning man away
from God and from _His_ will. Now, whatever departs from that Being who is
the sovereign and supreme Good, cannot but be in itself evil; for it
partakes of the nature of the supreme evil, and is a violation of the
original constitution of our nature, as derived from God himself. It was
this _turning away_ from God that produced the fall both of Satan and of
man; whence sin entered into the world, and has, by fleshly generation,
passed upon all men.

6. The nature of man is then inoculated with the nature of the devil
himself, and his will tainted with satanical wickedness, as with deadly
poison. Hence Christ called the Pharisees "children of the devil" (John
8:44); and even to one of his own disciples gave the name of Satan (John
6:70); intimating as though the covetousness, lying, pride, and evil
concupiscence, by which the nature of all men is defiled, were Satan
himself.

7. Hence it may, with all propriety, be affirmed, that they who lead a
life void of repentance, a life of pride, avarice, lust, and envy, live in
the devil, and partake of his nature. Such persons may assume the garb of
honesty; they may veil their real characters under a fair show of morality
and correct deportment; yet, _inwardly_, according to the saying of Christ
to the Jews, they are, nevertheless, devils. John 8:44. Such a declaration
is dreadful to be made; but the truth of it is confirmed, both by the Word
of God and by continual experience.

8. Our nature, as fallen creatures, being thus miserably depraved, thus
desperately perverted, and vitiated in all its springs; there is an
absolute necessity that it should be purified and _renewed_. There must be
a _total renovation_ of the soul, in all its powers and all its faculties.
But how shall this be effected? We answer: As the _chief evil_ has made a
breach upon our nature, and has infused poison into its very springs; so
must the _chief Good_ revisit and renew our nature, that it may be
assimilated to itself. That which the supreme evil has so radically
corrupted, can be corrected only by a thorough and vital _penetration_ of
the supreme Good, even of God himself; and, therefore, it was necessary
that the Word should be made flesh.

9. The Son of God truly became man, not for his own sake, but for our
sakes; that, by reconciling us to God by himself, he might make us
partakers of the sovereign good, having cleansed and sanctified us, to
that end; for whatever is to be sanctified, must be sanctified by God and
with God. And as God is in Christ, so ought we to be united to him by
faith, that we may live in God, and God in us; we in Christ, and Christ in
us (2 Cor. 5:19, 21); that the will of God be in us, and we in the will of
God, being made the righteousness of God in Christ. 2 Cor. 5:21. This is
the only way in which Christ administers medicine to our corrupt nature;
and the more powerfully he influences man, the more thoroughly will human
nature be purified.

10. Oh! how blessed is the man in whom Christ does all and is all; whose
will, thoughts, mind, and words, are the will, thoughts, mind, and words
of Christ! It was thus the apostle said, "We have the mind of Christ." 1
Cor. 2:16. And so indeed it must be with the believer; because the life of
Christ is the new life, yea, the new man in him; and whoever lives in
Christ after the Spirit, hath really put on the new man, and all the
graces with which he is adorned. His meekness and obedience are the
meekness and obedience of Christ; his patience and humility are the
patience and humility of Christ; and his life itself is the life of
Christ, by whom and in whom he lives. This is the "new creature" which is
created after God (2 Cor. 5:17); and that life of Christ in us, of which
St. Paul experimentally says, "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in
me." Gal. 2:20. This is to follow Christ truly. This is to walk in the
light of his life, and to bring forth "fruits meet for repentance;" for,
by this means, the "old man" is destroyed, the carnal life gradually
declines, and the new and divine life is established in the soul. He who
has this life is not a _nominal_, but a _real_ Christian; a Christian not
in word and in appearance only, but in deed and in truth. He is a true
child of God, begotten of Him, and quickened and renewed by faith after
the image of Jesus Christ.

11. Although we cannot attain to a state of perfection, while encompassed
with so many infirmities that obstruct our progress in the divine life, we
ought not, therefore, to be discouraged, but rather to be inspired with
more fervor in seeking after a consummation so much to be desired. We
ought ardently to wish and pray, to endeavor and study, that the kingdom
of Christ be established within us, and the kingdom of Satan destroyed. 1
John 3:9; Eph. 2:5. The object of our cares and efforts, of our groans and
prayers, should be--how we may more and more mortify the old man by daily
repentance. For, the more a man dies to himself, the more Christ lives in
him; the more corruptions are removed by the good Spirit of God, the more
divine grace possesses the heart. In proportion as the flesh is crucified,
the spirit is quickened; as the works of darkness are put off, the armor
of light from above is put on; and in the same degree as the _outward_ man
perisheth, the _inward_ man is strengthened and renewed. 2 Cor. 4:16; Col.
3:5. The decrease of the carnal life, is the increase of that which is
spiritual and divine. As the affections of the former, self-love,
ambition, wrath, covetousness, and voluptuousness, are weakened and
subdued, so are opposite affections of the spiritual life invigorated and
raised. The farther a man departs from the world, from "the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life" (1 John 2:16); the
more do God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit enter into the heart and dwell
there. And, on the other hand, the more nature, flesh, darkness, and the
world, reign in man; the less of grace, light, the Holy Spirit, God, and
Christ, is there to be found in him.

12. This spiritual life is enmity to the flesh, because the latter is
hereby restrained, subdued, and brought under the yoke, and crucified with
its "affections and lusts." In this, however, consist the power, efficacy,
and fruit of true repentance. The nature of flesh and blood is to lead a
lawless, dissolute, and voluptuous life, unshackled by restraint, and
entirely agreeable to its own will and humor. It is this which it finds
sweet, and in which it rejoices. To the flesh and the "old man," the life
of Christ is a most severe cross, and an intolerable burden; but to the
new and spiritual man, "this yoke is easy and this burden light" (Matt.
11:30), and attended with divine serenity and peace of mind. For the true
rest of the soul will be sought for in vain, unless in faith in Christ; in
his meekness and humility, patience and love. Here he hath himself
promised, "Ye shall find rest unto your souls." Yea, he that really loves
the Lord Jesus, will not deem it hard to suffer even death for his sake,
but account it a joy and a happiness. Such is the yoke of the Saviour,
which we are invited to take upon us, that we may find "rest unto our
souls."

13. It is necessary, therefore, that every one who is resolved to take
upon himself the yoke of Christ, and to imitate His holy example, should,
in the first place, shake off the yoke of Satan, and repress the carnal,
selfish, and unruly propensities of his fallen nature, in order that the
flesh may vex the spirit no more. All must be subjugated to the obedience
of Christ, to the wise and righteous discipline of his law; that is, the
will, understanding, reason, and appetites, together with the sensual
desires of the old Adam, that before reigned in the mortal body, must
henceforth yield a free obedience to the government of the Lord. Rom.
6:12.

14. True it is that the flesh is highly gratified when honored, courted,
and praised, and when abounding in the riches and pleasures of this life;
but the yoke of Christ, by which the flesh is mortified and subdued,
requires us to prefer ignominy, contempt, and poverty, to affluence and
honor; to account ourselves unworthy of these things, and freely to give
up all that is great in the estimation of the world. It is here that the
humility and life of Christ are most striking and apparent. This is the
"yoke" and this the "burden," which are easy and light to the spirit; this
is the law of love, the commandments of which are not grievous but
delightful. 1 John 5:3. What was the whole life of Christ but holy
poverty, extreme contempt, and severe persecution? Is it not true that he
"came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
ransom for many"? Matt. 20:28.

15. It is the tendency of the natural man to desire to excel others, and
to be thought of importance; but the spiritual man loves the humility of
the Redeemer, and desires to be reputed as nothing in this world. The
carnal man, that follows the propensities of corrupt nature, and has never
learned of Christ's humility, meekness, and love, deems it folly to live
as Jesus lived, and thinks those only are wise who indulge their appetites
in security, and satiate themselves with every object which they desire;
and when such a one most lives in the devil, he is so blinded by ignorance
and darkness as to esteem his own life the happiest that can be desired,
and to applaud himself in his own folly. And hence it is that these
deluded wretches, following the false light of carnal wisdom, are not only
deceived themselves, but are the means of involving others in the same
ruin. They, on the contrary, whose minds have been enlightened by the true
and eternal light, are struck with horror and surprise whenever they cast
their eyes upon the pomps and vanities of this world, upon the ambition
and pride, the wrath and revenge, the intemperance and voluptuousness, and
the other fruits of the carnal life which universally abound. Their
language is: "Alas! how far removed is all this from Christ! How far from
true repentance and the knowledge of Jesus is the man that acts thus! How
far from the nature and disposition of a child of God! Alas! he is still
dead in sins, and a slave of the devil." That man, therefore, who does not
imitate the life of Christ, is an entire stranger to true repentance; he
is not a Christian, nor a child of God; nay, he is wholly ignorant of
Jesus Christ; for he who desires to know Christ savingly, both as the
Saviour of the world and as the great exemplar of life, must know him to
be pure meekness, gentleness, and love, and to be wholly composed of
patience and humility. This living ensample of goodness and piety which
the Lord hath set before him, he must carry in his heart, and must labor
to be transformed into its image. The virtues that resided in Christ he
must have within himself; and if he would ever effectually know him, he
must love and admire them in his inward soul. As a plant discovers its
nature by the fragrance which it diffuses around, so the knowledge of
Christ discovers itself by the sweet and sacred odors which proceed from
it. Then is acquired an experimental knowledge of the life, power, rest,
and consolation which flow from the Saviour; which circulate through all
the faculties of the soul, and quicken them by a kind of spiritual
sweetness. Thus is man made to "taste how good the Lord is" (Ps. 34:8);
thus is the truth known, and the supreme and eternal good apprehended and
enjoyed. And thus is it certainly ascertained that the life of Christ is
infinitely superior to every other life in goodness and sweetness, in
dignity and in peace; yea, that it resembles life eternal itself, being
indeed the foretaste of such a life upon _earth_.

16. As there is nothing more excellent than the life of Christ, nothing
more delightful, more peaceful, or more satisfying to the soul, it ought
to have no rival in our affections, but to be endeared to us above all
things else. He who is destitute of Christ and of his knowledge, can form
no conception of the rest and quiet of eternal life; or of the sovereign
good; or of the everlasting truth; or of the imperishable word; or of the
joy of the soul; or of the true light of love; for all these centre in
Christ, and he who has him has them; because Christ is all these to the
man who truly believes in his holy name. "Every one that loveth is born of
God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not, knoweth not God; for God is
love." 1 John 4:7, 8.

17. It is, therefore, most evident that the fruits and effect of the new
birth do not consist in words, however sound, or in a _form_ of godliness,
however specious, but in an _abiding substance_, even in that _love_ which
is God himself. A son bears the image of him who begat him; and whoever is
born of God should evidence it by _love_, for God is love; and hence it is
clear that "he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him." 1
John 4:16.

18. The _knowledge of God_, in like manner, does not consist in words, nor
in merely speculative and superficial knowledge, but in a vital,
consolatory, and divine feeling, in a pure and unmixed pleasure, gently
infusing itself into the heart by faith, and penetrating it with an
unutterable and heavenly sweetness. This is a true, living, and
efficacious knowledge of God; such as that which the Psalmist means when
he says, "My heart and my flesh cry out for the living God" (Ps. 84:2);
and again, "Thy loving kindness (as experienced in the divine sensations
of my soul) is better than life" (Ps. 63:3); that is, this divine life
infinitely transcends every other life; in which it is evident that he
means that unutterable joy which is produced by an _experimental_
knowledge of God, and which is infused into a believing heart. Thus man
liveth in God, and God in man; and thus man knoweth God in truth, and is
known of God.




Chapter XII.


 The True Christian Dies Unto Himself And The World, And Lives In Christ.


    _Christ died for all, that they which live should not henceforth
    live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
    again._--2 COR. 5:15.


"Christ," says the apostle, "died for all, that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and
rose again." Besides that this sentence is replete with divine
consolation, declaring that Jesus died for all, it inculcates a lesson of
the most salutary nature, namely, that we should live not unto ourselves,
but unto him who died for us. To live to him, however, before we are dead
to ourselves, is impossible. If, therefore, thy resolution be to live to
Christ, thou must certainly die to the world and to thyself; but if thou
rather inclinest to live to the world and to thyself, it follows that thou
must renounce thy communion with the Saviour. For what communion hath
light with darkness, Christ with the world, or the Spirit with the flesh?
2 Cor. 6:14, 15.

2. There are three kinds of death: the one _spiritual_, the second
_natural_, and the third _eternal_. The first occurs when a man dies daily
to himself; that is, to his own carnal desires, to his avarice, pride,
lust, and wrath, and such other sins and passions as have their rise in a
corrupt nature.

3. It is of the second kind of death that the apostle speaks, where he
says, "To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain." Phil. 1:21. As if he
had said, Christ is the life and death, the gain and advantage of the
believer, even when he passes through _natural_ death, for, by it, he
exchanges a short and miserable life for an eternal and blessed one; and
earthly objects for possessions that are eternal and divine: an exchange
which cannot but prove in the highest degree gainful to himself.

4. If, however, any think that the apostle's language is also to be
understood of the _spiritual_ death of sin, they will not commit an error.
For thrice happy is the soul to whom, in this sense, "to live is Christ:"
thrice happy the soul in which Jesus lives by faith, and that imitates the
graces which manifested themselves in him, especially those of humility
and meekness. But alas! by far the greater part of men have put on the
life of the devil rather than the life of the Lord Jesus Christ, by
yielding to avarice, pride, anger, and other unholy passions.

5. Awake, therefore, O man! and consider who it is that liveth in thee. If
thou canst truly affirm, "to me, to live is Christ," happy art thou, as it
respects both this world and the world to come. Here, even on earth, let
Christ be thy life, that he may be thy life to all eternity: and in order
to this, account it the greatest of gain, when thou art enabled to die to
the world and to thy own corruptions. Then, in both senses, for thee, to
live is Christ, and to die, gain. What, indeed, can be more profitable or
advantageous, than to die, in this respect, to all thy sinful desires and
affections? Go on, then, in the Lord, and never faint, allowing Christ to
live in thee now, that thou mayest also live with him hereafter.

6. No man is capable of settled peace and tranquillity, who is distracted
and disturbed with earthly desires and designs; therefore, before thou
canst live unto Christ, thou must die to the flesh and to the world. This
dying to self and living to Christ, may be illustrated by a reference to
several types and histories in the Old Testament.

7. Thus, as the promise relative to Christ, and the seal of it by
circumcision, were not given to Abraham, until he had quitted his father's
house and relinquished his earthly inheritance (Gen. 12:1, and 17:10), so
man, as long as his affections cleave to the world, is unprepared to
receive the promise which is by the Saviour; and as long as he refuses to
die to it, and deny himself, so long it is impossible that he should enjoy
Christ, or the things which are His.

8. Jesus can never live in thy soul, until thou art dead to the affections
of carnal nature. St. Paul was thus dead; and hence he could say, "I live,
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me" (Gal. 2:20); and writing to the church
at Colosse, he says, "Ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God." Col. 3:3.

9. A man may be considered as dead to sin, when sin dies in him, and he
ceases from the commission of it. The same apostle says, "If we live in
the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit." Gal. 5:25. If we live in
Christ, we must walk even as he walked; for it is not sufficient to boast
of the Spirit in words, while our words are not confirmed by our works; or
of faith, while this is not evidenced by its fruits. Indeed it is said
unto _all_,--"If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye, through
the Spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live." Rom. 8:13.

10. Multitudes, however, may be compared to Saul, who, instead of slaying
Agag (1 Sam. 15:8), according to the commandment of God, only cast him
into prison. They do not _destroy_ their lusts and sinful desires; but are
contented to conceal, and as it were imprison them, that at a future
opportunity, they may indulge them with the greater secrecy. But let us
carefully avoid this trifling; and instead of subjecting our corrupt
propensities to a temporary restraint, let us lay the axe of mortification
to the very root: for unless this be effected, we shall, like Saul, be
cast out from the kingdom, and lose the crown of everlasting life.

11. Some professed friends of religion resemble trees, the leaves of which
fall off when winter approaches, but their foliage appears again when the
season becomes more favorable and mild; for in the winter of adversity,
they conceal their lusts, and restrain their sinful propensities; but when
prosperity smiles upon them, they break out again, as at the first, and
return to their evil ways. This is an evidence of _hypocrisy_; whereas a
true Christian is in all circumstances, and under every vicissitude,
whether public or private, always the same, and remains unalterably fixed
in his God. He is the same both in prosperity and adversity, in poverty
and in affluence, steadily cleaving to God, and meeting with resignation
every affliction that Providence lays upon him.

12. The history of Ahab (1 Kings 20:42) furnishes us with another
instance, not much unlike the case of Saul; for, in opposition to the
command of God, he spared the life of the king of Syria; and, in
consequence, sentence went forth against him, and his life was required
for that of the captive king. They who nourish in their breasts those
lusts which are the enemies of God and of themselves, and which are
appointed to destruction, voluntarily draw upon themselves everlasting
death and damnation.

13. Neither prayer nor a devout spirit can ever be perfected in man,
without the mortification of the flesh. Thus God appointed that every
beast which approached the holy mount of Sinai should be destroyed. Exod.
19:12, 13. How much more does it behoove us to slay our unholy lusts and
affections, if we would ever ascend the mountain of the Lord's house
(Isaiah 2:2, 3; Mic. 4:2), offer up the incense of prayer, or meditate
upon the Word of God! If we neglect to do this, we are already judged, and
shall be banished forever from the presence of the Lord.

14. Jacob (Gen. ch. 29) served for his beloved Rachel twice seven years;
and love so alleviated his toil, that the years seemed but as so many
days: thus, for the salvation of our souls, did Christ Jesus undergo
thirty and three years' service, and what Jacob said of himself is, in an
eminent degree, applicable to Him: "In the day, the drought consumed me,
and the frost by night; and my sleep departed from mine eyes" (Gen.
31:40): "for the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." Matt. 20:28. Shall we,
then, scruple to love Christ again, and to fight under his banner against
his enemy, the world?




Chapter XIII.


 The Christian Ought Willingly To Die Unto Himself And The World, For The
 Sake Of The Love Of Christ, And For The Sake Of That Future And Eternal
              Glory, For Which We Were Created And Redeemed.


    _Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was
    rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
    poverty might be rich._--2 COR. 8:9.


Thou art required, O man! to die to thyself, thy sin, and the world; and
to lead a holy, harmless life, according to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
This thou art to do, not with a view to merit anything at the hands of
God, but from a principle of love to him, who performed and merited all
for thee, and died to save thee.

2. Be not deceived: Jesus must be loved by thee, not in word and in
tongue; but in deed and in truth. "If," says he (John 14:23), "a man love
me, he will keep my words;" and so St. John speaks: "This is the love of
God, that we keep his commandments: and his commandments are not
grievous." 1 John 5:3. And, again, the Saviour says: "My yoke is easy, and
my burden is light." Matt. 11:30. To him, indeed, who loves Christ with
all his heart, it cannot but be easy to sacrifice the pleasure which
earthly vanities afford, and to do that which is good, without constraint.
Love renders every burden light that is laid upon us by Jesus; whereas to
him that is devoid of this heavenly principle, every act which duty
requires is grievous and oppressive. To such a one, every religious
exercise is painful and laborious; whereas the man who sincerely loves the
Lord Jesus Christ, esteems death itself to be in nowise terrible, when
submitted to for his sake. And, therefore, the Apostle says: "Unto you it
is given, in the the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but
also to suffer for his sake" (Phil. 1:29); nay, to lay down life itself,
whenever that sacrifice is required of us.

3. In order to confirm thy faith, consider the example of Moses, who, "by
faith, when he was come to years, refused to be called the son of
Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the
reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt." Heb.
11:24-26.

4. Consider Daniel, who refused the luxuries of a court, and desired to be
fed with pulse and water, resolving "that he would not defile himself with
the portion of the king's meat, nor with the wine which he drank." Dan.
1:8, 12. He contemned the pleasures of Babylon, that he might attain "the
wisdom that is from above" (James 3:17), which dwells only in a heart
preserved pure from the pollutions of an unholy world. So, if thou
desirest that Christ, the eternal Wisdom, should enter into thy soul, thou
must abhor the pleasures of sin. For as Daniel and his companions were
made fairer by their sobriety and abstemious life, so be thou firmly
assured, that thy soul will appear more beautiful and fair in the sight of
God, even as "partaking of the divine nature," if thou escape "the
corruption that is in the world through lust." 2 Pet. 1:4.

5. Consider, further, the example of St. Paul, who says, "The world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world" (Gal. 6:14); that is, I am dead
to the world, and the world is dead to me. Thus are all true Christians
_in_ the world, yet not _of_ it. Though they live in it, they do not love
it; for they view it as a transient shadow; and its pomps, dignities, and
lusts, as vanity and deceit, vexation and disappointment. Hence, they are
crucified to the world, though they remain in it; and the world is
crucified to them; that is, they desire no mere worldly honor, wealth or
joy.

6. How happy is the man who is dead to earthly vanities, and alive to God;
separated from the world, and drawn into Christ! How blessed is he into
whose heart divine grace is so infused, as wholly to wean it from inferior
objects, and exalt it to the fruition of the light and glory of heaven.
Such a state is the effect of daily prayer and supplication, without which
a true Christian cannot possibly exist.

7. Agur prayed to the Lord thus: "Two things, have I required of thee;
deny me them not before I die. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me
with food convenient for me." Prov. 30:7, 8. So let the Christian pray:
"Two things I desire of thee, O Lord, even these two: that I may die to
myself, and to the world." For without this death, it is utterly
impossible to be a true Christian. If thou, O Man! thinkest otherwise,
thou certainly deceivest thyself, and shalt at last hear from the mouth of
Christ that awful sentence, "I know you not." Matt. 7:23; 25:12.

8. Though to die thus to self and to the world, is, to flesh and blood, a
grievous cross, yet will the spirit and the love of Christ eventually
triumph over every difficulty. So powerful indeed are these aids, that
they enable the true Christian to bear all things for the sake of the
Beloved, as a pleasant yoke and easy burden. And although he who lives a
life thus mortified, will be hated by the world, yet shall he be loved of
God; for the enmity of the world is friendship with him (James 4:4). And
the Lord hath himself declared, "If ye were of the world, the world would
love his own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." John 15:19.

9. Those who are dead to the world for the testimony of Jesus, it casts
out; but it honors and applauds them who, living in the enjoyment of its
pomp and splendor, are its genuine offspring; because they live in the
world, and the world liveth in them.

10. In short, that man is not received and commended by the world, but is,
on the contrary, cast out of it, in whose heart, pride, covetousness,
lust, wrath, revenge, and the other corrupt passions of nature, are
mortified and restrained. Unto him the world is dead; and he again is dead
to the world: he begins to live in Christ, and Christ lives in him: and he
will be confessed by the Saviour, as one of his peculiar people, in whom
the great design of redemption has been effected. To others, on the
contrary, it will be said, "I know you not, as ye, in like manner, knew me
not." You have not confessed me before men, but have been ashamed of my
life, my meekness, humility, and patience; and I will not confess you: you
have despised the shame of my cross; and you shall be with shame disowned
by me. Mark 8:38. For whoever refuses to live with Christ in time, cannot
expect to live with him in eternity: whoever has not the life of Christ
here, shall never have it set forth in him hereafter: and whoever disdains
to follow Jesus in the present world, shall never be glorified with him in
the world to come.

11. Therefore, O Man! strictly scrutinize thy life, and see whether thou
bearest a greater conformity to the life of Christ, or to the life of the
devil: for thou must inevitably be united to one or other of these
throughout all eternity.

12. If thou art dead to thyself and to thy depraved desires within thee,
thou wilt find it no hard task to die to the world and its vain
allurements which are without thee: and whoever is thus dead to the world,
will not love it or the things which it contains; for, "if any man love
the world, the love of the Father is not in him." 1 John 2:15. Again, how
shall his desires any more go out after the world without him, when he is
dead to it? Great indeed would be the loss sustained by a lover of the
blessed God, were he, in any degree, to yield to the allurements of the
world, and allow it to obtain a share in that affection which should be
fixed solely on the Supreme Good. A soul so undecided would soon be
entirely vanquished by the blandishments of sin, as was Samson by the
charms of Delilah (Judg. 16:6); and would become subject to all that
misery and vexation of heart, which invariably attend the love of this
world.

13. The love of the world appertains not to the _new_ creature, but to the
_old_: for the world has nothing to bestow but honor and vainglory,
riches, pleasures, and carnal desires; in these the "old man" delights.
The new man, on the other hand, has no peace except in Christ, who is his
honor and glory, his riches and his heaven.

14. And as nothing can be conceived of that is greater or more exalted
than the image of God renewed in Christ Jesus, so it should be our only
concern and care, to render ourselves partakers of this exalted honor;
remembering the words of Tauler, "What man, who is possessed of reason,
can doubt for a moment, that God can infinitely more rejoice and delight
the heart, than the corrupt and indigent creature is capable of doing?"

15. In addition to this, the Scriptures assure us that man was not created
for the world's sake, but the world for man's. It was not to pamper his
appetite, to heap up riches, or to extend his empire without limits, that
man was formed; it was not that he might acquire large estates and
possessions, erect palaces, or be gorgeously attired, that he was endued
with a soul intelligent and immortal: man was made to be _lord_ of the
earth, and not its _slave_; to subdue, and not to be subdued. He was not
to seek his pleasure and enjoyment on earth, however fair and fascinating
it might be to a depraved taste: he was not destined to be an heir of this
inferior world, nor the possessor of terrestrial, treasures, nor to be
actuated by any worldly motive whatsoever. Man is to depart hence, as one
that dwells on earth as a _tenant at will_. He was not made for it, and
cannot remain in it; he entered it naked, and naked he must quit it again.
Many, indeed, are born into the world at the same time; but an equal
number, on the other hand, are daily taken out by death; nor can any carry
with them even an atom of the treasures which they had accumulated upon
earth.

16. Man, then, is but a guest and a pilgrim below; and most obvious it is,
that he was not created for this temporal life, and that this world was
never designed to be the _end_ of his being. That _end_ is God, and the
image of God in Christ Jesus, unto which we are renewed by the Spirit; and
we are created for the kingdom of God and for eternal life. These our
blessed Redeemer purchased for us, when they had been forfeited by us; and
it is his Spirit that regenerates men who had been without God in the
world.

17. How unreasonable, therefore, is it in man to fix his affections on
temporal objects, when we are assured that the soul is infinitely more
noble and more precious than the whole world! How preposterous is it, that
he should lavish his time in the pursuit of earthly things, when he is
conscious that he was created to bear the image of God in Christ, through
the Holy Spirit! Therefore, let us now solemnly repeat what has been
before affirmed, namely, that man was not made for the world, but the
world for man. The excellency of the image of God in Christ Jesus, is
inconceivably great and glorious: so that were all mankind to unite their
labor and might, their wealth, their honors, and their all, they could not
succeed in restoring even _one_ soul to the possession of this image. It
became requisite that Christ himself should die, in order that this divine
image which had been utterly defaced by sin, might, through His Spirit, be
revived; and that man might again become the temple and house of God
through all eternity.

18. This being duly considered, as certainly it ought to be, how is it
that man so thoroughly debases his soul as to seek after the things of
this world, its honors, its pleasures, lusts, and wealth? He should surely
reason with himself, and say: "Shall I, for the sake of a little gold, or
for this fading world, or for all the honors and pleasures it can afford
me,--shall I, for the sake of _these_, sacrifice my _immortal soul_, which
Christ has redeemed at so infinite a price? God forbid." "What is a man
profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" Matt. 16:26. Alas! the "whole
world," with all its power and glory, could not avail to rescue one soul
from eternal destruction; for the soul is immortal, while the world
passeth away with all that it contains. 1 Cor. 7:31; 1 John 2:17.




Chapter XIV.


The True Christian, Who Imitates Christ, Hates His Own Life In This World,
                         And Forsakes The World.


    _If any man come to me, and hate not ... his own life also, he
    cannot be my disciple._-LUKE 14:26. _He that loveth his life shall
    lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world shall keep it
    unto life eternal._--JOHN 12:25.


In order that a man may hate himself, he must, in the first place, cease
to love himself; secondly, he must daily die to sin; and, thirdly,
maintain a continual warfare with his corrupt nature, or the flesh.

2. There is nothing that more obstructs the everlasting salvation of
mankind than _self-love_. This is not to be understood of that natural
love which excites to a due regard to self-preservation, but of that
carnal and inordinate affection which influences man to be wholly
concerned about himself, without any reference to the Supreme Being, the
great Author of life. In this sense the term is used in the present Book.
Man was created to love God alone; and since God only is to be loved, it
follows that he who loves himself is an idolater, and makes of himself a
god. The heart of man rejoices and rests in the object of his affection;
and, whatever this be, he is brought by it into bondage, and is devoted to
it. Man, in this state, is become a servant, and is deprived of that
genuine liberty in the enjoyment of which he was originally created; and
in this lapsed and divided state he must serve as many masters as there
are objects upon which his affections are placed. But if thy love, O man!
be sincerely and simply fixed on God, then thou art subject to no lord but
Him; and thou preservest thy liberty with all the privileges appertaining
to it. It becometh thee, therefore, to be very circumspect in thy life and
conduct, lest thou shouldst in any degree obstruct the progress of divine
love in thy soul. If ever thou desirest to possess God alone, thou must
make a surrender of thyself solely to him. If thou lovest and pleasest
thyself, instead of loving and pleasing God, then sorrow and fear, sadness
and anxiety, will inevitably attend thee; whereas, if thou wholly yieldest
thyself unto God, cleaving to him and delighting thyself in him alone,
then he will never leave thee nor forsake thee, but remove by his gracious
presence all fear and anxiety from thy mind. He, on the other hand, who
seeks himself in all situations and in every circumstance, and who
incessantly pursues after profit, praise, and lust, can never attain to
serenity and peace of mind; for some circumstance there always will be to
cross his desires and to disturb his rest. Never, therefore, yield to the
belief that an accession of fame, wealth, or honor in this world, is
always good and profitable for thee; when, on the contrary, a righteous
contempt of all such transient objects, nay, an utter extirpation of our
love of them, would be attended with an infinite blessing and advantage.

3. As then, on the one hand, the things of this life, such as praise,
riches, and pleasure, are frail, and pass away with the world that
supplies them, while, on the other, the love of God endureth forever, it
is evident that no satisfaction can be durable that is founded upon the
love of self and of earthly objects. Such peace would be interrupted by
every trivial circumstance that occurred; whereas, when the mind is firmly
set upon God and upon his love, it cannot fail to be preserved in perfect
peace and perpetual serenity amid all the changes of this life. Forsake
thou, therefore, all things, and thou shalt, by faith, recover all things
again; for never can the lover of himself and of the world find the
blessed God.

4. Inordinate self-love is begotten of the world, and not of God; it is
earthly, and the chief enemy to "the wisdom which is from above." James
3:17. This wisdom does not seek the praise and applause of men; and though
in itself "a pearl of great price" (Matt. 13:46), yet appearing with no
other recommendation than its own native simplicity, it is but little
valued in the world, and, with but few exceptions, is entirely neglected
