
2. _Early Dissensions in the Church_. As instances of the
disagreements and differences that troubled and disturbed the Church
even in apostolic days Mosheim says: "The first of these
controversies, which was set on foot in the church of Antioch,
regarded the necessity of observing the law of Moses, and its issue is
mentioned by St. Luke in the Acts of the Apostles (chap. 15). This
controversy was followed by many others, either with the Jews who were
violently attached to the worship of their ancestors, or with the
votaries of a wild and fanatical sort of philosophy, or with such as,
mistaking the true genius of the Christian religion, abused it
monstrously to the encouragement of their vices, and their indulgence
of the appetites and passions. St. Paul and the other apostles have in
several places of their writings, mentioned these controversies, but
with such brevity that it is difficult at this distance of time to
come at the true state of the question in these various disputes. The
most weighty and important of all these controversies was that which
certain Jewish doctors raised at Rome, and in other Christian Churches
concerning the means of justification and acceptance with God, and the
method of salvation pointed out in the word of God. The apostles,
wherever they exercised their ministry, had constantly declared all
hopes of acceptance and salvation delusive, except such as were
founded on Jesus the Redeemer, and His all-sufficient merits; while
the Jewish doctors maintained the works of the law to be the true
efficient cause of the soul's eternal salvation and felicity. This
latter sentiment not only led to many other errors extremely
prejudicial to Christianity, but was also injurious to the glory of
the divine Savior."--(Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical History," Cent. I, Part
II, 11-12.)

3. _Unauthorized Writings in the Apostolic Age_. Paul's reference to
"another gospel" in his epistle to the Galatians (1:6) suggested to
Dr. Adam Clarke the following commentary on the passage:

"_Another gospel_: It is certain that in the very earliest ages of the
Christian Church, there were several spurious gospels in circulation;
and it was the multitude of these false or inaccurate relations that
induced St. Luke to write his own (see Luke 1:1). We have the names of
more than seventy of these spurious narratives still on record, and in
ancient writers many fragments of them remain; these have been
collected and published by Fabricius in his account of the apocryphal
books of the New Testament (3 vols, 8 vo.) In some of these gospels
the necessity of circumcision and subjection to the Mosaic law, in
unity with the gospel, were strongly inculcated."--(Clarke, "Bible
Commentary.")

4. _Some Authorities on Ecclesiastical History_. Among the authorities
cited in the text are those named below. A brief note as to each may
be of interest.

_Eusebius_: Eusebius Pamphilus, bishop of Caesarea in Palestine. He
lived from about 260 to about 339 A.D., though there is some
uncertainty as to the exact time of his death. He was an eye witness
of and a participant in some of the sufferings incident to heathen
persecution of the Christians, and has been called the "Father of
Church History." He was the author of several works, among them one of
the earliest on "Ecclesiastical History." The quotations from this
work by Eusebius, as given in the text, are from the version
translated from the Greek by C. F. Cruse.

_Mosheim_: Dr. J. L. von Mosheim, chancellor of the University of
Gottingen; a German writer, noted for his contributions to church
history. He is the author of an exhaustive work on "Ecclesiastical
History" (6 vols.), dated 1755. The excerpts from Mosheim's
"Ecclesiastical History" given in the text are taken from the version
translated into English by Dr. Archibald Maclaine, dated 1764.

_Milner_: Rev. Joseph Milner. An English authority on church history,
and author of a comprehensive "History of the Church of Christ" (5
vols.) from which the excerpts in the text are taken.

5. _Commentary on the Passage from Jude_:--The passage quoted in the
text--"For there are certain men crept in unawares, _who were before
of old ordained to this condemnation_, ungodly men." etc. (Jude 4),
has given rise to discussion, the question at issue being as to
whether the principles of pre-appointment or fore-ordination is here
involved. A hasty and casual reading of the passage may suggest the
inference that the "ungodly men" referred to had been appointed or
"ordained" in the providence of God to sow the seeds of discord and
dissension in the Church. A careful study of this scripture shows that
no such inference is warranted. The "ungodly men" "who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation" were men who had already, i. e.,
previously, been denounced, proscribed and condemned for the very
heresies which now they were endeavoring to perpetuate in the Church,
they having crept in unawares, or in other words, they having become
members of the Church by false pretenses and profession, and being
able because of their membership, to spread their false teachings more
effectively. Dr. Adam Clarke, in his Bible Commentary, thus treats the
passage under consideration:

"_For there are certain men crept in unawares_." They have got into
the church under specious pretenses, and when in, began to sow their
bad seed.

"_Before of old ordained_: Such as were long ago proscribed and
condemned in the most public manner; this is the import of the
[original] word in this place, and there are many examples of this use
of it in the Greek writers."

"_To this condemnation_: To a similar punishment to that about to be
mentioned.

"In the sacred writings all such persons, false doctrines and impure
practices have been most openly proscribed and condemned, and the
apostle immediately produces several examples, viz., the disobedient
Israelites, the unfaithful angels, and the impure inhabitants of Sodom
and Gomorrah. This is most obviously the apostle's meaning, and it is
as ridiculous as it is absurd, to look into such words for a decree of
reprobation, etc., such a doctrine being as far from the apostle's
mind as from that of Him in whose name he wrote."--(Clarke, "Bible
Commentary," Jude 4.)

In the Revised Version of the New Testament the passage is rendered
thus: "I was constrained to write unto you exhorting you to contend
earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered unto the
saints. For there are certain men crept in privily, even they who were
of old set forth unto this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the
grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying our only Master and
Lord, Jesus Christ."




CHAPTER IV.

**Causes of the Apostasy.--External Causes Considered**.


1. We are now to consider some of the principal causes contributing to
apostasy from the Primitive Church and leading later to the apostasy
of the Church as an earthly institution; and we are to study the
manner in which those causes have operated.

2. In the scriptures before cited as proof of the early beginning of
the apostasy, many of the contributing causes are indicated, such as
the rise of false teachers, the spread of heretical doctrines, and the
growth of the power of Satan in general. These may be classed as
internal causes, originating within the Church itself. In contrast
with these there were other conditions operating upon the Church from
without; and such may be classed as external causes. For convenience
in study we shall consider the subject in the following order of
treatment: (1) External causes; (2) Internal causes.

**External Causes of the Great Apostasy**.

3. External conditions operating against the Church, tending to
restrict its development and contributing to its decline may be
designated by the general term; _persecution_. It is a matter of
history, undisputed and indisputable, that from the time of its
inception to that of its actual cessation, the Church established by
Jesus Christ was the object of bitter persecution, and the victim of
violence. The question as to whether persecution is to be regarded as
an element tending to produce apostasy is worthy of present
consideration. Opposition is not always destructive; on the contrary
it may contribute to growth. Persecution may impel to greater zeal,
and thus prove itself a potent factor of advancement. A proverb still
in favor declares that "the blood of the martyrs is the seed of the
Church." But proverbs and adages, aphorisms and parables, while true
as generalities, are not always applicable to special conditions.

4. Undoubtedly the persistent persecution to which the early Church
was subjected caused many of its adherents to renounce the faith they
had professed and to return to their former allegiances, whether
Judaistic or pagan. Church membership was thus diminished; but such
instances of apostasy from the Church may be regarded as individual
desertions and of comparatively little importance in its effect upon
the Church as a body. The dangers that affrighted some would arouse
the determination of others; the ranks deserted by disaffected
weaklings would be replenished by zealous converts. Let it be repeated
that apostasy from the Church is insignificant as compared with the
apostasy of the church as an institution. Persecution as a cause of
apostasy has operated indirectly but none the less effectively upon
the Church of Christ.--(See Notes 1 and 2, end of chapter.)

5. We have considered briefly the testimony of early church historians
showing that schisms, contention, and perversion of doctrine invaded
the Church immediately after the passing of the apostles; we have seen
how wolves had awaited the departure of the shepherds that they might
the more effectively worry the flock. It cannot be denied that the
early persecutions were directed most particularly against the leaders
of the people; the sharpest shafts were aimed against the officers of
the Church. In the fierce battle between Christianity and its allied
foes--Judaism and heathendom--the strong men who stood for Christ were
the first to fall. And with their fall, the traitors within the
Church, the ungodly and the rebellious, those who had crept in
unawares, and whose sinister purpose it was to pervert the gospel of
Christ, were relieved of restraint, and found themselves free to
propagate their heresies and to undermine the foundations of the
Church. Persecution, operating from without, and therefore essentially
an external cause, served to set in motion the enginery of disruption
within the Church, and therefore must be treated as an effective
element contributing to the great apostasy.

6. A further purpose in introducing here a brief summary of the
persecutions of which the early Church was the victim, is that of
affording a basis of ready comparison between such and the
persecutions waged by the apostate church itself in later centuries.
We shall find that the sufferings of the Church in the days of its
integrity, are surpassed by the cruel inflictions perpetrated in the
name of Christ. Moreover, a study of the early persecutions will
enable us to contrast the conditions of opposition and poverty with
those of ease and affluence as affecting the integrity of the Church
and the devotion of its adherents.

7. The persecution to which the Primitive Church was subjected was
two-fold; viz., Judaistic and pagan. It must be remembered that the
Jews were distinguished from all other nations of antiquity by their
belief in the existence of a living God. The rest of the world before
and at the time of Christ was idolatrous and pagan, professedly
believing in a host of deities, yet with no recognition of a Supreme
Being as a living personage. The Jews were bitter in their opposition
to Christianity, which they regarded as a rival religion to their own;
and moreover, they recognized the fact that if Christianity ever came
to be generally accepted as the truth, their nation would stand
convicted of having put to death the Messiah.

**Judaistic Persecution**.

(See Note 3, end of Chapter.)

8. Opposition to Christianity on the part of those who belonged to the
House of Israel was rather Judaistic than Jewish. The conflict was
between systems, not between peoples or nations. Christ was a Jew: His
apostles were Jews, and the disciples who constituted the body of the
Church at its establishment and throughout the early years of its
existence were largely Jews. Our Lord's instructions to the chosen
twelve on their first missionary tour restricted their ministry to the
House of Israel;--(See Matt. 10:5, 6.) and when the time was
propitious for extending the privileges of the gospel to the Gentiles,
a miraculous manifestation was necessary to convince the apostles that
such extension was proper.--(See Acts, chapters 10 and 11.) The Church
was at first exclusively and for a long time pre-eminently Jewish in
membership. Judaism, the religious system founded on the law of Moses,
was the great enemy of Christianity. When therefore we read of the
Jews opposing the Church, we understand that Judaistic Jews are
meant--defenders of Judaism as a system, upholders of the law and
enemies of the gospel. With this explanation of the distinction
between the Jews as a people and Judaism as a system, we may employ
the terms "Jews" and "Jewish" according to common usage, keeping in
mind, however, the true signification of the terms.

9. Judaistic opposition to the Church was predicted. While Jesus
ministered in the flesh He specifically and repeatedly warned the
apostles of the persecution they would have to meet. In answering
certain inquiries Christ said to Peter and others: "But take heed to
yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to councils, and in the
synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be brought before rulers
and kings for my sake, for a testimony against them."--(Mark 13:9;
compare Matt. 10:16-18; 24:9-13; Luke 21:12.)

10. Shortly before His betrayal the Lord repeated the warning with
solemn impressiveness, citing the persecutions to which He had been
subject, and declaring that His disciples could not escape: "If the
world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you. If ye
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore
the world hateth you. Remember the word that I said unto you, The
servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they
will also persecute you."--(John 15:18-20.)

11. The extreme of depravity to which the bigoted persecutors would
sink is set forth in these further words of the Savior: "They shall
put you out of the synagogues: yea, the time cometh, that whosoever
killeth you will think that he doeth God service. And these things
will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father, nor
me."--(John 16:2, 3; compare 9:22, and 12:42.)

12. These predictions had speedy and literal fulfilment. From the time
of the crucifixion, Jewish malignity and hatred were directed against
all who professed a belief in the divinity of Jesus Christ. In the
early stages of their ministry several of the apostles were
imprisoned--(Acts 5:18; compare 4:3.) and the priestly leaders sought
to take their lives.--(Acts 5:33.) Stephen was stoned to death because
of his testimony;--(See Acts 6:8-15; 7:54-60.) and the persecution
against the Church became general.--(See Acts 8:1.) James, the son of
Zebedee, was slain by order of Herod,--(Acts 12:1, 2.) and Peter was
saved from a similar fate only by a miraculous intervention.--(Verses
3:10.) The scriptural record informs us as to the ultimate fate of but
few of the apostles; and secular history is likewise incomplete. That
Peter would be numbered with the martyrs was made known by the
resurrected Lord.--(See John 21:18, 19.) Paul sets forth the fact that
the apostles lived in the very shadow of death--(I Cor. 4:9.) and that
persecution was their heritage.--(Verses 11-13; see also II Cor. 4:8,
9; 6:4, 5.)

13. Not only did the Jews wage relentless persecution against those of
their number who professed Christ, but they sought to stir up
opposition on the part of the Romans, and to accomplish this end
charged that the Christians were plotting treason against the Roman
government. Even during the personal ministry of the early apostles,
persecution of the saints had spread from Jerusalem, throughout
Palestine and into the adjacent provinces. In this evil work the Jews
sought to incite their own people living in the outlying parts, and
also to arouse the opposition of the officers and rulers of the Roman
dominions. As evidence of this phase of the persecution, partly Jewish
and partly pagan, instigated by Jews and participated in by others,
the following quotation from Mosheim may suffice:

14. "The Jews who lived out of Palestine, in the Roman provinces, did
not yield to those of Jerusalem in point of cruelty to the innocent
disciples of Christ. We learn from the history of the Acts of the
Apostles, and other records of unquestionable authority, that they
spared no labor, but zealously seized every occasion of animating the
magistrates against the Christians, and setting on the multitude to
demand their destruction. The high priest of the nation and the Jews
who dwelt in Palestine were instrumental in inciting the rage of these
foreign Jews against the infant Church, by sending messengers to
exhort them, not only to avoid all intercourse with the Christians,
but also to persecute them in the most vehement manner. For this
inhuman order they endeavored to find out the most plausible pretexts;
and therefore, they gave out that the Christians were enemies to the
Roman emperor, since they acknowledged the authority of a certain
person whose name was Jesus, whom Pilate had punished capitally as a
malefactor by a most righteous sentence, and on whom, nevertheless,
they conferred the royal dignity."--(Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical
History," Cent. I, Part I, 5:2.)

15. In the latter half of the first century, the scene of Judaistic
persecution of the church had shifted from Jerusalem to the outlying
provinces; and the cause of this was the general exodus of Christians
from the city whose destruction had been decreed.--(See Note 4, end of
chapter.) Our Lord's predictions as to the fate of Jerusalem and His
warnings to the people--(See Luke 21:5-9, 20-24.) had been very
generally heeded. Eusebius--(Eusebius, "Ecclesiastical History," Book
III, ch. 5.) informs us that the body of the Church had moved from
Jerusalem into the provinces beyond the Jordan, and thus largely
escaped the calamities of the Jews who remained.


NOTES

1. _Persecution in Different Dispensations_. It may be argued that,
judging from the history of the re-established Church in the present
dispensation, may tend to strengthen rather than to weaken the Church,
and that therefore violent opposition in earlier times cannot be
considered a true cause leading to final disruption. In reply it may
be said that the present is the dispensation of the fulness of
times,--a period in which the Church shall triumph, and during which
the powers of evil are limited and restrained in their opposition;
whereas the period of the apostasy was one of temporary victory for
Satan. Our belief in the eventual triumph of good over evil must not
blind us to the fact that evil is frequently allowed a short-lived
success, and a seeming victory. The permanency of the Latter-day
Church has been not less surely predicted than was the temporary
duration of the Primitive Church. Satan was given power to overcome
the saints in former days, and the persecutions he waged against them
and the officers of the Church contributed to his passing success. It
has been decreed that he shall not have power to destroy the Church in
the last dispensation, and his persecution of the saints today will be
futile as a means of bringing about a general apostasy in these latter
times.

2. _Persecution as a Possible Cause of Apostasy_. "Let it not be a
matter of surprise that I class those persecutions as among the means
through which the church was destroyed. The force of heathen rage was
aimed at the leaders and strong men of the body religious; and being
long-continued and relentlessly cruel, those most steadfast in their
adherence to the Church invariably became its victims. These being
stricken down, it left none but weaklings to contend for the faith,
and made possible those subsequent innovations in the religion of
Jesus which a pagan public sentiment demanded, and which so completely
changed both the spirit and form of the Christian religion as to
subvert it utterly. Let me further ask that no one be surprised that
violence is permitted to operate in such a case. The idea that the
right is always victorious in this world, that truth is always
triumphant and innocence always divinely protected, are old, fond
fables with which well-meaning men have amused credulous multitudes;
but the stern facts of history and actual experience in life correct
the pleasing delusion. Do not misunderstand me. I believe in the
ultimate victory of the right, the ultimate triumph of truth, the
final immunity of innocence from violence. These--innocence, truth and
the right--will be at the last more than conquerors; they will be
successful in the war, but that does not prevent them from losing some
battles. It should be remembered always that God has given to man his
agency; and that fact implies that one man is as free to act wickedly
as another is to do righteousness. Cain was as free to murder his
brother as that brother was to worship God; and so the pagans and Jews
were as free to persecute and murder the Christians as the Christians
were to live virtuously and worship Christ as God. The agency of man
would not be worth the name if it did not grant liberty to the wicked
to fill the cup of their iniquity, as well as liberty to the virtuous
to round out the measure of their righteousness. Such perfect liberty
or agency God has given man; and it is only so variously modified as
not so thwart His general purposes." (B. H. Roberts, "A New Witness
for God," pp. 47, 48.)

3. _Early Persecutions by the Jews_. "The innocence and virtue that
distinguished so eminently the lives of Christ's servants the
apostles, the purity of the doctrine they taught, were not sufficient
to defend them against the virulence and malignity of the Jews. The
priests and rulers of that abandoned people not only loaded with
injuries and reproach the apostles of Jesus and their disciples, but
condemned as many of them as they could to death, and executed in the
most irregular and barbarous manner their decrees. The murder of
Stephen, of James the son of Zebedee, and of James surnamed the Just,
bishop of Jerusalem, furnished dreadful examples of the truth of what
we here advance. This odious malignity of the Jewish doctors against
the heralds of the gospel, was undoubtedly owing to a secret
apprehension that the progress of Christianity would destroy the
credit of Judaism, and bring on the ruin of their pompous ceremonies."
In a footnote to the foregoing, references appear as follows. "The
martyrdom of Stephen is recorded in the Acts of the Apostles 7:55; and
that of James the son of Zebedee, Acts 12:1, 2, and that of James the
Just, bishop of Jerusalem, is mentioned by Josephus in his Jewish
Antiquities, book XX, chap. 8; and by Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical
History, book II, chap. 23."--(Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical History,"
Cent. I, Part I, 5:1.)

4. _Destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans_. "A rebellious disturbance
among the Jews gave a semblance of excuse for a terrible chastisement
to be visited upon them by their Roman masters, which culminated in
the destruction of Jerusalem, A. D. 71. The city fell after a six
months' siege before the Roman arms led by Titus, son of the Emperor
Vespasian. Josephus, the famous historian, to whom we owe most of our
knowledge as to the details of the struggle, was himself a resident in
Galilee and was carried to Rome among the captives. From his record we
learn that nearly a million Jews lost their lives through the famine
incident to the siege; many more were sold into slavery, and uncounted
numbers were forced into exile. The city was utterly destroyed, and
the site upon which the temple had stood was plowed up by the Romans
in their search for treasure. Thus literally were the words of Christ
fulfilled, There shall not be left here one stone upon another, that
shall not be thrown down.--(Matt. 24:1, 2; see also Luke 19:44.)" (The
Author, "The Articles of Faith," Lecture 17:18.)




CHAPTER V.

**Causes of Apostasy.--External Causes, Continued**.


1. As already pointed out, it is convenient to study the causes
leading to the great apostasy as belonging to two classes, external
and internal, or (1) causes due to conditions operating against the
Church from without; and (2) causes arising from dissension and heresy
within the Church itself. We have summarized external causes under
the general term persecution; and we have drawn a distinction between
Judaistic and pagan persecution waged against the Church. Having dealt
with the opposition suffered by the early Christians at the hands of
the Jews or through Jewish instigation, we have now to consider the
persecution brought upon the believers in Christ by pagan nations.

**Pagan Persecution**.

2. The term "pagan" as here used may be taken as a synonym of
"heathen," and is to be understood as referring to persons or peoples
who did not believe in the existence of the living God, and whose
worship was essentially idolatrous. The motives impelling
non-believing Jews to oppose the establishment and spread of
Christianity may readily be understood, in view of the fact that the
religion taught by Christ appeared as a rival of Judaism, and that the
growth and spread of one meant the decline if not the extinction of
the other. The immediate motive leading to bitter and widespread
persecution of the Christians by heathen peoples is not so easy to
perceive, since there was no uniform system of idolatrous worship in
any single nation, but a vast diversity of deities and cults of
idolatry, to no one of which was Christianity opposed more than to
all. Yet we find the worshipers of idols forgetting their own
differences and uniting in opposition to the gospel of peace,--in
persecution waged with incredible ferocity and indescribable
cruelty.--(See Note 1, end of chapter.)

3. Unfortunately, historians differ widely in their records of
persecution of Christians, according to the point of view from which
each writer wrote. Thus, in a general way, Christian authors have
given extreme accounts of the sufferings to which the Church and its
adherents individually were subjected; while non-Christian historians
have sought to lessen and minimize the extent and severity of the
cruelties practiced against the Christians. There are facts, however,
which neither party denies, and to which both give place in their
separate records. To make a fair interpretation of these facts,
drawing just and true inferences therefrom, should be our purpose.

4. Among pagan persecutors of the Church, the Roman empire is the
principal aggressor. This may appear strange in view of the general
tolerance exercised by Rome toward her tributary peoples; indeed, the
real cause of Roman opposition to Christianity has given rise to many
conjectures. It is probable that intolerant zeal on the part of the
Christians themselves had much to do with their unpopularity among
heathen nations. This subject is conservatively summed up by Mosheim
as follows:

5. "A very natural curiosity calls us to inquire, how it happened that
the Romans, who were troublesome to no nation on account of their
religion, and who suffered even the Jews to live under their own laws,
and follow their own methods of worship, treated the Christians alone
with such severity. This important question seems still more difficult
to be solved, when we consider, that the excellent nature of the
Christian religion, and its admirable tendency to promote both the
public welfare of the state, and the private felicity of the
individual, entitled it, in a singular manner, to the favor and
protection of the reigning powers. One of the principal reasons of the
severity with which the Romans persecuted the Christians,
notwithstanding these considerations, seems to have been the
abhorrence and contempt with which the latter regarded the religion of
the empire, which was so intimately connected with the form, and
indeed, with the very essence of its political constitution. For,
though the Romans gave an unlimited toleration to all religions which
had nothing in their tenets dangerous to the commonwealth, yet they
would not permit that of their ancestors, which was established by the
laws of the state, to be turned into derision nor the people to be
drawn away from their attachment to it. These, however, were the two
things which the Christians were charged with, and that justly, though
to their honor. They dared to ridicule the absurdities of the pagan
superstition, and they were ardent and assiduous in gaining proselytes
to the truth. Nor did they only attack the religion of Rome, but also
all the different shapes and forms under which superstition appeared
in the various countries where they exercised their ministry. From
this the Romans concluded, that the Christian sect was not only
insupportably daring and arrogant, but, moreover, an enemy to the
public tranquillity, and every way proper to excite civil wars and
commotions in the empire. It is probably on this account that Tacitus
reproaches them with the odious character of haters of mankind, and
styles the religion of Jesus as destructive superstition; and that
Suetonious speaks of the Christians and their doctrine in terms of the
same kind.

6. "Another circumstance that irritated the Romans against the
Christians, was the simplicity of their worship, which resembled in
nothing the sacred rites of any other people. The Christians had
neither sacrifices, nor temples, nor images, nor oracles, nor
sacerdotal orders; and this was sufficient to bring upon them the
reproaches of an ignorant multitude, who imagined that there could be
no religion without these."--(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. 1, Part 1,
ch. 5:6, 7.)

7. Persecution of the Church by Roman authority may be said to have
begun in the reign of Nero (A. D. 64) and to have continued to the
close of Diocletian's reign (A. D. 305.) Within this range of time
there were many periods of diminished severity, if not of comparative
tranquillity; nevertheless, the Church was the object of heathen
oppression for about two and a half centuries. Attempts have been made
by Christian writers to segregate the persecutions into ten distinct
and separate onslaughts; and some profess to find a mystic relation
between the ten persecutions thus classified, and the ten plagues of
Egypt, as also an analogy with the ten horns mentioned by John the
Revelator.--(See Rev. 17:14.) As a matter of fact attested by history,
the number of persecutions of unusual severity was less than ten;
while the total of all, including local and restricted assaults, would
be much greater.--(See Note 2, end of chapter.)

8. _Persecution under Nero_. The first extended and notable
persecution of Christians under the official edict of a Roman emperor
was that instigated by Nero, A. D. 64. As students of history know,
this monarch is remembered mostly for his crimes. During the latter
part of his infamous reign, a large section of the city of Rome was
destroyed by fire. He was suspected by some of being responsible for
the disaster; and, fearing the resentment of the infuriated people, he
sought to implicate the unpopular and much-maligned Christians as the
incendiaries, and by torture tried to force a confession from them. As
to what followed the foul accusation, let us consider the words of a
non-Christian writer, Tacitus, whose integrity as a historian is held
in esteem.

9. "With this view, he (Nero) inflicted the most exquisite tortures on
those men who, under the vulgar appellation of Christians, were
already branded with deserved infamy. They derived their name and
origin from Christ, who, in the reign of Tiberius had suffered death
by the sentence of the procurator Pontius Pilate. For a while this
dire superstition was checked but it again burst forth; and not only
spread itself over Judea, the first seat of this mischievous sect, but
was even introduced into Rome, the common asylum which receives and
protects whatever is impure, whatever is atrocious. The confessions of
those that were seized discovered a great multitude of their
accomplices, and they were all convicted, not so much for the crime of
setting fire to the city, as for their hatred of human kind. They died
in torments, and their torments were embittered by insults and
derision. Some were nailed on crosses; others sewn up in the skins of
wild beasts and exposed to the fury of dogs; others, again, smeared
over with combustible materials, were used as torches to illuminate
the darkness of the night. The gardens of Nero were destined for the
melancholy spectacle, which was accompanied with a horse-race, and
honored with the presence of the emperor, who mingled with the
populace in the dress and attitude of a charioteer. The guilt of the
