beginning of sin reigneth in the sensuality, and there principally
is rooted, she is moved and stirred highly and holily with all her
mights against her own sensuality; not utterly to destroy the root,
for that may not be, as long as the soul dwelleth in the body living
in this life, but ever there shall be left a root, namely of small
venial sins. And because she may not utterly destroy the root of sin
thus in her sensuality, she conceiveth a great displeasaunce against
her sensuality, of the which displeasaunce springeth an holy hate
and a despising of the sensuality, by the which the soul is ever
well kept from her ghostly enemies. There is nothing that keepeth
the soul so strong and so sure as doth such an holy hate. And that
felt well the Apostle, when he said: Cum infirmor, tonc fortior sum
et potens;[125] that is: When I am sick and feeble in my sensuality
by hate of sin, then am I stronger and mightier in my soul. Lo, of
such hate cometh virtue, of such feebleness cometh strength, and of
such displeasaunce cometh pleasaunce. This holy hate maketh a man
meek, and to feel meek things of himself. It maketh him patient in
adversity, temperate in prosperity, and setteth him in all honesty
of virtue, and maketh him to be loved both of God and man. And where
this holy hate is not, there is inordinate love, which is the
stinking canal of all sin, and root[126] of all evil concupiscence.
Do therefore," she saith, "your business to put away such inordinate
love of your own self, out of your hearts, and plant therein holy
hate of sin. For certain that is the right way to perfection, and
amendment of all sin."

Here is a common answer which she used to say to the fiends:

"I trust in my Lord Jesu Christ, and not in myself."

Here is a rule how we shall behave us in time of temptation:

"When temptation," she saith, "ariseth in us, we should never
dispute nor make questions; for that is," she saith, "that the fiend
most seeketh of us for to fall in questions with him. He trusteth so
highly in the great subtlety of his malice, that he should overcome
us with his sophistical reasons. Therefore a soul should never make
questions, nor answer to the questions of the fiend, but rather turn
her to devout prayer, and commend her to our Lord that she consent
not to his subtle demands; for by virtue of devout prayer, and
steadfast faith, we may overcome all the subtle temptations of the
fiend."

Here is a good conceit of this holy maid to eschew the temptations
of the fiend:

"It happeneth," she said, "that otherwhile[127] the devout fervour
of a soul loving our Lord Jesu, either by some certain sin, or else
by some new subtle temptations of the fiend, waxeth dull and slow,
and otherwhile it is brought to very coldness;[128] in so much that
some unwitty folks, considering that they be destitute from the
ghostly comfort the which they were wont to have, leave[129]
therefore the ghostly exercise that they were wont to use of prayer,
of meditations, of reading, of holy communications, and of penance
doing; whereby they be made more ready to be overcome of the fiend.
For he desireth nothing else of Christ's knights, but that they
should put away their armour by the which they were wont to overcome
their enemies. A wise knight of our Lord Jesu should not do so. But
thus, the more he feeleth[130] himself dull and slow, or cold in
devotion, the rather he should continue in his ghostly exercise, and
not for to make them less, but rather increase them."

Here is another doctrine of this holy maid, the which she used to
say to herself in edifying of others:

"Thou vile and wretched creature, art thou worthy any manner of
comfort in this life? Why hast thou not mind of thy sins? What
supposest thou of thyself, wretched sinner? Is it not enough to
thee, trowest thou not, that thou art escaped by the mercy of our
Lord from everlasting damnation? Therefore thou shouldest be well
apaid,[131] wretch, though thou suffer all the pains and darkness of
thy soul all the days of thy life. Why art thou, then, heavy and
sorrowful to suffer such pains, sith by God's grace thou shalt
escape endless pains with Christ Jesu without any doubt, and be
comforted endlessly, if thou bear these pains patiently. Whether
hast thou chosen to serve our Lord only for the comfort that thou
mayst have of Him in this life? Nay, but for the comfort that thou
shalt have of Him in the bliss of heaven. Therefore arise up now,
and cease never of thy ghostly exercise that thou hast used, but
rather increase to them more."

Here is an answer by the which she had a final victory of the fiend,
after long threats of intolerable pains:

"I have chosen pain for my refreshing, and therefore it is not hard
to me to suffer them, but rather delectable for the love of my
Saviour, as long as it pleaseth His Majesty that I shall suffer
them."

Here is a doctrine of the said virgin, how we should use the grace
of our Lord:

"Who so could use the grace of our Lord, he should ever have the
victory of all things that falleth to him. For as often," she said,
"as any new thing falleth to a man, be it of prosperity or
adversity, he should think in himself thus: Of this will I win
somewhat. For he that can do so, shall soon be rich in virtue."

Here followeth notable doctrines of this holy maid, taken of her
sermon which she made to her disciples before her passing, and the
first was this:

"What so ever he be that cometh to the service of God, if he will
have God truly, it is needful to him that he make his heart naked
from all sensible love, not only of certain persons but of every
creature what that ever he be, and then he should stretch up his
soul to our Lord and our Maker, simply, with all the desire of his
heart. For an heart may not wholly be given to God, but if it be
free from all other love, open and simple without doubleness." And
so she affirmed of herself, that it was her principal labour and
business from her young age unto that time, ever for to come to that
perfection. Also she said that she knew well that to such a state of
perfection, in the which all the heart is given to God, a soul may
not come perfectly without meditation of devout prayer, and that the
prayer be grounded in meekness, and that it come not forth and
proceed by any trust of any manner of virtue of him that prayeth,
but alway he should know himself to be right nought. For she said
that that was ever her business, to give herself to the exercise of
prayer, so for to win the continual habit of prayer; for she did see
well that by prayer all virtues are increased, and made mighty and
strong; and, without prayer, they wax feeble and defail.[132]
Wherefore she induced her disciples that they should busy them to
prayer perseverauntly; and therefore she told them of two manner of
prayers:[133] Vocal and Mental. Vocal prayers, she said, should be
kept certain hours in the night and in the day ordained by holy
Church; but mental prayer should ever be had, in act or in habit of
the soul. Also she said that, by the light of quick faith, she saw
clearly and conceived in her soul that what that ever befell to her,
or to any others, all cometh from God, not for hate but for great
love that He hath to His creatures; and by[134] this quick faith she
conceived in herself a love and a readiness to obey as well to the
precepts of her sovereigns,[135] as to the commandments of God, ever
thinking that their precepts should come from God, either for need
of herself, or else for increase of virtue in her soul. Also she
said, for to get and purchase purity of soul, it were right
necessary that a man kept himself from all manner of judgments of
his [neighbour, and from all idle speaking of his][136] neighbour's
deeds; for in every creature we should behold only the will of God.
And therefore she said that in no wise men should deem[137]
creatures; that is, neither despise them by their doom[138] nor
condemn them, all be it that they see them do open sin before them;
but rather they should have compassion on them and pray for them,
and despise them not, nor condemn them. Also she said that she had
great hope and trust in God's providence; for, she said, she knew
well[139] by experience that the Divine providence was and is a
passing great thing, for it wanteth never to them that hopeth in it.

DEO GRATIS




III.

HERE BEGINNETH A SHORT TREATISE OF CONTEMPLATION TAUGHT BY OUR LORD
JESU CHRIST, OR TAKEN OUT OF THE BOOK OF MARGERY KEMPE, ANCRESS OF
LYNN


SHE desired many times that her head might be smitten off with an
axe upon a block for the love of our Lord Jesu. Then said our Lord
Jesu in her mind: "I thank thee, daughter, that thou wouldest die
for My love; for as often as thou thinkest so, thou shalt have the
same meed in heaven, as if thou suffredest the same death, and yet
there shall no man slay thee.

"I assure thee in thy mind, if it were possible for Me to suffer
pain again, as I have done before, Me were lever to suffer as much
pain as ever I did for thy soul alone, rather than thou shouldest
depart from Me everlastingly.

"Daughter, thou mayst no better please God, than to think
continually in His love."

Then she asked our Lord Jesu Christ, how she should best love Him.
And our Lord said: "Have mind of thy wickedness, and think on My
goodness.

"Daughter, if thou wear the habergeon or the hair,[140] fasting
bread and water, and if thou saidest every day a thousand Pater
Nosters, thou shalt[141] not please Me so well as thou dost when
thou art in silence, and suffrest Me to speak in thy soul.

"Daughter, for to bid many beads, it is good to them that can not
better do, and yet it is not perfect.[142] But it is a good way
toward perfection. For I tell thee, daughter, they that be great
fasters, and great doers of penance, they would that it should be
holden the best life.[143] And they that give them unto many
devotions, they would have that the best life. And those that give
much almesse, they would that it were holden the best life. And I
have often told thee, daughter, that thinking, weeping, and high
contemplation is the best life in earth, and thou shalt have more
merit in heaven for one year thinking in thy mind than for an
hundred year of praying with thy mouth; and yet thou wilt not
believe Me, for thou wilt bid many beads.[144]

"Daughter, if thou knew how sweet thy love is to Me, thou wouldest
never do other thing but love Me with all thine heart.

"Daughter, if thou wilt be high with Me in heaven, keep Me alway in
thy mind as much as thou mayst, and forget not Me at thy meat; but
think alway that I sit in thine heart and know every thought that is
therein, both good and bad.

"Daughter, I have suffered many pains for thy love; therefore thou
hast great cause to love Me right well, for I have bought thy love
full dear."

"Dear Lord," she said, "I pray Thee, let me never have other joy in
earth, but mourning and weeping for Thy love; for me thinketh, Lord,
though I were in hell, if I might weep there and mourn for Thy love
as I do here, hell should not noye[145] me, but it should be a
manner of heaven. For Thy love putteth away all manner of dread of
our ghostly enemy; for I had lever be there, as long as Thou
wouldest, and please Thee, than to be in this world and displease
Thee; therefore, good Lord, as Thou wilt, so may[146] it be."

She had great wonder that our Lord would become man, and suffer so
grievous pains, for her that was so unkind a creature to Him. And
then, with great weeping, she asked our Lord Jesu how she might best
please Him; and He answered to her soul, saying: "Daughter, have
mind of thy wickedness, and think on My goodness." Then she prayed
many times and often these words: "Lord, for Thy great goodness,
have mercy on my great wickedness, as certainly as I was never so
wicked as Thou art good, nor never may be though I would; for Thou
art so good, that Thou mayst no better be; and, therefore, it is
great wonder that ever any man should be departed from Thee without
end."

When she saw the Crucifix, or if she saw a man had a wound, or a
beast, or if a man beat a child before her, or smote a horse or
another beast with a whip, if she might see it or hear it, she
thought she saw our Lord beaten or wounded, like as she saw in the
man or in the beast.

The more she increased in love and in devotion, the more she
increased in sorrow and contrition, in lowliness[147] and meekness,
and in holy dread of our Lord Jesu, and in knowledge of her own
frailty. So that if she saw any creature be punished or sharply
chastised, she would think that she had been more worthy to be
chastised than that creature was, for her unkindness against God.
Then would she weep for her own sin, and for compassion of that
creature.

Our Lord said to her: "In nothing that thou dost or sayest,
daughter, thou mayst no better please God than believe that He
loveth thee. For, if it were possible that I might weep with thee, I
would weep with thee for the compassion that I have of thee."

Our merciful Lord Jesu Christ drew this creature unto His love, and
to the mind of His passion, that she might not endure to behold a
leper, or another sick man, specially if he had any wounds appearing
on him. So she wept as if she had seen our Lord Jesu with His wounds
bleeding; and so she did, in the sight of the soul; for, through the
beholding of the sick man, her mind was all ravished in to our Lord
Jesu, that she had great mourning and sorrowing that she might not
kiss the leper when she met them in the way, for the love of our
Lord: which was all contrary to her disposition in the years of her
youth and prosperity, for then she abhorred them most.

Our Lord said: "Daughter, thou hast desired in thy mind to have many
priests in the town of Lynn, that might sing and read night and day
for to serve Me, worship Me, and praise Me, and thank Me for the
goodness that I have done to thee in earth; and therefore, daughter,
I promise thee that thou shalt have meed and reward in heaven for
the good wills and good desires, as if thou haddest done them in
deed.

"Daughter, thou shalt have as great meed and as great reward with Me
in heaven, for thy good service and thy good deeds that thou hast
done in thy mind, as if thou haddest done the same with thy bodily
wits withoutforth.[148]

"And, daughter, I thank thee for the charity that thou hast to all
lecherous men and women; for thou prayest for them and weepest for
them many a tear, desiring that I should deliver them out of sin,
and be as gracious to them as I was to Mary Magdalene, that they
might have as much grace to love Me as Mary Magdalene had; and with
this condition thou wouldest that everich[149] of them should have
twenty pounds a year to love and praise Me; and, daughter, this
great charity which thou hast to them in thy prayer pleaseth Me
right well. And, daughter, also I thank thee for the charity which
thou hast in thy prayer, when thou prayest for all Jews and
Saracens, and all heathen people that they should come to Christian
faith, that My name might be magnified in them. Furthermore,
daughter, I thank thee for the general charity that thou hast to all
people that be now in this world, and to all those that are to come
unto the world's end; that thou wouldest be hacked as small as flesh
to the pot for their love, so that I would by thy death save them
all from damnation, if it pleased Me. And, therefore, daughter, for
all these good wills and desires, thou shalt have full meed and
reward in heaven, believe it right well and doubt never a deal."

She said: "Good Lord, I would be laid naked upon an hurdle for Thy
love, all men to wonder on me and to cast filth and dirt on me, and
be drawen from town to town every day my life time, if Thou were
pleased thereby, and no man's soul hindered. Thy will be fulfilled
and not mine."

"Daughter," He said, "as oftentimes as thou sayest or thinkest:
Worshipped be all the holy places in Jerusalem, where Christ
suffered bitter pain and passion in: thou shalt have the same pardon
as if thou were there with thy bodily presence, both to thyself and
to all those that thou wilt give to.[150]

"The same pardon that was granted thee aforetime, it was confirmed
on Saint Nicholas day, that is to say, playne[151] remission; and it
is not only granted to thee, but also to all those that believe, and
to all those that shall believe unto the world's end, that God
loveth thee, and shall thank God for thee. If they will forsake
their sin, and be in full will no more to turn again thereto, but be
sorry and heavy for that they have done, and will do due penance
therefore, they shall have the same pardon that is granted to
thyself; and that is all the pardon that is in Jerusalem,[152] as
was granted thee when thou were at Rafnys."[153]

That day that she suffered no tribulation for our Lord's sake, she
was not merry nor glad, as that day when she suffered tribulation.

Our Lord Jesus said unto her: "Patience is more worth than miracles
doing. Daughter, it is more pleasure to Me that thou suffer
despites, scorns, shames, reproofs, wrongs, and diseases, than if
thine head were stricken off three times a day every day in seven
year."

"Lord," she said, "for Thy great pain have mercy on my little pain."

When she was in great trouble, our Lord said: "Daughter, I must
needs comfort thee, for now thou hast the right way to heaven. By
this way came I and all My disciples; for now thou shalt know the
better what sorrow and shame I suffered for thy love, and thou shalt
have the more compassion when thou thinkest on My passion."

"O my dear worthy Lord," said she, "these graces Thou shouldest shew
to religious men and to priests."

Our Lord said to her again: "Nay, nay, daughter, for that I love
best that they love not, and that is shames, reproofs, scorns, and
despites of the people; and therefore they shall not have this
grace; for, daughter, he that dreadeth the shames of this world may
not perfectly love God."

Here endeth a short treatise of a devout ancress called Margery
Kempe of Lynn




IV.

HERE FOLLOWETH A DEVOUT TREATISE COMPILED BY MASTER WALTER HYLTON OF
THE SONG OF ANGELS


DEAR brother in Christ, I have understanding by thine own speech,
and also by telling of another man, that thou yearnest and desirest
greatly for to have more knowledge and understanding than thou hast
of angel's song and heavenly sound; what it is, and on what wise it
is perceived and felt in a man's soul, and how a man may be siker
that it is true and not feigned; and how it is made by the presence
of the good angel, and not by the inputting of the evil angel. These
things thou wouldest wete of me; but, soothly, I cannot tell thee
for a surety the soothfastness of this matter; nevertheless
somewhat, as me thinketh, I shall shew thee in a short word.

Wete thou well that the end and the sovereignty of perfection
standeth in very onehead[154] of God and of a man's soul by perfect
charity. This onehead, then, is verily made when the mights of the
soul are reformed by grace to the dignity and the state of the first
condition; that is, when the mind is stabled sadly,[155] without
changing and vagation,[156] in God and ghostly things, and when the
reason is cleared from all worldly and fleshly beholdings, and from
all bodily imaginations, figures, and fantasies of creatures, and is
illumined by grace to behold God and ghostly things, and when the
will and the affection is purified and cleansed from all fleshly,
kindly, and worldly love, and is inflamed with brenning love of the
Holy Ghost. This wonderful onehead may not be fulfilled[157]
perfectly, continually, and wholly in this life, for the corruption
of the flesh, but only in the bliss of heaven. Nevertheless, the
nearer that a soul in this present life may come to this onehead,
the more perfect it is. For the more that it is reformed by grace to
the image and the likeness of its Creator here on this wise; the
more joy and bliss shall it have in heaven. Our Lord God is an
endless being without changing, almighty without failing, sovereign
wisdom, light, soothness without error or darkness; sovereign
goodness, love, peace, and sweetness. Then the more that a soul is
united, fastened, conformed, and joined to our Lord, the more stable
and mighty it is, the more wise and clear, good and peaceable,
loving and more virtuous it is, and so it is more perfect. For a
soul that hath by the grace of Jesu, and long travail of bodily and
ghostly exercise, overcome and destroyed concupiscences, and
passions, and unskilful stirrings[158] within itself, and without in
the sensuality, and is clothed all in virtues, as in meekness and
mildness, in patience and softness, in ghostly strength and
righteousness, in continence, in wisdom, in truth, hope and charity;
then it is made perfect, as it may be in this life. Much comfort it
receiveth of our Lord, not only inwardly in its own privy
substance,[159] by virtue of the onehead to our Lord that lieth in
knowing and loving of God, in light and ghostly brenning of Him, in
transforming of the soul in to the Godhead; but also many other
comforts, savours, sweetnesses, and wonderful feelings on sere[160]
or sundry manners, after that our Lord vouchethsafe to visit His
creatures here in earth, and after that the soul profiteth and
waxeth in charity. Some soul, by virtue of charity that God giveth
it, is so cleansed, that all creatures, and all that he heareth, or
seeth, or feeleth by any of his wits, turneth him to comfort and
gladness; and the sensuality receiveth new savour and sweetness in
all creatures.[161] And right as beforetime the likings in the
sensuality were fleshly, vain, and vicious, for the pain of the
original sin; right so now they are made ghostly and clean, without
bitterness and biting of conscience. And this is the goodness of our
Lord, that sith the soul is punished in the sensuality, and the
flesh is partner of the pain, that afterward the soul be comforted
in the sensuality, and the flesh be fellow of joy and comfort with
the soul, not fleshly, but ghostly, as he was fellow in tribulation
and pain. This is the freedom and the lordship, the dignity, and the
worship that a man[162] hath over all creatures, the which dignity
he may so recover by grace here, that every creature savour to him
as it is. And that is, when by grace he seeth, he heareth, he
feeleth only God in all creatures. On this manner of wise a soul is
made ghostly in the sensuality by abundance of charity, that is, in
the substance of the soul. Also, our Lord comforteth a soul by
angel's song. What that song is, it may not be described by no
bodily likeness, for it is ghostly, and above all manner of
imagination and reason. It may be felt and perceived in a soul, but
