heard of his incomparably great works and sayings,--but omitted to
give him a page or a line? Could they have been in a conspiracy
against him? How else is this unanimous silence to be accounted for?
Is it not more likely that the wonder-working Jesus was unknown to
them? And he was unknown to them because no such Jesus existed in
their day.

Should the student, looking into Abraham Lincoln's history, discover
that no one of his biographers knew positively just when he lived or
where he was born, he would have reason to conclude that because of
this uncertainty on the part of the biographers, he must be more
exacting than he otherwise would have been. That is precisely our
position. Of course, there are in history great men of whose
birthplaces or birthdays we are equally uncertain. But we believe in
their existence, not because no one seems to know exactly when and
where they were born, but because there is overwhelming evidence
corroborating the other reports about them, and which is sufficient to
remove the suspicion suggested by the darkness hanging over their
nativity. Is there any evidence strong enough to prove the historicity
of Jesus, in spite of the fact that not even his supposed companions,
writing during the lifetime of Jesus' mother, have any definite
information to give.

But let us continue. The reports current about a man like Lincoln are
verifiable, while many of those about Jesus are of a nature that no
amount of evidence can confirm. That Lincoln was President of these
United States, that he signed the Emancipation Proclamation, and that
he was assassinated, can be readily authenticated.

But how can any amount of evidence satisfy one's self that Jesus was
born of a virgin, for instance? Such a report or rumor can never even
be examined; it does not lend itself to evidence; it is beyond the
sphere of history; it is not a legitimate question for investigation.
It belongs to mythology. Indeed, to put forth a report of that nature
is to forbid the use of evidence, and to command forcible
acquiescence, which, to say the least, is a very suspicious
circumstance, calculated to hurt rather than to help the Jesus story.

The report that Jesus was God is equally impossible of verification.
How are we to prove whether or not a certain person was God? Jesus may
have been a wonderful man, but is every wonderful man a God? Jesus may
have claimed to have been a God, but is every one who puts forth such
a claim a God? How, then, are we to decide which of the numerous
candidates for divine honors should be given our votes? And can we by
voting for Jesus make him a God? Observe to what confusion the mere
attempt to follow such a report leads us.

A human Jesus may or may not have existed, but we are as sure as we
can be of anything, that a virgin-born God, named Jesus, such as we
must believe in or be eternally lost, is an impossibility--except to
credulity. But credulity is no evidence at all, even when it is
dignified by the name of _faith_. Let us pause for a moment to
reflect: The final argument for the existence of the miraculous Jesus,
preached in church and Sunday-school, these two thousand years, as the
sole savior of the world, is an appeal to faith--the same to which
Mohammed resorts to establish his claims, and Brigham Young to prove
his revelation. There is no other possible way by which the virgin-
birth or the _godhood_ of a man can be established. And such a faith
is never free, it is always maintained by the sword now, and by
hell-fire hereafter.

Once more, if it had been reported of Abraham Lincoln that he
predicted his own assassination; that he promised some of his friends
they would not die until they saw him coming again upon the clouds of
heaven; that he would give them thrones to sit upon; that they could
safely drink deadly poisons in his name, or that he would grant them
any request which they might make, provided they asked it for his
sake, we would be justified in concluding that such a Lincoln never
existed. Yet the most impossible utterances are put in Jesus' mouth.
He is made to say: "Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name that will I
do." No man who makes such a promise can keep it. It is not sayings
like the above that can prove a man a God. Has Jesus kept his promise?
Does he give his people everything, or "whatsoever" they ask of him?
But, it is answered, "Jesus only meant to say that he would give
whatever he himself considered good for his friends to have." Indeed!
Is that the way to crawl out of a contract? If that is what he meant,
why did he say something else? Could he not have _said_ just what
he _meant_, in the first place? Would it not have been fairer not
to have given his friends any occasion for false expectations? Better
to promise a little and do more, than to promise everything and do
nothing. But to say that Jesus really entered into any such agreement
is to throw doubt upon his existence. Such a character is too wild to
be real. Only a mythical Jesus could virtually hand over the
government of the universe to courtiers who have petitions to press
upon his attention. Moreover, if Jesus could keep his promise, there
would be today no misery in the world, no orphans, no childless
mothers, no shipwrecks, no floods, no famines, no disease, no crippled
children, no insanity, no wars, no crime, no wrong! Have not a
thousand, thousand prayers been offered in Jesus' name against every
evil which has ploughed the face of our earth? Have these prayers been
answered? Then why is there discontent in the world? Can the followers
of Jesus move mountains, drink deadly poisons, touch serpents, or work
greater miracles than are ascribed to Jesus, as it was promised that
they would do? How many self-deluded prophets these extravagant claims
have produced! And who can number the bitter disappointments caused by
such impossible promises?

George Jacob Holyoake, of England, tells how in the days of utter
poverty, his believing mother asked the Lord, again and again--on her
knees, with tears streaming from her eyes, and with absolute faith in
Jesus' ability to keep His promise,--to give her starving children
their daily bread. But the more fervently she prayed the heavier grew
the burden of her life. A stone or wooden idol could not have been
more indifferent to a mother's tears. "My mind aches as I think of
those days," writes Mr. Holyoake. One day he went to see the Rev. Mr.
Cribbace, who had invited inquirers to his house. "Do you really
believe," asked young Holyoake to the clergyman, "that what we ask in
faith we shall receive?" "It never struck me," continues Mr. Holyoake,
"that the preacher's threadbare dress, his half-famished look, and
necessity of taking up a collection the previous night to pay expenses
showed that faith was not a source of income to him. It never struck
me that if help could be obtained by prayer no church would be needy,
no believer would be poor." What answer did the preacher give to
Holyoake's earnest question? The same which the preachers of today
give: "He parried his answer with many words, and at length said that
the promise was to be taken with the provision that what we asked for
would be given, _if God thought it for our good."_ Why then, did not
Jesus explain that important _proviso_ when he made the promise? Was
Jesus only making a half statement, the other half of which he would
reveal later to protect himself against disappointed petitioners. But
he said: "If ye ask anything in my name, I will do it," and "If it
were not so, I would have told you." Did he not mean just what he
said? The truth is that no historical person in his senses ever made
such extraordinary, such impossible promises, and the report that
Jesus made them only goes to confirm that their author is only a
legendary being.

When this truth dawned upon Mr. Holyoake he ceased to petition Heaven,
which was like "dropping a bucket into an empty well," and began to
look _elsewhere_ for help. [Footnote: Bygones Worth Remembering.--George
Jacob Holyoake] The world owes its advancement to the fact that men no
longer look to Heaven for help, but help themselves. Self-effort, and
not prayer, is the remedy against ignorance, slavery, poverty, and
moral degradation. Fortunately, by holding up before us an impossible
Jesus, with his impossible promises, the churches have succeeded only
in postponing, but not in preventing, the progress of man. This is a
compliment to human nature, and it is well earned. It is also a promise
that in time humanity will be completely emancipated from every phantom
which in the past has scared it into silence or submission, and

    "A loftier race than e'er the world
     Hath known shall rise
     With flame of liberty in their souls,
     And light of science in their eyes."




[Illustration: Portion of Manuscript Supposed to Be Copy of Lost
Originals.]

THE CHRISTIAN DOCUMENTS



The documents containing the story of Jesus are so unlike those about
Lincoln or any other historical character, that we must be doubly
vigilant in our investigation.

The Christians rely mainly on the four Gospels for the historicity of
Jesus. But the original documents of which the books in the New
Testament are claimed to be faithful copies are not in existence.
_There is absolutely no evidence that they ever were in existence_.
This is a statement which can not be controverted. Is it conceivable
that the early believers lost through carelessness or purposely
_every_ document written by an apostle, while guarding with all
protecting jealousy and zeal the writings of anonymous persons? Is
there any valid reason why the contributions to Christian literature
of an inspired apostle should perish while those of a nameless scribe
are preserved, why the original Gospel of Matthew should drop quietly
out of sight, no one knows how, while a supposed copy of it in an
alien language is preserved for many centuries? Jesus himself, it is
admitted, did not write a single line. He had come, according to
popular belief, to reveal the will of God--a most important mission
indeed, and yet he not only did not put this revelation in writing
during his lifetime, and with his own hand, which it is natural to
suppose that a divine teacher, expressly come from heaven, would have
done, but he left this all-important duty to anonymous chroniclers,
who, naturally, made enough mistakes to split up Christendom into
innumerable factions. It is worth a moment's pause to think of the
persecutions, the cruel wars, and the centuries of hatred and
bitterness which would have been spared our unfortunate humanity, if
Jesus himself had written down his message in the clearest and
plainest manner, instead of leaving it to his supposed disciples to
publish it to the world, when he could no longer correct their
mistakes.

Moreover, not only did Jesus not write himself, but he has not even
taken any pains to preserve the writings of his "apostles," It is well
known that the original manuscripts, if there were any, are nowhere to
be found. This is a grave matter. We have only supposed copies of
supposed original manuscripts. Who copied them? When were they copied?
How can we be sure that these copies are reliable? And why are there
thousands upon thousands of various readings in these, numerous
supposed copies? What means have we of deciding which version or
reading to accept? Is it possible that as the result of Jesus' advent
into our world, we have only a basketful of nameless and dateless
copies and documents? Is it conceivable, I ask, that a God would send
his Son to us, and then leave us to wander through a pile of dusty
manuscripts to find out why He sent His Son, and what He taught when
on earth?

The only answer the Christian church can give to this question is that
the original writings were purposely allowed to perish. When a
precious document containing the testament of Almighty God, and
inscribed for an eternal purpose by the Holy Ghost, disappears
altogether there is absolutely no other way of accounting for its
disappearance than by saying, as we have suggested, that its divine
author must have intentionally withdrawn it from circulation. "God
moves in a mysterious way" is the last resort of the believer. This is
the one argument which is left to theology to fight science with.
Unfortunately it is an argument which would prove every cult and "ism"
under the heavens true. The Mohammedan, the Mazdaian, and the Pagan
may also fall back upon faith. There is nothing which faith can not
cover up from the light. But if a faith which ignores evidence be not
a superstition, what then is superstition? I wonder if the Catholic
Church, which pretends to believe--and which derives quite an income
from the belief--that God has miraculously preserved the wood of the
cross, the Holy Sepulchre, in Jerusalem, the coat of Jesus, and quite
a number of other mementos, can explain why the original manuscripts
were lost. I have a suspicion that there were no "original"
manuscripts. I am not sure of this, of course, but if nails, bones and
holy places could be miraculously preserved, why not also manuscripts?
It is reasonable to suppose that the Deity would not have permitted
the most important documents containing His Revelation to drop into
some hole and disappear, or to be gnawed into dust by the insects,
after having had them written by special inspiration.

Again, when these documents, such as we find them, are examined, it
will be observed that, even in the most elementary intelligence which
they pretend to furnish, they are hopelessly at variance with one
another. It is, for example, utterly impossible to reconcile Matthew's
genealogy of Jesus with the one given by Luke. In copying the names of
the supposed ancestors of Jesus, they tamper with the list as given in
the book of Chronicles, in the Old Testament, and thereby justly
expose themselves to the charge of bad faith. One evangelist says
Jesus was descended from Solomon, born of "her that had been the wife
of Urias." It will be remembered that David ordered Urias killed in a
cowardly manner, that he may marry his widow, whom he coveted.
According to Matthew, Jesus is one of the offspring of this adulterous
relation. According to Luke, it is not through Solomon, but through
Nathan, that Jesus is connected with the house of David.

Again, Luke tells us that the name of the father of Joseph was _Heli;_
Matthew says it was _Jacob_. If the writers of the gospels were
contemporaries of Joseph they could have easily learned the exact name
of his father.

Again, why do these biographers of Jesus give us the genealogy of
Joseph if he was not the father of Jesus? It is the genealogy of Mary
which they should have given to prove the descent of Jesus from the
house of David, and not that of Joseph. These irreconcilable
differences between Luke, Matthew and the other evangelists, go to
prove that these authors possessed no reliable information concerning
the subjects they were writing about. For if Jesus is a historical
character, and these biographers were really his immediate associates,
and were inspired besides, how are we to explain their blunders and
contradictions about his genealogy?

A good illustration of the mythical or unhistorical character of the
New Testament is furnished by the story of John the Baptist. He is
first represented as confessing publicly that Jesus is the Christ;
that he himself is not worthy to unloose the latchet of his shoes; and
that Jesus is the Lamb of God, "who taketh away the sins of the
world." John was also present, the gospels say, when the heavens
opened and a dove descended on Jesus' head, and he heard the voice
from the skies, crying: "He is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased."

Is it possible that, a few chapters later, this same John forgets his
public confession,--the dove and the voice from heaven,--and actually
sends two of his disciples to find out who this Jesus is, [Footnote:
Matthew xi.] The only way we can account for such strange conduct is
that the compiler or editor in question had two different myths or
stories before him, and he wished to use them both.

A further proof of the loose and extravagant style of the Gospel
writers is furnished by the concluding verse of the Fourth Gospel:
"There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they
should be written, every one, I suppose that even the world itself
could not contain the books that should be written." This is more like
the language of a myth-maker than of a historian. How much reliance
can we put in a reporter who is given to such exaggeration? To say
that the world itself would be too small to contain the unreported
sayings and doings of a teacher whose public life possibly did not
last longer than a year, and whose reported words and deeds fill only
a few pages, is to prove one's statements unworthy of serious
consideration.

And it is worth our while to note also that the documents which have
come down to our time and which purport to be the biographies of
Jesus, are not only written in an alien language, that is to say, in a
language which was not that of Jesus and his disciples, but neither
are they dated or signed. Jesus and his twelve apostles were Jews; why
are all the four Gospels written in Greek? If they were originally
written in Hebrew, how can we tell that the Greek translation is
accurate, since we can not compare it with the originals? And why are
these Gospels anonymous? Why are they not dated? But as we shall say
something more on this subject in the present volume, we confine
ourselves at this point to reproducing a fragment of the manuscript
pages from which our Greek Translations have been made.[Footnote: See
page 57.] It is admitted by scholars that owing to the difficulty of
reading these ancient and imperfect and also conflicting texts, an
accurate translation is impossible. But this is another way of saying
that what the churches call the Word of God is not only the word of
man, but a very imperfect word, at that.

The belief in Jesus, then, is founded on secondary documents, altered
and edited by various hands; on lost originals, and on anonymous
manuscripts of an age considerably later than the events therein
related--manuscripts which contradict each other as well as
themselves. Such is clearly and undeniably the basis for the belief in
a historical Jesus. It was this sense of the insufficiency of the
evidence which drove the missionaries of Christianity to commit
