other than the most perfect idea of things according to their just
value.

In the first place, it is certain, according to this Apostle, that
when the Eternal Word came into the world it knew Him not; when Jesus
wished to make the Jews feel the confusion of their own blindness,
and see the reason of their opposition to His doctrine, He said: You
are from beneath, I am from above, you are of this world, I am not of
this world, therefore, I say to you that you shall die in your sins.
(John viii. 23, 24.) Could there be anything more explicit in
condemnation of the world? It has its origin and the throne of its
power in the lower regions of the earth, while the kingdom of God
resides in the sublime abode of the human heart.

When He promised His disciples that He would send them the Spirit of
Truth, to console them, He gave as the distinctive mark by which they
would know the Holy Spirit, that the world could not receive Him
because it has no knowledge of Him. Hence the opposition that exists
between the world and the spirit of the New Law is so great that any
compromise is impossible. The world is absolutely incompetent to
receive or understand the spirit of Jesus Christ. Another fact will
render this manifest opposition still more palpable. When Jesus
addressed His eternal Father that beautiful prayer preceding His
agony and passion, He excluded the world by a positive act of His
will, in order to give all to understand that the world could never
have any share with Him. "_I pray not for the world but for them
whom thou hast given me. The world hath hated them because they are
not of the world as I also am not of the world._" (John xvii. 9,
14.)

St. Paul interprets these words in that energetic style so
characteristic of his writings, when he says to the Corinthians that
"we have not received the spirit of this world whose wisdom is folly
before God." Now shall you adopt as the rule of your conduct and
judgment a wisdom which God has not only reproved, but even branded
with the stigma of folly? According to the same Apostle the world
proves by its own words that its knowledge is stupidity, since it can
see nothing but folly in the cross. The maxims, ideas, judgments,
conduct and habits of the world and those of the flock that Jesus
came to save are so contradictory, their language is so different,
that the wise of the one are fools with the other; and the things
regarded as the most sublime by the former are to the latter
preposterous absurdities. The reason is simply because the one has
its origin, light and end in heaven, while the other draws them from
the earth.

Now, if, in order to verify these words of the Sacred Scriptures,
you take a view of the doctrine of the world and of that of Jesus
Christ, and compare them, you will not find a single point in the one
that is not in direct contradiction to the other; so that, by the
Gospel, you are enabled to discover the maxims of the world, and
_vice versa_. You may rest assured that what is recommended and
sought for by the one is censured and despised by the other. St.
Paul, speaking to the Galatians, says; that "if he was still pleasing
to men he would not be the servant of Jesus Christ."

If this be the case, you will say, why remain in the world? Is it
not every one's duty to leave it as soon as possible and abandon it
to its own corruption? Let the words of our divine Lord answer: "_I
do not pray you to remove them from the world, but I pray you to
preserve them from evil._" Our peace of conscience in this life,
and the joys of heaven hereafter require separation from the world
and opposition to its maxims. But this separation is one of mind and
heart, which consists in a manner of thinking, judging and acting
entirely opposed to that of the world. Man ceases to belong to the
world the moment he has ceased to make it the arbitrator of his
conduct and judgment, and when he has freed himself from its
prejudices, caprices and tyranny. Behold what religion requires of
you, and what alone will insure you happiness in this life and in the
next.

Now, what is this world from which we must separate in order to lead
a Christian life? In any society, that we wish to study with a view
to obtain a knowledge of its nature and objects, we may consider
either the laws by which it is governed, or the body of men who
compose it and who are governed by these laws.

Considered from the first point of view, the world consists in its
own maxims, laws, customs and judgments, which are in opposition to
the letter and spirit of the Gospel; and which tend to withdraw the
soul from the love of spiritual things, or at least to create in her
a dislike for them.

Considered from the second point of view, the world comprises a mass
of men who profess its maxims, adopt its usages, obey its laws, and
yield to its judgments.

The world thus considered entails a twofold obligation for you, one
of which can never admit of any exception or dispensation, while the
observance of the other must be always regulated by prudence and
charity. Indeed the world, considered in its maxims, should be for
you an object of constant aversion and contempt, because it is the
arch enemy of Jesus Christ and of the spirit that He communicates to
His true disciples. This is the world that you renounced on the day
of your baptism; and the solemn engagement that you then made was the
first and most important of all those that you have made, or will
make, during life.

But, while it is never permitted you to adopt the maxims of the
world, charity, prudence, and the consideration due to your position,
age and family, will not allow you to effectively isolate yourself
from those who have adopted its maxims as the rule of their actions
and judgments. In this you should conform to all that due decorum
requires, and endeavor to preserve your mind and heart against the
pernicious influences often communicated by words, actions, lessons
or examples of those who are slaves of the laws or customs of the
world. The danger is the more imminent inasmuch as the sunny side
only of the world is displayed to you; while no pains are spared on
the part of those bound to you by the most sacred ties to engage you
to adopt their views and imitate their example. This is certainly one
of the most delicate positions in which a young lady can be placed,
when her only arms of defense are the uprightness of her mind, the
innocence of her heart and the purity of her instincts.

St. Bernard says, "to serve God is to reign." By a contradictory
assertion, we can safely say, to serve the world is to be a slave;
and of all servitudes there is none so hard nor so humiliating as
that which the world imposes upon those who yield to its empire. If
God were so exacting as the world, so inflexible in the laws that He
imposes upon us, so severe in the chastisements by which
delinquencies are punished, piety would be an insupportable burden
through the weakness of the greater part of men; and God would find
very few worshipers who would be willing to submit to such an ordeal.

What is most remarkable and worthy of compassion is the fact that,
very often, those who groan the most under this slavery are at the
same time those who support it with the greatest resignation.

To suffer for a genuine duty, for a generous sentiment, for a noble
or grand idea, is something which the human heart can, not only
accept, but even love and choose with a certain pride; but to suffer
for the sake of worldly etiquette, for the sake of fashion, for
things and parsons despised for their tyranny, is a deplorable
humiliation for those who do it. And, nevertheless, the greater part
of those who might be called world-worshipers, who seem to give it
the _tone_, bear patiently its yoke, which debases them in their
own eyes,--pandering to necessities which they have imprudently
created, and from which they now find it impossible to free themselves.




CHAPTER VIII.


THE SAME SUBJECT CONTINUED.

IF the life of a woman of the world were proposed as a model, and,
after having carefully examined all her occupations, you would
discover what would be hard for you to be convinced of before having
done so, namely: that there are women so inconsiderate as to feast
their minds on such frivolities, so forgetful of their dignity as to
make it subservient to such misery, so trifling as to make a serious
work of _bag itelles_, which at most can be considered as little
better than childish amusement; your soul, still rich in its
primitive candor, and favored with an energy tempered in the love and
habit of virtue, would revolt at the thought of such debasement. And,
nevertheless, unless you apply your mind to acquire a love for
serious matters you will not escape a disorder which you so justly
deplore in others; you will be captured in those windings which have
proved fatal fastnesses to women of other days. There remains no
choice between these two alternatives: you must either found your
conduct upon intelligence enlightened by faith, or abandon it, like a
rudderless ship, to the caprice of passion and pleasure.

The life of a worldly woman is a fictitious life: nature seems to
have no attractions for her; her soul has lost all taste for its
charms; she studiously endeavors to shut out its influences, and to
subvert as much as possible the order by which it is governed. This
estrangement, this disgust with nature, haunts her wherever she goes,
even in the making of her toilet, even in the employment of her time.
She converts day into night and night into day, giving to pleasure
the time destined for repose; she purloins from the industrious hours
of day the sleep and rest for which her wearied limbs and excited
imagination contend.

While she is sleeping, the humble daughter of St. Benedict or St.
Dominic leaves her cell to sing the praises of the Lord, and offer
Him the day with its duties consecrated without reserve to His glory.
When heavy curtains screen her restless slumber from the sun's
obtrusive light, the pious daughter of St. Vincent de Paul descends
into the folds of her own heart in meditation, and enkindles in the
fire of divine love the charity with which she must cheer the poor or
sick whom she is destined to visit during the day.

What a difference between those two lives! The worldling rises
rested, but not from a refreshing sleep, she is aroused perhaps by
the importunate rays of the mid-day sun or by the noisy tramping of
hardy workmen who, after their half day's work is done, return home
to partake of a frugal repast and receive the sweet greetings of a
Christian family. It is then that her day begins, as also the series
of the _grave_ occupations that are destined to fill it. The
time is short and scarcely suffices to prepare herself for the
evening amusements; all her energies are now employed to give herself
that external grace and charm necessary to render her conspicuous in
the joyous circle. Alas! the worldly woman is entirely absorbed in
herself, and when she does something for others, it is with a view to
secure her own interest or pleasure. That devotedness, that generous
sacrifice and disinterestedness characteristic of true friendship is
to her a mere paradox, as she is an entire stranger to its effects
and charms.

After her toilet, her most serious occupations are the visits which
she pays and receives. A visit prompted by charity or some other
virtue is good, highly commendable and praiseworthy. I admire and
understand the woman who leaves the peaceful company of her family,
when no pressing need requires her presence, to go and visit the poor
and destitute, in order to sweeten their bitter lot by a word of
encouragement or a little alms. I understand and admire her who
readily sacrifices her legitimate joy in order to go and mingle her
tears with those of her friend and mitigate her sorrow or share it
with her. I understand and esteem the woman who, impressed by the
superior wisdom and exemplary piety of another woman, goes to her for
advice, devoting with pleasure her leisure hours to that end. I see
in all these circumstances a motive that is serious, honorable,
praiseworthy, and capable of acting upon a noble heart and an
elevated intelligence. But, among the visits made by worldly women;
how few there are that are prompted by such motives! The greater part
of those women visit with no other view than to pass the time, to
pander to their own vanity and curiosity, to form or execute some
intrigue. What is said and done in their visits is worthy of the
motive that inspires them. There is not a single serious thought
expressed, not a single word to show that these women have an
intelligence capable of comprehending the truth, a heart made to love
what is good, or a soul capable of receiving God Himself. If life
were but a dream, if there be no hereafter, if at death the soul must
perish with the body; and man must sink into the nothingness whence
he sprang; they would have nothing to change in their visits,
conversations and conduct.

There is a visit celebrated in Holy Writ, a visit paid by a young
woman to one of her own sex but more advanced in years, a visit so
holy and renowned that its anniversary is celebrated throughout the
Christian world,--it is the visit paid by the Blessed Virgin to her
cousin St. Elizabeth. O, Christian ladies, behold your true model!
Compare this visit with yours, and judge yourselves according to it.
Compare your motives with those of Mary. Compare your conversations
with that sublime conversation of which the sacred writer has given
us a fragment, being the most sublime canticle that has ever been
uttered by any intelligent creature under the action of divine
inspiration. Oh, what a world-wide difference between this sublime
canticle and the light and frivolous conversations in which so many
women indulge; if you were to look for the reverse of this heavenly
visit you would invariably find it among the visits paid by worldly
women.

Mary carries with her the Son of God, the Author of grace, the
Principle of eternal life, the Source of chaste desires and holy
hopes. The worldly woman carries with her in her visits the spirit of
the world, the spirit of deception, egotism and folly, which is in
every way opposed to the spirit of Christianity. Mary sings the
praises of humility and proclaims it the virtue beloved of God,--the
virtue which secures His love and assistance; she extols the
happiness of those who thirst for justice and truth, deploring at the
same time the spiritual poverty and indigence of those who are puffed
up with self-conceit. The worldly woman, on the contrary, seeks in
her conversations to flatter her vanity and pride by parading the
empty resources of her imagination and misguided intelligence. She
envies the happiness of those who, rich in beauty and all those
qualities that charm, draw many admirers around them. Elizabeth, on
beholding her cousin, felt her infant leap for joy. The worldly woman
stirs up in the hearts of those whom she visits the most frivolous
instincts, and sometimes even the worst passions.

This tableau excites your love and disgust. The comparison frightens
you; and perhaps in the simplicity of your heart you will say, it is
not free from exaggeration. On the contrary, you will be sadly
disappointed when, at a more advanced age, you will clearly see that
this is a very mild and subdued picture of what is true and real.
Your age and innocence do not allow me to reveal to you all the
mysteries of sin--all the snares, all the dangers, all the
frivolities that fill up the days of a worldly woman.

Would that what I have said of her may inspire you with salutary
horror for her life; and make you shun the snares in which she has
been taken! I pray that you, satisfied with the knowledge you have of
her follies, may never feel the desire of adding to what you already
know, the fatal knowledge imparted by experience! That you may never
forget these words of St. John: _Love not the world, nor the things
which are in the world; for all that is in the world is the
concupiscence of the flesh and the concupiscence of the eyes and the
pride of life._ (I John ii. 15-16.)




CHAPTER IX.


THE WILL.

St. John, the Apostle, addressing those who have not yet passed the
age of adolescence, says in his first Epistles: _"I write unto you,
because ... you have overcome the wicked one."_ Then speaking to
those who have attained the age of manhood, he says: _"I write to
you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God abideth
in you, and you have overcome the wicked one."_ Again, in the book
of Proverbs, chapter xxxi, the inspired writer speaks in the
following terms: "_who shall find a valiant woman? The price of her
is as of things brought from afar off, and from the uttermost coasts ...
She hath put out her hand to strong things ... strength and
beauty are her clothing; and she shall laugh in the latter day, she
hath opened her mouth to wisdom and the law of clemency is on her
tongue.... Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain; the woman that
feareth the Lord, she shall be praised. Give her of the fruit of her
hands; and let her works praise her in the gates._"

Thus, according to Holy Writ, fortitude or strength is the portion
of youth, which is manifested by the victories of the will over the
enemy of our salvation. This valor is regarded by the sacred writer
as one of the finest qualities with which woman can be adorned, since
she owes to it all her true success and glory. Now what is this
precious quality? In what faculty of the soul does it reside? What
are the signs by which its presence is made manifest? What is the end
to which it tends? What are the rewards that crown its victories?
These are questions of deep interest, and the importance attached to
a knowledge of their solution cannot be too great.

In the first place we shall begin by stating that the seat of valor
is found in the will. To be valiant consists in willing intensely
what is painful to nature, accomplishing what is proposed with energy
and perseverance. I have often treated this subject, but it is so
inexhaustible that it always seems new. Its importance grows with
time, and now-a-days it cannot be insisted on too much, nor can there
be too much attention paid to it by those who wish to preserve in
this world the integrity of their conscience and lead an
irreproachable life.

Alas it is painful to avow that this generous will is too rarely met
with. This noble faculty of the soul is made subservient to other
faculties which should be subject to and directed by it. The mind has
perhaps acquired greater vivacity and penetration. The imagination,
under the action of a constant change of images, and those sensations
which the activity of life multiplies so rapidly in our time, has
perhaps become richer and more varied. The heart, cherished while
young by the cares and caresses common to the paternal roof, has
perhaps more confidence and candor. But the will, what has become of
it, what has it gained by this development of all the powers of the
soul? Where is its place among them? It should be their ruler,
whereas it is made their slave; they have conspired its overthrow.

It is true that very often the enfeebling of this great faculty is
due to the excessive tenderness of those who have allowed us to
contract pernicious habits. Who is it that speaks to the child's
will? Who teaches him how to use that faculty and resist with energy
the caprices of his imagination, the passions of the heart, the
empire of the senses, the seductions of the world? These are duties
that the will is called on to discharge, and as long as man shall
live such duties will be of daily occurrence,--hence the will is
destined to be constantly called into action.

The will serves us when all the other faculties fail to act. When
the exhausted imagination sinks into a lethargic slumber; when the
worried heart loses all relish for everything; when the mind,
dreading the light of truth, gives itself over to error and
prejudice; when the smoke of passion blinds the intelligence and
suffocates the senses; it is then that the will, fashioned in the
school of pliant energy, seizing the reins with a firm and vigorous
grasp, snatches the imagination from its torpor by bringing it to
bear on objects capable of arousing it; it is then that the will
animates the heart with generous and noble sentiments, and applies
the mind to the consideration of truths which enlighten and fortify it.

There exists a strange abuse relative to the nature and essence of
the will. Very often, parents, blinded by a false prejudice, see with
pleasure, and admire in their children, stubbornness and obstinacy of
character; and, looking forward to their future with an air of pride,
they say: "That child will have a strong will." Deplorable error! Woe
to the parents who fall into it, and the children who are its object!
When the will is truly strong, far from being obstinate it is, on the
contrary, pliant and tractable. No human power can restore suppleness
to the arm which a convulsive paroxysm has stiffened, yet it does not
follow that this arm is stronger than when it was in a healthy
condition. The stiffness, far from increasing its strength, decidedly
weakens it. In like manner the will's strength does not lie in
stubborn obstinacy, but rather in that pliancy which enables it to
dispose itself as circumstances may require.

A stubborn character has nothing in common with this noble and
precious faculty of the soul. And, like all the others, this faculty
possesses two degrees of elevation; in the one it comes in direct
contact with the senses and, the external world; and in the other,
raised above all sensibility, it receives its light and movement from
on high.

The will, taken in its inferior part, is nothing else than that
appetite or blind instinct which we hold in common with the brute
creation; and by which animals are governed in their choice of some
things and their rejection of others. If the will, properly so
called, consisted in this blind instinct, man would be inferior to
the ass and the mule, whose attractions and repugnances are more
imperious than those of other animals. The will, as understood in the
true Christian sense of the term, acts in contradiction to this
brutal appetite; hence they alone have a strong will who can, when
duty and conscience require it, obey their voice with docility, in
spite of all instinctive opposition.

The education of the will, I admit, is a long and painful process.
We are taught at a dear rate how to _know_ and _judge_ things;
but we must learn at a dearer price how to _will_. The culture
of the mind is the least important and the easiest part of our
education, while the culture of the will is extremely important
and demands much time and labor; yet, through a most culpable
negligence, it is just the faculty that receives the least attention
and culture. Too many imagine that the training of the will may be
done at any time and, what is still more erroneous, that age,
experience and events will suffice to do this work. Hence we see
every day poor souls entering the scene of life without an educated
will, which alone is capable of reacting against the evils and trials
from which none in this world can escape. This is the cause of that
imbecility which renders the most precious qualities of mind and
heart useless; generating inconsistencies and uncertainties which, in
the moment of trial, deprive the heart of its energy and the mind of
all light, thus leaving the soul open to all the assaults of
misfortune.

We are obliged to chronicle a painful truth when we assert that the
culture of the will is sadly neglected in education in general, but
more especially so in that of women. There are even some so blind as
to think that a strong will in woman is a dangerous quality,
alleging, as a proof of their assertion, the puerile reason, that
since woman was made to obey she should find in another's will the
rule of her actions. But, we ask, if woman can have no will of her
own, how can she exercise the virtue of obedience, since that virtue
consists in bending the will to duty? And since, in her sphere, she
is constantly called on to practice obedience it is just the reason
why she should have a strong will.

Now if from a tender age she has not given due attention to this
precious faculty of her soul; if she has contracted the fatal habit
of acting without a purpose, without reflecting, through caprice,
following by a blind instinct the allurements that flatter the senses
and imagination; if she has not learned to conquer herself, to put
duty before pleasure, and the voice of conscience above that of the
passions and honor; how will she be able to live with a husband
capricious perhaps in his desires and stubborn in his will? How will
she be able to confront his exactions or cope with his rage? How will
she bear with the faults of her servants and of those with whom she
may be obliged to live? How will she, in her warnings and reproaches
be able to blend in a just proportion mildness and firmness, to
obtain the salutary effects which she desires?

The path of life is not strewn with flowers; all is not joy and
happiness here below. Woman is destined, as well as man, to meet with
days of sorrow and bitterness, when a firm, patient will must be her
only port of safety. To woman patience is, perhaps of all virtues,
the most necessary to sustain her in mental anxieties and various
other sufferings that are inevitable; and, since patience is a fruit
of the will, it follows that a morbid will cannot produce an enduring
patience, the deficiency of which must render her life almost
intolerable.

He that sails with the current and a favorable wind need not ply his
oars; but when there is question of going in the contrary direction,
what was at first a great advantage becomes now a double
disadvantage, and he can succeed only by strenuous efforts.

During the days of youthful glee you glide gaily down the river of
life, going with the current, favored by the breeze of hope, charmed
by varied and softly-changing scenes. But this time will soon have an
end: sorrow will embitter your joys ere the frost of age shall have
cooled the blood or chilled the imagination; very soon, in a few
years, perhaps, it will knock at the door of your soul; and you will
be obliged to give this inopportune visitor admittance, to remain
with you, perhaps, for the rest of your life. Among the young ladies
of your acquaintance are there not some who are unhappy? And can you,
without a voluntary illusion, convince yourself that youth is a
preservative against misfortune? Are you prepared to ward off the
intruder? If it wounds you how will you endure the pain? It is
imprudent to delay the acquisition of a particular branch of learning
until its practical use becomes necessary; and since it is while we
are hale and hearty that we should learn to die well, so it is while
prosperity smiles on us that we should learn to bear adversity. Learn
now, while young, to support all the vicissitudes of life; make
timely provision, not only against adversity, but also against
prosperity, which for many is the more dangerous of the two.

Prepare to meet not only those who will try your patience by their
unjust or troublesome doings, but also those whose affection
officiousness, and flattery, will perhaps exact from you a greater
exercise of virtue. Be on your guard, not only against others, but
also against yourself. Learn to bear with yourself, to suffer with
courage the inconstancy of your own humor, the nights of your
imagination, the impetuosity of your character, the violent and
inordinate movements of your heart. Accustom your will to wield the
scepter and resolutely to govern the passions, which are most
