
"No, no more you would, dear Mary. Never mind," she said, glancing a
look at Frances, not altogether without suspicion, "it is only to
_play_ with, it does not signify whether it is much or little.

"William, shall I help you to a little chicken?"

"O no, Anne, you have forgot, help the _ladies_ first; and beside, you
ought to have placed me at the bottom of the table to carve this dish.
What is it?"

"Beef, William."

"O beef, very well. Come, Miss Frances, let me sit there, and you come
to the side of the table."

In haste to begin the eating part of the play, she rose immediately to
change places, when, to her disgrace, a quantity of crumbs, which had
lodged unobserved in a fold of her frock, fell out, and disordered the
neatness of the table.

"There!" said William, "we have no question to ask who took the liberty
to lessen the dishes."

"For shame, William, I--"

"O Frances, take care what you say, tell no falsehoods; I will tell one
truth, and say you are a greedy girl."

Frances began to cry again, "For shame, William, to call me names."

"I call no names, I only say what I think, and how can I help it, when
it is only just now you cried so, because you said mamma had given me a
larger piece of cake than yourself; for you must know," he continued,
turning to Mary, "we have both had one piece before, and she half of
mine to make her quiet; and then she cried again because a piece was
put by for you and Anne, and she cannot be contented now, though Anne
shares hers amongst us. If this is not being greedy, I do not know what
greedy means. It is no names, it is only saying what a thing is."

"Now I know another thing," said Anne; "when mamma called me to receive
my piece of cake, she said, 'And you shall take a piece also to Mary,'
but when she unfolded the paper, there was only _one_ piece; mamma did
not say anything, but I think she _thought_ something."

At this remark, Frances redoubled her crying, but, for the sake of a
share of the present feast, did not attempt to leave the party. No more
was said, and the feast was concluded in good humor by all except the
conscious greedy girl, and they then all went into the garden together
to finish their hour's recreation before they were called again to
their lessons.

There was a little plantation of young fir-trees at one corner of the
garden, intended to grow there for shelter from the north-west wind:
the grass was so high amongst them, that the gardener had orders to go
and carefully mow it down. He was engaged in the business when the
children ran out to see him work.

"Hush! hush!" he exclaimed, as they approached, "I have just cleared a
bough from the grass, and see what's there!"

All curiosity, they went forward on tip-toe, and were directed to
something lodged on the spreading branch of a young larch.

"A bird's nest!" said William.

"A bird's nest!" they all repeated. "But what is in it, I cannot tell."

"Look steadily," said the gardener, "and you will find out."

It was difficult to trace what it was; something all in a heap, brown
naked skin; alive, as might be known by the heaving breathing. William
putting his finger to touch them, immediately four wide mouths
stretched open, with little tongues raised, and the opening of their
throats extended to the utmost.

"Look at the little things," said William; "they thought their mother
was come when I touched the branch, and they have opened their mouths
to be ready to receive what she would put in.

"They are _blind_!" said William.

"Yes, they cannot have been hatched more than two days."

"Will they take what the mother gives them?" asked William.

"Yes," said the man, "they trust her, and swallow down what she puts
into their mouths."

"I wish the mother would come," said Anne.

"But she will not whilst we are here," William replied.

"Touch it again, William," said Frances.

William touched the edge of the nest "See!" said he, "they think the
mother is come, they stretch, their months still wider."

"Hark!" said Mary, "what an impatient noise they make: they look ready
to stretch themselves out of their nest, and as if their little mouths
would tear."

"Poor little things! do not disappoint them, give them something," said
Anne.

"We have not proper food for them," said William.

"I will run and fetch some crumbs," said Mary.

Mary soon returned with a piece of bread, and giving it to her brother
as the most experienced, he broke it into extremely small crumbs, and,
again touching the nest, awakened the expectation of the young birds:
they opened their mouths wide, and as he dropped a small crumb into
each, they moved their tongues, trying to make it pass down into their
throat. "Poor little things, they cannot swallow well, they want the
mother to put it gently down their throat with her beak."

"See! see!" said all the girls, "they want more, give them more."

William dropped his crumbs again.

"More, more, William; see! they are not satisfied."

"I dare not give them more for fear of killing them, we cannot feed
them like the mother. We will stand still at a little distance, and you
will see them go to sleep." When all was quiet, the little nestlings
shut their mouths, and dropped their heads.

"I should like to see the mother feed them."

"You would see how much better she would do it than we can; perhaps, if
we could conceal ourselves behind that laurel, she would come, but she
will be very frightened, because all is so altered now the grass is cut
down, and her nest is exposed; but I dare say she is not for off, she
will be watching somewhere."

They took William's hint, and retreated behind the laurel; they had not
waited ten minutes, before the hen bird flitted past, and, darting over
the larch, as if to inspect whether her little brood was safe, she
disappeared again. In a few minutes more, she returned, skimming round
to reconnoitre that all was safe, she perched upon the nest. Instantly
the little nestlings were awake to the summons of her touch and chirp,
and, opening their mouths wide, were ready for what she would give. She
dropt a small fly into the mouth of one of them, and, having no more,
flew away to provide for the other hungry mouths as fast as she could.
As soon as she was gone, they again shut their mouths, and dropt their
heads in silence.

"What a little bit she gave them," said Frances.

"Yes," answered William, "but she knows it is _plenty_."

"How contented the others seem to wait till she comes again!"

"Yes, Mary," William again answered, unable to resist the comparison
which had come to his mind, "they did not take the little bit away from
the other. Shall we wait till she comes again?"

"O do."

"Very well, I want to see whether the one that was fed first will take
away the bit the others got."

The allusion made a little laugh, but, seeing that Frances understood
and felt that it applied to her, Anne said, "Do not let us tease
Frances; it is better to tell her at once what her fault is, than to
seem to like to hurt her."

"Indeed, dear Anne, I have not spared to tell her, her fault, as she
knows very well, for she has often given me reason, but I cannot make
her ashamed of such things; and I know mamma is very uneasy to see it
in her."

Frances looked grave, but did not cry; turning pale, however, she said,
"O Mary take me out of this laurel--I am so sick!"

Mary hastened to take her into the freer air, but all in vain. The
sisters were alarmed, and took her in to their mamma; who received her
gravely, without expressing any concern for her indisposition.

"What can we do for Frances, mamma? Will you let her have your smelling
bottle, or shall I run and get some sal volatile?"

"Neither, my dear Mary; it is an indisposition caused by her own
selfish appetite, and probably the relief may be obtained by her
stomach rejecting what she so improperly forced upon it. We will wait a
short time, and if not, I will give her something less palatable,
perhaps, than plum-cake, but necessary to remove it."

Frances was too ill to make any remark; she became paler still, and
then quickly flushed almost a crimson color, her eyes were oppressed,
and her eyebrows contracted, and she impatiently complained,

"O my head! how it beats! What shall I do, mamma?"

"Bear the consequences of your own inordinate appetite, Frances, and
learn to subject it to the wholesome rules of temperance."

"O the nasty plum-cake! I wish you had not given me any, mamma."

"You _once_ thought the plum-cake _nice_, and you would not be
contented with the small portion I knew to be sufficient and safe for
you."

"O my head! I think it is very cruel, mamma, that you do not pity me."

"I do pity you, Frances, and will take care of you now that I see you
require help, as I perceive that you will not have any relief without
medicine."

Frances began again to cry, "O, I am so sick! I cannot take medicine. I
am sure I cannot."

"Come to your room, Frances; I shall give you something proper, and you
had better lie down after you have taken it; you will, perhaps, drop
into a sleep, and be well when you awake again." Her mamma took her
hand and led her up stairs, and Frances knew very well it was in vain
to make any objection, as her mamma always made a point of obedience.
The medicine was administered, although for some time Frances refused
to look at it. When she laid down, her mamma placed the pillow high
under her head, and, drawing the curtain to shade the light, left the
room that she might be perfectly quiet. And when she returned to the
drawing-room, she inquired of the other children what they had been
doing, and received a full account of the feast, and the bird's nest,
and all the little circumstances of each.

It was time to resume their studies, and, except that Frances was not
in her usual place, all things proceeded as before. When the lessons
were finished, they entreated their mamma to go with them, and see the
bird's nest."

"It is _so_ pretty, mamma!" said Anne; "and they know when the mother
comes, and they take what she puts into their mouths."

"We will first inquire after Frances," she answered; "if she is well
enough, she can accompany us."

"I will run up, if you will be putting on your bonnet and shawl, mamma."

"Very well, I hope you will find her recovered, we will wait your
return."

Anne soon returned,--"She is gone! I do not see her anywhere!"

"Gone! In perhaps we shall find her at play in the garden."

In this expectation they all went out, and as they drew near the spot
where the nest was, they saw Frances looking very eagerly into the
nest, and seeming to be in some agitation, then she threw something out
of her hand, and ran away as if wanting not to be seen.

"She is about some mischief," William said, and ran forward to the
nest. But what was his grief to see one of the little birds dead on the
ground, two others in the nest with pieces of bread sticking in their
mouths, gasping, unable to swallow or reject it, and the fourth with
its crop gorged, and slowly moving its little unfledged head from side
to side, struggling in death.

Full of sympathy with the little sufferer, and indignant with Frances,
he exclaimed, "Provoking girl! she has stuffed the little creatures as
she would like to stuff herself; and I believe she has killed them all."

The lively interest the other children had in the nest, impelled them
to hasten to the spot, and their lamentations, and even tears, soon
flowed.

"William, William, cannot you do anything for them? do try."

"Well, stand still and do not shake my arm--so saying, he began the
attempt, and drew the bread carefully out of the distended mouths of
the two.

"Now the other! the other, William!"

"That I cannot help," he answered: "see! she has forced it down, and we
cannot get it back again; it is dying now."

Anne picked up the dead one from off the ground, and stroking it with
her forefinger, "Poor little thing!" she said, "was she so cruel to
you!"

It was not long before they heard a rustling in the tree near the
place, and then a chirp of fright and distress. "Ah!" said their mamma,
"there is the mother! poor things, we will go a little distance to let
her come to the nest; perhaps she will be able to save the two."

They all withdrew, and the little parent bird was soon on her nest,
fluttering and chirping to awaken the dead and dying little ones, till
at length she sorrowfully brooded down on her nest, and spread her
wings over them, occasionally chirping as if to solicit an answer from
her little brood.

"Oh!" said Mary, bursting into tears, "I cannot bear it! cruel Frances,
to be so unkind to the little birds!"

"Go and find Frances," said their mamma, "and bring her to me."

"I will go," William answered, "I think I know where she will hide
herself."

It was not long before William returned, leading Frances, who very
reluctantly yielded to accompany him.

"Come here," said her mamma, stopping the accusations she saw were
ready to overwhelm the offending little girl; "come here, and let me
talk to you about this sad thing you have done to the little birds. Do
you see what you have done by your ill-judged kindness?"

"Kindness! mamma," they all exclaimed.

"Yes, dear children, she has been very faulty, but I believe she meant
to be kind, and through ignorance did this thing which proves the death
of the birds. _You_ would not have done it, William, because you have
already learnt there is such a thing as a necessary prudence to deal
out your morsels with wisdom, and in a measure suited to the age and
the capacity of the birds, and also that their food should be of a
wholesome kind suitable to their nature. Nothing of this did Frances
know, and it seems she had not learnt wisdom from the circumstances she
had herself so lately fallen into.

"It reminds me of the scripture, which teaches us to profit: 'Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it.' These little birds first attracted
your attention by their _open mouths_, which they had stretched to
receive what their poor mother was preparing to put into them. As one
lighted on the edge of their nest, they instinctively opened their
little yellow-edged beaks; she delighted to see them do so; and they,
taking with content what she had provided for them, with the utmost
confidence swallowed it down. She had a bit for every one of them in
turn and they waited patiently until it was given them. All was well
whilst they were nourished with parental tenderness and prudence, and
none other meddled with them, or ventured to give them other things,
which they, being blind, received and knew not the hand that gave, nor
the consequences of eating food not such as their parent would have
provided.

"Here you see Frances, neither prudent nor aware of consequences, has
stuffed these little birds with improper food, both in quality and
quantity. The consequences are fatal; one is dead, another is dying,
and it is very uncertain whether the others also will not die. She fed
them without measure, and their crops and throats were gorged so as to
stop their breathing. They took it greedily, because they knew not the
fatal consequences.

"Frances, you are a greedy girl. You had been suffering for this
offence, and had not the wisdom to leave it to me to apportion your
food. You opened your mouth wide, but you must remember it is not
written that _you_ are to fill it according to your own desires. 'I
will fill it,' saith the Lord. He knows what is good for us, and he
will measure his bounty according to his own wisdom."

Frances began to look ashamed and sorrowful.

"I was to you," her mamma continued, "in the affair of the cake,
endeavoring to fulfil this my duty, but you rebelled against my
discretion, and would covet more than was right. You _helped yourself_,
you gorged your stomach. You were cross and peevish, and ill, and when
the medicine had relieved you, as it was designed, you, without
