lives in a worldly manner, or in a manner like the world. Likewise, when
some one is spoken of as living a godly life, it is meant that he lives in
a godly manner, or in a manner like God. To many this is a hard saying,
but it is possible for man to live just such a life; in fact, it is the
only right way of life. A godly life is the only true life. Such a life is
demanded by the Scriptures. We are to live "soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world" (Tit.2:12).

God's dear children are told to be "followers of him" (Eph. 5:1). In some
translations this reads, "Be ye imitators of God," and in some others, "Be
ye mimickers of God." From this we understand that to be a follower of God
is to live or act in a manner like him. Again, it is said of those who
abide in Christ, that they should walk even as he walked. Our manner of
life should be as was the life of Jesus. It is said of Christ that "when
he was reviled, he reviled not again." Although he was treated most
shamefully by his enemies, he did not seek to avenge himself. When
insulting remarks were made to him, he gave no reply. To live a godly life
is to live in the same manner. When Christians are reviled, they bless;
when they are persecuted, they suffer meekly and patiently. When Jesus was
being put to death by his enemies, he prayed the Father to forgive them.
When a man who had come to take Jesus had his ear cut off, Jesus in his
tender compassion healed this bitter persecutor's wound. This is the true
spirit of godliness.

The full standard of godliness is attained to only when the whole tenor of
the life is in simplicity and godly sincerity. The apostle Paul said in
testimony that his rejoicing was this: the testimony of his conscience
that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom but by the
grace of God, he had had his conduct in the world. A godly life is wholly
free from ostentation; every act is done in purest simplicity and truest
sincerity. As God scrutinizes every act by his all-seeing eye, he
discovers no impure motive, as vain-glory or lifting up of self; for all
is in godly sincerity.

The grace of godliness in the Christian character is capable of
cultivation and increase. There is a law in both the material and
spiritual that exercise is conducive to growth. The Spirit-filled apostle
said, "Exercise thyself unto godliness." In the Emphatic this reads,
"Train thyself for piety." Here is something for every soul that has any
aspiration to be more godly in life. Train yourself for piety. To become
of deeper piety and more godly is the joy of the Christian heart. By
training we become more pious. The lawn-tender forms an espalier by
intertwining the branches of the vine. He keeps intertwining them as they
grow, and by such training forms a latticework made of shrubbery. The soul
intertwined with the meek and lowly life of Jesus will form a character of
deep piety and sincere godliness. The daily life should be intertwined
with the life of Jesus. Let there be no reaching out for anything outside
of him. For a proper development of the Christian graces there must be a
constant training or intertwining of the soul with God. This linking more
tightly is the result of growth, and growth is produced by exercise, and
exercise consists in reading the Scriptures, in prayer, and in deep
thought or heart-communion with God. The athlete takes such exercises and
eats such foods as will most properly develop and strengthen his muscles.
The soul that has any longings for more of God must exercise to have its
yearnings gratified. To be conscious of a growing up into Christ, to feel
the soul intertwining more and more with the life of God, is fulness of
joy and perfect happiness. Christian reader, is there an ardent flame of
pure love in your heart? Do you walk with Jesus in a devout, trustful,
reverential spirit? Do you oftentimes find your mind contemplating the
wonders of creation and the glories of salvation? Is your soul habituated
to breathe in the atmosphere of heaven deeply? Is that holy awe filling
you? Is that tender sensibility of spiritual things filling your heart? Is
that fine, keen edge upon your soul that gives such avidity for holy
things? Is to become more godly a sincere desire of your heart? Then
diligently perform all the duties that belong to a godly life. Some give
great diligence for a time and make spiritual gain and then lose it all in
a day of slackness. But do not slack, be constant, be persevering, be
encouraged, reach forth, press forward,--and the prize of meekness, peace,
and godliness will crown your life.




SOMETHING TO DO.


There is so much to do that every one is needed to help in doing it. In
this great, busy world of life there is something for every one to do. The
command is, "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might."
Think over these words for a moment. Does not your heart feel that they
imply great earnestness in life? They mean a life of labor--a life of
service. "Do with your might" implies putting your whole heart into your
work. Do it in just such a manner as shows you expect to make a success of
it.

God has a work for every one that comes into the world. This world is
going to be made a little better by your having come into it, or it will
be made worse. Which shall it be? No one can do the work of another, since
every one is given all he can do. It is true we are told to bear one
another's burdens. I am to help you bear your burdens; that is a part of
my work. You are to help me. We need the help of each other. But I can not
do what you ought to do; for I have all I can do. What you neglect to do
will have to go undone. If some one stops to do what you ought to do, just
as large a rent is made in his life's work as would have been made in
yours, but the reflection is on you.

A father who had five sons left them a certain work to do. He gave to each
his portion according to his ability. Upon his return he found that four
of them had done their part and done it well, but one had only partially
done his. Consequently, there was a neglected spot--a dropped stitch--
which constantly showed itself. If we fail to do the work in life that God
in his wisdom has assigned us, there will be in the Father's great plan a
blank space, a neglected part, that will show through all eternity. Is
your life or mine going to be the dropped stitch in the great web of human
life? Down in our heart there is a No for an answer, is there not?

Let not the precious moments of your life flee away unimproved. Jesus is
our example. He went about doing good. Everywhere he went, he left
evidences that he had passed along that way. O pilgrim on life's journey,
what are you leaving along the way to show in after-years that you have
passed along? Is it flowers you are strewing? Is it sunshine to cheer and
lighten the hearts of others? Sad indeed if there is none to say, "He did
me good."

It matters not how small may be the part of his great work the Father has
assigned you, do that little and do it well and do it with all the
earnestness of your heart. It is your part, and you should do it with as
much earnestness and interest as those who are engaged in the greater
works do their parts. If your part is not done well, there will not be
completeness in the divine plan. A single stitch dropped shows a blemish
in the garment. In the sight of God the most menial task is as sacred as
that of the highest order, and when well done as greatly meets his
approval.

That is a beautiful thought expressed by the Mohammed Bible. It tells of
Gabriel's being sent to earth to do two things. One was to keep King
Solomon from becoming so much engaged with the affairs of his kingdom as
to neglect the hour of prayer. The other was to give assistance to a
little ant that was trying to bear its load of food up a hillside. To
Gabriel the one duty was as important as the other because both came in
the plan of God. "Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy
might." Think these words over again. Let them have the full force of
meaning to your heart. Take as much interest in helping the little child
get the tangle out of the string as in building a church edifice.

Many are working, but alas! how few are doing their best! So much time and
labor are being wasted; so many things are being done that had as well not
be done. God wants not only our service but our best service. We are under
obligation to do our best every day. If we let a day pass by without doing
what we could and in the best way we could, our work is not perfectly
done.

God pours his blessings out upon us, but the blessing is not to end with
itself. Remember these words: "Freely ye have received, freely give." Seek
to be blessed of God, that you may pass the blessing on to others. Leave
some footprints here upon the sands of time, so that in after-years they
may guide some one to a noble deed and better way. When you reach the end
of life, you can experience no greater consolation than to know you have
done what you could. Improve the moments of time while you have them. They
are passing swiftly. They will not wait for you. Some people are going to
do, but behold, the opportunity passes before they are ready.
Opportunities do not wait. Do good while you may. You are going to give
the flower tomorrow, but tomorrow the flower may have faded. You intended
to speak a kind word yesterday, but thought you would defer until another
day. But the strain was so great the life went out, and your kind word
came too late. Today is the day to save the lost. Tomorrow may be too
late. How sad that a soul through all eternity will be crying out, "You
were going to help me, but you came too late." O God! help us to be up and
doing while it is called today. What work you are going to do, do it now
as the poet urges in the following beautiful lines:

  "Let's not be living in the past,
   On what we have been doing,
  Nor building castles in the air
   And after them pursuing.
  'Work in my vineyard, go today':
   The Master's time is narrow
  For yesterday we'll see no more--
   We may not see tomorrow.

  "If for discouragements you look,
   You certainly shall find them,
  But they are not discouragements
   Except to those who mind them.
  The future for itself will care,
   We'll not its trouble borrow;
  Sufficient evil is today,
   Then think not of the morrow.

  "Let's cast our bread upon the flood,
   In many days to gather,
  But then at eve hold out the hand
   For present blessings rather.
  We hide the seed deep in the ground
   And watch the closing furrow,
  When, lo! the field's already white,
   Not waiting for the morrow.

  "The sower and the reaper both
   May now rejoice together,
  For what they sow and gather in
   Is fruit that lives forever.
  The saint rejoices evermore,
   E'en in the midst of sorrow;
  He knows the weeping's but a night,
   Joy cometh on the morrow."

Man was made to labor. He is so constituted that he can not find true rest
and enjoyment in idleness. How much the Bible says about good works! We
are "created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before
ordained that we should walk in them." Jesus purifies unto "himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works." We are told by the scriptures to
"be careful to maintain good works" to "be not weary in well-doing," and
to "do good unto all men." Time is given us to spend in usefulness, not in
idleness. Money lost may be regained, but a moment never.

As Christians we have the mind of Jesus. With such a mind we can not be
contented unless we are doing the will of God and making the proper use of
the moments he gives us. Mind is the same quality whether it be in Jesus,
in angels, or in men, and it is governed by the same laws. It is true that
after man's transgression he was told that in the sweat of his face he
should eat bread, but this does not imply that the disposition to labor is
a result of the fall. The disposition to labor that we find in man's
constitution is not the fruit of corruption in his nature, but is a part
of his original constitution. We find this disposition in the mind of
angels. They are ministering spirits. They are doing the will of God. How
often we read in the Book that tells of heaven how angels have visited
this transitory world of ours on errands of help, mercy, and consolation.
They have closed the mouths of lions, opened prison doors, stilled the
waves, whispered comforting words, rolled away the stone, and ministered
strength and help to the needy.

Man is not designed for prayer and praise only; he is designed for service
as well. His mission is twofold: he is to adore and praise his Creator and
to serve his fellow men. Some have symbolized the two functions of man's
life by the ascending and descending of the angels on the ladder that
Jacob saw in his dream. They ascended to God and descended to man. Life
should be spent in praising God and in serving man for God's sake.

There is something to do. There is much to do. There is too much to do for
us to idle away one moment of time. A full and well-spent life is one
which is spent in doing good out of pure love to God and man. When we
shall have come down to the end of life's journey, how sweet it will be to
know that we have done all we could to help other pilgrims make their
journey in safety! There is a reward for every generous act. Heaven is
faithful and will repay. What we do here will find an eternity of reward.
Let not, therefore, one day pass you by without your doing something
purposely for God.




SPIRITUAL DRYNESS.


We often meet with those who complain of dryness and deadness in their
worship. They are very unlike the Psalmist's picture of the "blessed man."
"He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth
forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither." This is a
true picture of the Christian life. The soul should be as a watered
garden--fresh and green and sparkling. It should be a springtime. You have
seen a garden in the spring or one that is well-watered. All is beauty,
freshness, and vigor. Such a garden is used by the prophet to symbolize
the Spirit-filled soul. He says, "And the Lord shall guide thee
continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones; and
thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose
waters fail not." Isa. 58:11.

In order to have such a happy experience, however, the children of God
must meet certain conditions. The context says, "If thou draw out thy soul
to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul." If our souls are not drawn
out in pity for the hungry and we fail to do what we can to relieve them,
we need not expect anything other than a spiritual drought in our own
cases.

Spiritual dryness is sometimes the result of attachment to the world. "Set
your affections on things above, and not on things on the earth." Unless
we live by the Bible, we can not be spiritual. A little affection for the
things of earth robs the soul of spiritual life. In this matter Satan is
an excellent reasoner. He will suggest that your desires are only for the
glory of God; that you have no affection for the worldly object, but
desire it only for God's glory. A young lady to whom I gave warning said
that her desires were pure and that she had no affection for the object,
but sought only to please the Lord. Very soon, however, she came to the
realization that her soul was a desert place, and all because she had
believed the falsehood of Satan. Beware how you desire earthly things for
God's glory. Underneath may be a desire for self-gratification, ease, or
luxury. If you are troubled by a lack of sensible devotion in worship,
examine your affections. Possibly you may find some tiny roots twining
around something of this world.

Spiritual dryness may be the result of sloth. "Slothfulness casteth into a
deep sleep." Prov. 19:15. Spiritual idleness soon results in spiritual
dryness. That sophism of Satan's, "No time for prayer," is very dangerous.
Any neglect of spiritual devotion must result in lukewarmness. Oh, how
unreasonable is man and how easily the desires of the flesh deceive! If
you neglected to water your garden, you would not wonder for a moment why
it was drying up. Then, when you are neglecting to water the soul in
vigorous, spiritual exercises, why do you wonder at your being so
spiritually dull? "Awake, thou that sleepest!" Up and away to the hill of
the Lord. Be the frequent witness of a sunrise scene from the mount of
prayer.

The San Jose scale works imperceptibly at first. Oftentimes its presence
will be detected only by the experienced. Its presence will perhaps be
known first by the fruit. If your spiritual fruit is not as beautiful,
well-flavored, and fully developed as it should be, look for the presence
of sloth in the soul. The poison of sloth will get into the soul little by
little. First there will be a momentary delay of spiritual duties. Satan
is too wise to suggest an entire abandonment of them, but he will suggest
a little postponement. One delay will soon be followed by another and then
by another. These delays are an opiate that dulls the spiritual senses,
and thus they will yield more readily to postponements and finally find
pleasure in them.

Let me make this still more simple, for some may need it made very easy to
understand. When the soul is like a watered garden, it will be drawn to
God in prayer in the early morning. Any delay will cause uneasiness and
restlessness. The soul longs to hasten away to the presence of God. But
one little delay after another brings on a morbid condition. The soul
loses its keen relish; its senses become deadened, so that there is no
uneasiness; while the senses of the self-life will find pleasure in sloth.

When the soul once gets into the habit of idleness, it experiences no
little difficulty in getting out. On becoming aware of his state, the
individual may acknowledge his inactivity and make half-formed resolves to
be more earnest and diligent, only very soon to relapse into the same
former sluggishness. This virus of sloth inoculates the entire spiritual
being, poisoning the will and making spiritual activity most disagreeable.
Not only does it destroy the will of the soul, but it blindfolds the eyes
so that the individual can see no necessity for great fervency in spirit
or for diligence in spiritual exercise. In a half-dazed manner he
acknowledges that the "watchings often" and "fastings often" and "praying
always" of the apostle Paul were very consistent in him, but does not
realize that such would be as desirable in his own Christian profession.
He wonders why he is not healed as people were in the days of Paul. Why
wonder? He does not wonder why the flowers wither when it does not rain.
It is the fervent, earnest prayer that God hears.

Nothing but the greatest diligence and determination and strong laying
hold upon God will ever put spiritual sloth to death. In this respect it
is like the South American animal called the sloth. Though one species of
the sloth is only the size of a cat, and is extremely slow on the ground,
its highest rate of speed there being not more than ten feet an hour, yet
it is difficult to exterminate.

One reason why so many are slothful is that they do not realize the true
worth of prayer. Oh, I would to God that men rightly valued communion with
God or a few thoughts of him! The lifting of the heart to God in praise or
adoration is of greater value than the wealth of worlds. It is not enough
to know much about the doctrine of the Bible, to be acquainted with this
present reform, and to live a fair outward life; we must be filled with
the Spirit. We must be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, whose
leaf does not wither. Take plenty of time to gain heaven. Take time to be
spiritual. A home in heaven is worth laboring for. Work out your salvation
with fear and trembling. Spiritual dryness is the result of spiritual
indolence. Be active, and you will not be unfruitful.




PRAYER.


A work of this nature would be inexcusable for not saying something about
prayer, for who can live life triumphantly without prayer? Who can
properly estimate the true worth of prayer or rightly appreciate the
privilege of prayer? Man esteems it a great honor to be admitted into the
courts of the lords and kings of earth. What an honor it is to have
audience with the King of glory! He extends the golden scepter to us, and
we come hopefully, confidingly into his presence to tell him all that is
in our hearts. He loves us so. We should not dare to come into the awful
presence of the Great King did we not know that he loves us with an
everlasting love. When we understand his love toward us, we tell him with
joy and eagerness every desire of the heart.

Prayer is the energy and life of the soul. It is the invincible armor
which shields the devoted Christian from the poisoned missiles shot forth
from the batteries of hell. It is the mighty weapon with which he fights
life's battles unto victory. He who lives in prayer reigns triumphant. The
dark storm-clouds are driven away, mountains of discouragement are cast
into the sea, chasms of difficulties are bridged, hope is given wings,
faith increases, and joys abound. Hell may rage and threaten; but he who
is frequent and fervent in prayer experiences no alarm.

By prayer the windows of heaven are opened, and showers of refreshing dew
are rained upon the soul. It is as a watered garden, a fertile spot where
blooms the unfading rose of Sharon and the lily-of-the-valley; where
spread the undecaying, unwithering branches of the tree of life. By prayer
the soul is nourished and strengthened by the divine life. Do you long for
a brighter hope and deeper joy, for a deeper sense of the divine fulness,
for a sweeter, closer walk with God? then live in prayer. Do you love to
feel the holy flame of love burning in all its intensity in your soul?
then enkindle it often at the golden altar of prayer. Without prayer the
soul will weaken, famish, and die, the fountain of love dry up and become
as a thirsty and parched desert. Do you admire the character Jesus? Behold
his lowliness and humility, his gentleness and tender compassion. Have
they any beauty and do you desire them to grace your soul? then draw them
down from the skies in all their glorious fulness by the fervent prayer of
faith. As through the process of assimilation food is transformed into an
active, living being, so through the medium of prayer the character Jesus,
in all its transcendent beauty and glory, becomes the character of man.

If you desire victory during the day, begin it with prayer--not a few
hurried words, not a few ejaculations, but minutes of deep, intimate
communion with God. Linger at the altar of prayer until you feel particles
of glory drop in richness into your soul, scattering sweetness throughout.
In the early morning hours, when the still, balmy breath of nature plays
around you, let your soul fly away on the wings of prayer with its message
of love and praise to its Maker.

  "Sweet morning is the time to pray:
  How lovely and how sweet
  To send our early thoughts away
  Up to the mercy-seat!"

If you desire to be more deeply and sincerely pious, pray. If you desire
heights in his love, depths in his grace, fulness in his joy, and richness
in his glory, pray, pray with all sincerity of heart and intensity of
soul. Did you say you had no time for prayer? What a pity! Your happiness
and success in life depend upon prayer. Your eternal enjoyment depends
upon it. Then, oh, what a pity that you have no time for prayer! Satan
will tell you there is no need of so much praying. He will give you
indifferent feelings if he can, and tell you that you can get along well
enough without it. He will do all he possibly can to prevent your praying.
If there is not much benefit derived from prayer, why is he so concerned?
The Bible commands are: "Watch and pray," "Pray always," "Be instant in
prayer," "Pray without ceasing," etc. Beloved saints, I exhort you to a
life of prayer. I beseech you in Jesus' name to go often into your closets
and there in all earnestness of soul pray until the love of God and light
of heaven fill your beings. Pray until a rapture from the skies sweeps
over your soul, making the place of prayer the dearest spot on earth to
you.




KEEP THE ROOTS WATERED.


How often you admire a tree for the loveliness of its green foliage and
the profusion of its luscious fruit. You speak to your friend of the
beauty of the tree and of the goodness of God in bestowing such a gift to
men; but perhaps you do not speak nor even think of the coarse, unsightly
roots hidden deep in the ground. But that tree owes its beauty and its
life to roots. The foliage is bright and fresh and green because the roots
are burrowing deep in a rich and well-watered soil. The flavoring of the
fruit is generated by the roots down in the dark and silent chamber of the
earth.

Perhaps there comes to your mind now some whose faces you always see lit
up with a radiant glory. You can not fail to admire them. Their words
contain a secret power and seem to awaken in you all that is noble. They
seem to lift you into a higher life. From their words, their actions, and
their countenances flows an influence that causes you to forget the things
of earth and makes you feel as if you had joined the society of angels.
Such ones have a secret hidden root-life that generates this peculiar
charm in their visible life. Down in a closet is a secret laboratory where
the fragrance and beauty and glory that flow out of their lives are
compounded. There the roots of their inner life take hold upon the riches
of heaven's grace and drink in of the waters that flow. In their oft and
silent communion with God they take root downward, and then they go forth
into life and bear fruit upward. While others are talking with their
friends about the things of earth, they meet with God in the garden of
graces, where the sweet spices flow out and the frankincense and myrrh
scent the air, and there they become laden with a profusion of fruits and
impregnated with a sweet odor, which they bear out into the world. They
are like the tree planted by the rivers of water, whose leaf does not
wither.

O beloved pilgrim, see that the roots of your inner being are well
watered. Let them drink in the sparkling waters of life. Remember,
effectual work for God consists more in being than in doing. Do not go
about in your labor with an empty basket. It is only when you go out from
deep and silent communion with God that your labor will be effectual.
Never think that you have so much to do that you have not much time for
prayer. An hour's work done in the quiet, secret power of the Spirit is
worth more than a day of your own efforts. Keep the roots watered.
