lesser good.

82. The innumerable Buddhas, countless as the sands of Ganges, are a
testimony and a shield to all that have life in this sorrowful and
sinful world, declaring unto them that teaching most high and
difficult of acceptance, which is the true faith.

83. Whoso attaineth unto a Soul clear and enduring as diamond shall
testify unto his thankfulness for the limitless grace of the Blessed
One, for even the testimony and the safeguarding that he hath of all
the Buddhas proceed only from the fulfilment of His most merciful
promise.

84. The innumerable Buddhas, countless as the sands of Ganges, guide
into a sure trust in the Holy Name those sinful creatures and
evil-hearted that wander in the darkness of this wicked world
bearing the five signs of degeneration upon it.


OF THE MANY SUTRAS CONCERNING THE INFINITE ONE

85. Having great pity, our Eternal Father lighteneth the dark night
of ignorance, manifesting Himself in that Land of Joy as the Buddha
of Infinite Light which enlighteneth all the worlds with its
immeasurable glory.

86. That Lord most compassionate, the Buddha of immeasurable Light,
He who had attained unto the Supreme Wisdom even before the myriads
of Kalpas were, pitying them that know not, made himself manifest in
the Palace of Kapila as the Lord Sakya-muni.

87. If a man had the duration of all the myriad Kalpas, had he
innumerable tongues and each of these tongues innumerable voices,
yet should he vainly essay the praises of that Blessed One.

88. The Lord instructeth us that the way into Paradise is straight
and easy. Therefore whoso receiveth not this Truth is, in verity,
called a man that hath not eyes to see nor ears to hear.

89. The One true freedom is the Highest, and the Absolute is perfect
freedom. And when we attain unto that freedom, for us shall desire
and doubt vanish away.

90. When every man is beloved of us, even as the son of our own
body, there is the Universal Mind made perfect in us. And this shall
be in Paradise.

91. He who is in all things supreme, is Himself Nirvana, and Nirvana
is that true light that abideth in the Land that is to come, but
this world cannot know it.

92. Our Lord instructeth us that he who rejoiceth in his faith is,
in so doing, in unity with the Highest. For true faith is the seed
of light, and the seed of true light is in itself the potentiality
of that which is Deity.

93. Whoso trusteth not in the Supreme Wisdom of the Enlightened One,
clinging unto his own purblind knowledge, must suffer by fire for
long Kalpas of ages.


CONCERNING THE WELFARE OF THE PRESENT WORLD

94. He that hath unending pity, the Buddha of Infinite Life, hath
given unto us in the Sutra of Golden Light a teaching concerning
long life, that the way of long life and the welfare of the people
might be made known unto them.

95. Dengyo-Daishi, he who taught the Tendai-shu in the mount of
Hiye, hath compassionately instructed us that we should recite
Namuamida-butsu, that Holiest Name, as a sure shield against the
seven sorts of calamities.

96. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name, that is higher than all other
virtues, shall be set free from the fetters of the past, the
present, and the future.

97. To him that reciteth the Holy Name shall be good unending even
in this world, for the sin of his former births is vanquished and
his youth set free from death.

98. To him that reciteth the Holy Name, shall Brahma and Chakra the
great king bring homage, and about him shall heavenly beings and
benignant deities keep watch throughout the days and nights.

99. That man that reciteth the Holy Name shall the four mighty
Regents in Heaven guard through the days and nights against the
disturbance of all evil spirits.

100. To him that reciteth the Holy Name shall the Deity of the Earth
bring homage, watching over him throughout the day and night, as the
shadow follows its substance.

101. To him who reciteth the Holy Name, Nanda and Upananda the Naga
Kings, together with their attendant deities shall bring homage,
watching over him throughout the day and night.

102. To him who reciteth the Holy Name, the King of Death, together
with his ministers in the five worlds, shall do reverence, guarding
him throughout the days and nights.

103. Mara, the Tempter, he who is Ruler of that heaven, where
pleasures are collected, hath sworn unto the Lord to shield him from
temptation who reciteth the Holy Name.

104. All good deities in Earth and Heaven shall be gracious unto him
who reciteth the Holy Name, shielding him throughout the days and
nights.

105. All evil spirits in heaven and earth tremble before that
believer who standeth upon the Immutable promise. For even in this
world hath he the mind of Divine Illumination.

106. Kwannon and Seishi, the Bodhisattvas of incarnate Pity and
Wisdom, together with their companions, innumerable as the sands of
Ganges, shall be beside him who reciteth the Holy Name, even as the
shadow cleaves to the substance.

107. Within the Light of Buddha of Infinite Light are unnumbered
Buddhas, and of these, each and every one shall shield him who hath
within him the true Faith.

108. Whoso reciteth the Holy Name shall be surrounded himself by
those Buddhas who cannot be numbered, who in the Ten Regions with
joy protect and guide him.

Upon the Sutra of Suraigama-Samadhi, I, Shinran Shonin, have uttered
these eight lauds praising the virtue of Seishi the Bodhisattva of
Wisdom.

109. Seishi, he who is the Bodhisattva of Wisdom, having
comprehended the fullness of the Holiest Name, rising from his seat,
prostrated himself beneath the feet of our Lord, worshipping Him, he
and his fellowship, and thus he spake:

110. "O my Lord, in the ancient time, before the Kalpas innumerable
as the sands of Ganges, there was manifest in this world a Buddha,
and His Name was called--The Buddha of Infinite Light.

111. "In His footsteps twelve Buddhas followed, and twelve long
Kalpas have rolled away. And of these Buddhas the last was He that
is called that Buddha in whose glory the Sun and Moon are even as
darkness.

112. "Unto me hath that Buddha revealed the Path of the meditation
of the Supreme--that meditation wherein He instructeth us that all
the Buddhas of all the Ten Regions compassionate as even as a father
pitieth his child.

113. Whoso seeketh refuge in Buddha, as a child in the bosom of his
mother shall verily perceive Him now or in the time that shall be.
And it shall be soon.

114. "As a man encompassed by the cloud of incense casteth sweet
odours about him, so he that trusteth in the Holy Promise is
spiritually endued with the Divine Essence.

115. "When I was initiate in right doing, I attained unto the high
way of that assurance that freed me from birth and death, through
the teaching of the Noble Doctrine of the Holy Name.

"Therefore in this world, rejoicing, I guide the faithful believer
into the way of Purity."

116. Now with all praise let us give thanks unto the merciful
goodness of the Bodhisattva of Wisdom.


OF THANKSGIVING FOR NAGARJUNA, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

117. Nagarjuna, the great teacher, setting forth in many excellent
writings the praise of the Kingdom of Purity, hath instructed us to
recite the Holy Name.

118. For the Lord Buddha declared in prophecy that in India, in the
Southern Parts, should arise a great Teacher, trampling upon the
false teachings of affirmation and denial.

119. Nagarjuna, the Great Teacher, he who mightily set forth the
noble doctrine of the greater Vehicle, and himself attained unto
that height whereon a man rejoiceth eternally in the Faith, hath
very sweetly persuaded men that they should receive the teaching of
the Holy Name.

120. Nagarjuna, that great priest, setting forth the two ways--the
way that is straight and plain, and the way of high austerity,
leadeth very gently to the Ark of the Divine Promise such as are
driven through the weariness of births and deaths.

121. He who receiveth this teaching of Nagarjuna the Great Teacher,
should recite always the Holy Name, believing the Divine Promise of
the Buddha of Infinite Light.

122. Whoso would quickly attain unto that resting-place where
illusion ceaseth, should recite the Holy Name holding his mind in
steadfast piety.

123. One Ark only, that Ark of the Divine Promise of our merciful
Father, doth voyage and bear us unto the shore of the eternal
peace--even us who so long have drifted hither and thither in the
ocean of birth and death.

124. This great priest hath in one utterance set forth that the Lord
is Ruler indeed of the sacred teaching, and that herein are the holy
Bodhisattvas His ministers. Therefore should we bring homage unto
our Lord.

125. The mighty company of the Bodhisattvas utter these words, "When
we became wise in holiness, yea, we who have striven through Kalpas
unnumbered,

126. "Yet could we not root out our earthly desires which are the
very seed of birth and death. But through that only way of the
meditation of the Highest did we attain unto the final deliverance
that hath destroyed all our sin."


OF THANKSGIVING FOR VASUBANDH, THE GREAT TEACHER OF INDIA

127. Among those doctrines taught of our Lord Vasubandh, the great
priest hath persuaded us who are full of sinful desires to accept
the Divine Promise of our infinite Father.

128. Only to Him who is above all things is known the glory of the
Land of Peace. Wide as the sky and boundless is it spread forth.

129. Whoso believeth in the power of the Divine Promise shall verily
be at one with the holy Essence, even as the turbid stream is clear
and pure within the ocean depth when they have flowed together.

130. When the assemblage of the believers in the holy faith is born
within that Land of Purity that hath sprung from the lotus of the
true enlightenment, soon shall their heart's desire be fulfilled in
them.

131. The heavenly spirits and those souls freed from illusion, they
who are born in the land of purity from the wisdom deep as the ocean
of the Divine Promise, differ not the one from the other in their
powers. Pure are they as the air is pure.

132. Vasubandh, that exalted master of excelling works, who himself
hath found refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, hath declared
that whoso is borne in the Vehicle of the Divine Promise shall
without doubt attain unto the Promised Land.

133. Whoso taketh refuge in the Buddha of Infinite Light, that light
that shineth unto all the worlds of the Ten Regions, shall be
called, according to the teaching of that master of excelling works,
a man whose heart is great, and to him shall the True Light be
shown.

