and be willing to sacrifice his life for the truth of his word.

--_Illustrated Weekly Telegraph_



THE GOLDEN RULE EXEMPLIFIED

Early one morning while it was yet dark, a poor man came to my door and
informed me that he had an infant child very sick, which he was afraid
would die. He desired me to go to his home, and, if possible help them.
"For," said he, "I want to save its life, if possible." As he spoke thus
his tears ran down his face. He then added:

"I am a poor man; but, Sir, I will pay you in work as much as you ask
if you will go."

I said: "Yes, I will go with you as soon as I take a little refreshment."

"Oh, sir," said he, "I was going to try to get a bushel of corn, and get
it ground to carry home, and I am afraid the child will die before I get
there. I wish you would not wait for me"; and then he added: "We want
to save the child's life if we can."

[Illustration]

It being some miles to his house, I didn't arrive there until the sun
was two hours high in the morning, when I found the mother holding her
sick child, and six or seven little boys and girls around her, with clean
hands and faces, looking as their mother did, lean and poor. On examining
the sick child, I discovered that it was starving to death! I said to
the mother: "You don't give milk enough for this child."

She said: "I suppose I don't."

"Well," said I, "you must feed it with milk."

She answered: "I would, sir, but I can't get any to feed it with."

I then said: "It will be well, then, for you to make a little water
gruel, and feed your child."

To this she replied: "I was thinking I would if my husband brings home
some Indian meal. He has gone to try to get some and I am in hopes he
will make out."

She said this with a sad countenance. I asked her with surprise: "Why
madam, have you not got anything to eat?"

She strove to suppress a tear, and answered sorrowfully: "No sir; we
have had but little these some days."

I said: "What are your neighbors, that you should suffer among them?"

She said, "I suppose they are good people, but we are strangers in this
place, and don't wish to trouble any of them, if we can get along without."

Wishing to give the child a little manna I asked for a spoon. The little
girl went to the table drawer to get one, and her mother said to her:
"Get the longest handled spoon." As she opened the drawer, I saw only
two spoons, and both with handles broken off, but one handle was a little
longer than the other. I thought to myself this is a very poor family,
but I will do the best I can to relieve them. While I was preparing the
food for the sick child, I heard the oldest boy (who was about fourteen),
say: "You shall have the biggest piece now, because I had the biggest
piece before." I turned around to see who it was that manifested such a
principle of justice, and I saw four or five children sitting in the
corner, where the oldest was dividing a roasted potato among them. And
he said to one: "You shall have the biggest piece now," etc. But the
other said: "Why, brother, you are the oldest, and you ought to have the
biggest piece."

"No," said the other, "I had the biggest piece."

I turned to the mother, and said: "Madam, you have potatoes to eat, I
suppose?"

She replied, "We have had, but this is the last one we have left; and
the children have now roasted that for their breakfast."

On hearing this, I hastened home, and informed my wife that food was
needed for the sick family. I then prescribed a gallon of milk, two
loaves of bread, some butter, meat and potatoes, and sent my boy with
these; and had the pleasure to hear in a few days that they were all well.

--Selected.



ONLY ONE VOTE

A local option contest was going on in W--, and Mrs. Kent was trying to
influence her husband to vote "No License." Willie Kent, six years old,
was, of course on his mamma's side. The night before election Mr. Kent
went to see Willie safe in bed, and hushing his prattle, he said: "Now,
Willie, say your prayers."

"Papa, I want to say my own words, tonight," he replied. "All right, my
boy, that is the best kind of praying," answered the father.

Fair was the picture, as Willie, robed in white, knelt at his father's
knee and prayed reverently: "O dear Jesus, do help papa to vote No Whiskey
tomorrow. Amen."

Morning came, the village was alive with excitement. Women's hands, made
hard by toil, were stretched to God for help in the decision.

The day grew late and yet Mr. Kent had not been to the polls. Willie's
prayer sounded in his ears, and troubled conscience said: "Answer your
boy's petition with your ballot."

At last he stood at the polling place with two tickets in his hand--
one, license; the other, "No License." Sophistry, policy, avarice said:
"Vote License." Conscience echoed: "No License." After a moment's
hesitation, he threw from him the No License ticket and put the License
in the box.

The next day it was found that the contest was so close that it needed
but one vote to carry the town for prohibition. In the afternoon, Willie
found a No License ticket, and, having heard only one vote was necessary,
he started out to find the man who would cast this one ballot against
wrong, and in his eagerness he flew along the streets.

The saloon men were having a jubilee, and the highways were filled with
drunken rowdies. Little Willie rushed on through the unsafe crowd.

[Illustration]

Hark! a random pistol-shot from a drunken quarrel, a pierced heart, and
sweet Willie Kent had his death wound--

They carried him home to his mother. His father was summoned, and the
first swift thought that came to him, as he stood over the lifeless boy,
was: "Willie will never pray again that I vote No Whiskey."

With a strange still grief he took in his own the quiet little hand
chilling into marble coldness, and there between the fingers, firmly
clasped, was the No License ballot with which the brave little soul
thought to change the verdict of yesterday.

Mr. Kent started back in shame and sorrow. That vote in his hand might
have answered the prayer so lately on his lips now dumb, and perhaps
averted the awful calamity. Fathers, may not the hands of the "thousands
slain" make mute appeal to you? Your one vote is what God requires of
you. You are responsible for it being in harmony with His law as if on
it hung the great decision.

--_The Issue_



How a Little Girl Utilized the Telephone

A mother living not very far from the post-office in this city, tired
with watching over a sick baby, came down stairs for a moment the other
day for a few second's rest. She heard the voice of her little,
four-year-old girl in the hall by herself, and, curious to know to whom
she was talking, stopped for a moment at the half-opened door. She saw
that the little thing had pulled a chair in front of the telephone, and
stood upon it, with the piece against the side of her head. The earnestness
of the child showed that she was in no playing mood, and this was the
conversation the mother heard, while the tears stood thick in her eyes;
the little one carrying on both sides, as if she were repeating the
answers:

[Illustration]

"Hello."

"Well, who's there?"

"Is God there?"

"Yes."

"Is Jesus there?"

"Yes."

"Tell Jesus I want to speak to him."

"Well?"

"Is that you, Jesus?"

"Yes. What is it?"

"Our baby is sick, and we want you to let it get well. Won't you, now?"
No answer, and statement and question again repeated, and finally answered
by a "Yes."

The little one put the ear-piece back on its hook, clambered down from
the chair, and with a radiant face, went for her mother, who caught her
in her arms.

The baby whose life had been despaired of, began to mend that day and
got well.

--_Elmira Free Press_



Jesus Answers Ruth's Prayer

I went to sit up all night with a very sick neighbor. I took Ruth, my
little five-year-old girl along. When I started to leave the next morning,
the folks told me to leave Ruth there and they would send her home when
she awakened. Being very busy, they forgot about the child for some time,
and she got up and started home by herself. She started up the fence
which she thought led home, but she took the wrong fence and it led out
into a large pasture where there were deep canyons, bad cattle, wolves,
and other dangers.

The neighbors missed Ruth and sent their son to find out if Ruth had got
home all right. Her parents became alarmed when they were told that she
had left two hours before. Her father started out to find his precious
child, asking God to direct him to her. After going some distance, he
heard someone talking. He stopped and listened. His heart was so glad,
for he knew it was his child. She was kneeling by a post praying. And
this is what he heard her say, "O sweet Jesus, please send my papa to
find me! I'm not afraid! I know that you wouldn't let nothing hurt your
little girl, but if my papa didn't find me, my mama would cry herself
to death and my papa would almost cry his self to death. So please, sweet
Jesus, send my papa to find me."

"Here I am, Ruth," Papa said, as he walked toward her.

"Oh, Papa, I knew Jesus would send you to find me!" Ruth said as she
quickly jumped up and ran to her father, throwing her arms around him.

Mother was very happy when she saw father coming with their child, and
thanked God for caring for her.

--Essie Wilson



VERY SICK

"Mother, Mrs. Oats is very sick!" Ruth said as she came in the door,
looking very sad. "Mama, she is sick; she is awful sick. I'm sorry for
her. What shall we do for her? Let's go into the other room and pray and
ask Jesus what he wants me to do."

So Mother and her little girl went into the other room and knelt down.
Ruth began to pray and ask Jesus what she should do for Mrs. Oats. And
all of a sudden she jumped up and said, "Jesus told me what to do. He
told me to go over and lay my hands on her and pray for her, and he would
heal her." And without an answer, Ruth, who was just six years old ran
out the door and didn't stop running till she was at Mrs. Oat's bedside.


"Turn over here, Mrs. Oats," Ruth said, as she laid her hand on Mrs.
Oats' shoulder. "I came over here to pray for you and Jesus is going to
heal you."

Mrs. Oats replied, "Well, pray for me, you blessed little angel; if the
Lord would hear anyone's prayers, he would hear yours."

Ruth laid her hands on her and prayed for her and the Lord instantly
healed her. She got up and dressed and came over and told Ruth's mother
what Ruth had done.

--Essie Wilson



THE DYING GIRL'S PRAYER FOR HER DRUNKEN FATHER

A child from a poor family had an intemperate father, who often used to
abuse his wife and children. This child had been to the Sunday School--
had become pious. The physician told the father that his little girl
would die. No! he did not believe it. Yes, she will--she must die in a
few hours. The father hastened to the bedside; would not part with her,
he said.

"Yes, father, you must part with me; I am going to Jesus. Promise me two
things. One is, that you won't abuse mother any more, and will drink no
more whiskey."

He promised in a solemn, steady manner. The little girl's face lighted
up with joy.

"The other thing is, promise me that you will PRAY," said the child.

[Illustration]

"I cannot pray; don't know how," said the poor man.

"Father, kneel down, please. There, take the words after me. I will pray--
I learned how to pray in Sunday School and God has taught me how to pray,
too; my heart prays, and you must let your heart pray. Now say the words."

And she began in her simple language to pray to the Savior of sinners.
After a little he began to repeat after her; as he went on his heart was
interested, and he broke out into an earnest prayer for himself; bewailed
his sins, confessed and promised to forsake them; entered into covenant
with God; light broke out in his darkness; how long he prayed he did not
know; he seemed to have forgotten his child in his prayer. When he came
to himself he raised his head from the bed on which he had rested it;
there lay the little speaker, a lovely smile was upon the face, her hand
was in that of the father, but she had gone to be among the angels.

--_Power of Prayer_ by Prime.



LOST TREASURES

"Come, Mamie, darling," said Mrs. Peterson, "before you go into the land
of dreams you will kneel at my knee and thank your heavenly Father for
what he has given you today."

Mamie came slowly towards her mother, and said, "I've been very naughty,
and I can't pray, Mama."

"If you've been naughty dear, that is the more reason that you need to
pray."

"But, Mama, I don't think God wants little girls to come to Him when
they are naughty."

"You are not naughty now, my dear, are you?"

"No, I am not naughty now."

"Well, then come at once."

"What shall I say to God about it, Mama?"

"You can tell God how very sorry you are."

"What difference will that make?"

"When we have told God that we are sorry, and when he has forgiven us,
then we are as happy as if we had not done wrong; but we cannot undo the
mischief."

"Then, Mama, I can never be quite as rich as if I had not had a naughty
hour today."

"Never, my dear; but the thought of your loss may help you to be more
careful in the future, and we will ask God to keep you from sinning
against him again."

--Selected

