It was during the last three days of Passion Week that the votaries of
solar worship performed their severest penance. Besides fasting and
prayer, the more devout flagellated and slashed themselves and others
with knives and thongs, and carried heavy crosses up steep acclivities.
In all ultra-Catholic countries the priests, in imitation of the
ancient custom, expose in the churches figures representing the dead
Saviour, over which the laity, especially the women, weep and mourn;
and the more devout men cut and slash themselves, and each other, with
knives and thongs; and, in imitation of the imaginary tramp of Jesus
with his cross up Calvary's rugged side, bear heavy crosses up steep
acclivities.


Passion Plays.

Anciently dramas representing the passion of incarnate saviours, called
Passion plays, were enacted upon the stage. The most celebrated of
these divine tragedies, known as Prometheus Bound, and composed by the
Greek poet AEschylus, was played at Athens 500 years before the
beginning of the Christian era. To show that this sin-atoning saviour
was not chained to a rock, while vultures preyed upon his vitals, as
popularly taught, but was nailed to a tree; we quote front Potter's
translation of the play, that passage which, readily recognized as the
original of a Christian song, reads as follows:

            "Lo, streaming from the fatal tree,
               His all atoning blood:
             Is this the infinite? 'Tis he--
               Prometheus and a God.
             Well might the sun in darkness hide,
               And veil his glories in,
             When God the great Prometheus died
               For man, the creature's sin."

The veiling of the sun, as represented in these plays, having reference
to the imaginary sympathy expressed by God Sol for the sufferings of
his incarnate son, was shown upon the stage by shading the lights. The
monks of the Middle Ages enacted plays representing the passion of the
Christian Saviour, and the Bavarian peasantry, perpetuating this
custom, perform the play every tenth year.


Resurrection and Easter Festival.

In conformity to the ancient teachings, the incarnate saviours,
considered as figuratively dead for the space of three days at the
Vernal Equinox, or 21st of March, were raised to newness of life after
the expiration of that time. Hence, the 25th of March, without regard
to the day of the week, was celebrated as the anniversary of the Vernal
resurrection. On the morning of this day it was the custom of the
astrologers to say to the mourners assembled in the temples, "Be of
good cheer, sacred band of initiates; your God has risen from the dead,
his pains and his sufferings shall be your salvation." Another form of
this admonition, quoted from an ancient poem in reference to the
Phoenician Tammuz, reads as follows:

            "Trust ye saints, your God restored,
             Trust ye in your risen Lord,
             For the pains which he endured,
             Your salvation hath procured."

Then would begin the festivities of Easter, which corrupted from
Eostre, and derived from the Teutonic mythology, was one of the many
names given to the goddess of Spring. In the observance of this
festival the temples were adorned with floral offerings; the Hilaries
sang their joyful lays; the fires upon the pyres, or the fire-altars,
were extinguished and rekindled with new fire, or sacred fire of the
stars, which the Astrologers taught was brought down from heaven by the
winged genius Perseus, the constellation which, anciently, was in
conjunction with the Vernal Equinox; Paschal candles, lit from the new
fire, were distributed to the faithful and the Paschal feast, Easter
feast, or the feast of the passover, was eaten in commemoration of the
passion of the incarnate saviours, or, in other words, of the passage
of the sun across the celestial equator. In ultra-Catholic countries
the descent of the sacred fire is represented by some secretly arranged
pyrotechny, and the credulous laity, believing they have witnessed a
miraculous display, eagerly solicit Paschal candles lit from it; and in
imitation of the ancient festivities in honor of the return of spring,
all Catholic churches, and most of Protestant ones, are adorned with
flowers, the bells ring out their merriest peals, and "Gloria in
Excelsis" and other jubilant songs, similar to the lays of the ancient
Hilaries, are sung.


Annunciation.

The anniversary of the Nativity having been placed on the 25th of
December, according to the course of nature, the 25th of March was
anciently celebrated as the anniversary of the annunciation, and is
still observed on that day, and the duty of saluting the Virgin (Virgo)
and announcing her conception by the Holy Ghost or third person in the
Trinity was assigned to the genius of Spring. In the Chaldean version
of the Gospel story the name of Gabriel was given to this
personification, and in the Christian version of that story he is made
to perform the same office; see Luke i. 26-35.


Ascension.

Celebrating the anniversary of the ascension forty days after Easter,
it was anciently observed on the 4th of May, and it was taught that the
incarnate saviours ascended bodily into heaven, in a golden chariot
drawn by four horses caparisoned with gilded trappings, all glittering
like fire in the fervid sunlight. Hence when we read in II. Kings ii.
11, that "There appeared a chariot of fire and horses of fire, . . .
and Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven," we must accept this
text as descriptive of the imaginary ascension of one of the incarnate
saviours of ancient Judaism.


Assumption.

When the Summer solstice was in the sign of Cancer, the sun was in that
of Virgo in the month of August, and the anniversary of the Assumption
was observed on the 15th of that month, and is so observed at the
present time. The fact that the anniversary of the Ascension precedes
that of the Assumption explains why Jesus is made to say to his mother
(Virgo) soon after his resurrection, "Touch me not: for I am not yet
ascended to my Father." John xx. 17.


The Lord's Supper.

In the ancient solar worship the so-called ordinance of the Lord's
Supper was observed just before the anniversary of the autumnal
crucifixion; and consisting of bread and wine, in reference to the
maturing of the crops and completion of the vintage, was, like the
modern festival of the hardest home, a season of thankfulness to the
Lord (God Sol) as the giver of all good gifts. Hence being observed but
once a year, it was in reality not an ordinance but an anniversary; and
the fact that Christians partake of these emblems so frequently during
the year indicates that the original signification of the Lord's Supper
has been lost.


Transubstantiation,

or the conversion of the bread and wine into the veritable blood and
body of Christ, is a doctrine of the Catholic church which was derived
from the ritual of the ancient solar worship.

In the 26th chapter of Matthew we have an account of the Lord
administering the last supper to his Disciples on the eve of the
autumnal crucifixion, and in verse 27 it reads that "he took the cup,
and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it." The
compilers of the modern version of the Gospel story must surely have
inadvertently copied this text as it read in the ancient versions of
that old, old story, which, when observed in remembrance of "Our Lord
and Saviour Bacchus," was called the Bacchanalia, or feast, of Bacchus.
At these orgies the participants give thanks for the wine by not only
drinking all of one cup, but many more; in fact they kept on drinking
until they fell under the table.


Autumnal Crucifixion.

The beneficent seasons of Spring and Summer coming to an end at the
Autumnal Equinox, the 22d of September was made the anniversary of the
Autumnal Crucifixion. The vernal resurrection and Autumnal Crucifixion,
representing the alternate triumph of the personified principles of
Good and Evil, as manifested in the diversity of the seasons; we find
appropriately expressed in two religious pictures. In the one, the
Saviour, appealing as a vigorous young man, surrounded by a brilliant
halo, representing the rays of the all-conquering Sun of Spring, is
rising triumphantly from the tomb, before whom the demon of Winter, or
Devil, is seen retreating in the background. In the other, the
vanquished Saviour, represented by the figure of a lean and haggard
man, with a crown of thorns upon his head, around which appears a faint
halo of the Sun's declining rays, and above which is placarded the
letters I. N. R. I., the initial letters of Latin words, signifying the
life to come, or the eternal life, is suspended upon the cross, at the
foot of which his mother Mary (Virgo) is represented as kneeling in a
mourning attitude, and by her side is seen a serpent and a skull, the
emblems of Evil and of Death.

[See plate5.gif & plate6.gif]


Michaelmas.

In the calendar of the ancient Astral Worship, the fourth day after the
Autumnal Equinox was dedicated to the genius of Autumn. In the Chaldean
allegories the name of Michael was given to this personification, and
called Michaelmas, or feast of Michael. In the Catholic calendar this
anniversary is placed an the 29th of September, instead of the 26th of
that month, while that of St. Matthew, the Christian genius of Autumn,
which should be placed on the 26th of that month, is observed on the
21st.

Thus we have shown that the anniversaries of the ancient Astral Worship
were all fixed, and from church history we learn that they were so
observed by the Christians until the Council of Nice in the year 325,
when the Bishops assembled at that celebrated convocation, desiring to
have the festival of Easter celebrated on Sunday, which had been made
the Sabbath by the edict of Constantine, in the year 321, ordered that
it should be observed on the Sunday of the full moon, which comes on or
next after the Vernal Equinox. Hence, converting it into a movable
festival, its allied feasts and fast days were also made movable.



PERSONIFICATIONS OF THE DIVISIONS OF TIME.

In the ancient solar fables the several divisions of time were
personified and made to pay homage to the Triune Deity, supposed to be
enthroned above the firmament.


The Hours.

The genii of the hours were designated as Elders, and we find them
described in the 4th chapter of Revelation as sitting round about the
throne upon four and twenty seats, clothed in white raiment, and crowns
of gold upon their heads.


The Days.

Each day of the year was appropriately personified, and these genii of
the days constitute the saints of the Christian calendar. Of these we
will refer to but one. According to the ancient belief that the sun
stood still for the space of three days at each of the cardinal points,
the 24th of June was made the first of the decreasing days; and
dedicating it to St. John the Baptist, he is made to say in reference
to his opposite, (the genius of the 25th of December, and first of the
increasing days,) "He must increase, but I must decrease." This text,
found in John iii. 30, simply means that the days of the one must
increase in length, while the days of the other must decrease.


The Months.

The fable of the twelve labors having been superseded by others, in
which the genii of the twelve signs of the Zodiac, corresponding to the
months, were designated as angels, and made to minister to God Sol
while making his apparent annual revolution; but, when constituted the
attendants of the incarnate saviours during their imaginary earth life,
they were personified as men and called Disciples. Of these genii of
the months we will refer only to the first and the last. The first
month, dedicated to the genius known in the mythology as Janus, and
from which was derived the name January, was portrayed with two faces,
the one of an old man looking mournfully backward over the old year,
and the other of a young man looking joyfully forward to the new year.
This personification, made the opener of the year, and represented as
holding a pair of cross-keys, was called "The carrier of the keys of
the kingdom of heaven." Hence, the Popes of Rome, claiming apostolic
succession from Peter, the Janus of the Christian twelve, wear
cross-keys as the insignia of their office. Sometimes a crosier, or
shepherd's crook, is substituted for one of the keys, in reference to
his arrogated office of the leader of the sheep! The authority for the
assumption that the Popes are Peter's successors is found in Matthew
xvi. 18, 19; but its fallacy becomes apparent when we bear in mind that
the scriptures are but collections of astronomical allegories, and that
the Peter referred to in the text was not a man, but the mythical
genius of the month of January.

In reference to the last month, we find that the authors of the ancient
solar fables, ever doubting whether God Sol, after inaugurating Winter
by his supposed retreat from the earth, would return to revivify nature
with his life-giving rays, gave to the genius of the twelfth month the
title of the Doubter. In the Christian calendar this personification is
known as Thomas, and a more specific dedication of the shortest day of
the year having been made to him, the 21st day of December is called
St. Thomas day.


The Seasons.

When the cardinal points were in the constellations Leo, Taurus,
Aquarius and Scorpio, the astrologers, objecting to the signification
of the latter, substituted the constellation in conjunction therewith,
which is known as Aquila (Ak-we-la) or Flying Eagle. In the allegorical
astronomy of that remote period these genii of the seasons were
designated as beasts, and as such we find them referred to in
Revelation iv. 7, which reads as follows: "And the first beast was like
a lion (Leo), and the second beast like a calf (Taurus, the bull calf),
and the third beast had a face as a man, (Aquarius, the waterman) and
the fourth beast was like a flying eagle (Aquila)." In the first chapter
of Ezekiel, the prophet, the genii of the seasons are referred to in
the same manner.

These genii of the seasons, standing, imaginarily, at the four corners
of the heavens, were called corner-keepers, and making them witnesses
to God Sol in his apparent annual revolution, the founders of the
Astral Worship designated them as Archangels, Evangelists, God-Spellers
or Gospel-Bearers, and claiming inspiration from them, composed four
different histories of the birth and earth-life of the incarnate
saviour, to each of which they attached a name, and called these
records the Gospel story. In its Chaldean version, the names of
Gabriel, Michael, Raphael and Uriel were given them; but while the
first two of these are mentioned in the Christian Gospel story, its
