down before entering thy house. O thou of tresses ending in graceful
curls, the foolish Kichaka afflicted by the god of desire, will, on
seeing me, offer me insult. Therefore, I will not go to his quarters.
Thou hast, O princess, many maids under thee. Do thou, good betide thee,
send one of them. For, surely, Kichaka will insult me.' Sudeshna said,
'Sent by me, from my abode, surely he will not harm thee.' And having
said this, she handed over a golden vessel furnished with a cover. And
filled with apprehension, and weeping, Draupadi mentally prayed for the
protection of the gods, and set out for Kichaka's abode for fetching
wine. And she said, 'As I do not know another person save my husbands,
by virtue of that Truth let Kichaka not be able to overpower me although
I may approach his presence.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "And that helpless damsel then adored Surya for
a moment. And Surya, having considered all that she urged, commanded a
_Rakshasa_ to protect her invisibly. And from that time the _Rakshasa_
began to attend upon that blameless lady under any circumstances. And
beholding Krishna in his presence like a frightened doe, the _Suta_ rose
up from his seat, and felt the joy that is felt by a person wishing to
cross to the other shore, when he obtains a boat."


SECTION XVI

"Kichaka said, 'O thou of tresses ending in beautiful curls, thou art
welcome. Surely, the night that is gone hath brought me an auspicious
day, for I have got thee today as the mistress of my house. Do what is
agreeable to me. Let golden chains, and conchs and bright ear-rings made
of gold, manufactured in various countries, and beautiful rubies and
gems, and silken robes and deer-skins, be brought for thee. I have also
an excellent bed prepared for thee. Come, sitting upon it do thou drink
with me the wine prepared from the honey flower.' Hearing these words,
Draupadi said, 'I have been sent to thee by the princess for taking away
wine. Do thou speedily bring me wine, for she told me that she is
exceedingly thirsty.' At this, Kichaka said, 'O gentle lady, others will
carry what the princess wants.' And saying this, the _Suta's_ son caught
hold of Draupadi's right arm. And at this, Draupadi exclaimed, 'As I
have never, from intoxication of the senses, been unfaithful to my
husbands even at heart, by that Truth, O wretch, I shall behold thee
dragged and lying powerless on the ground.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Seeing that large-eyed lady reproving him in
that strain, Kichaka suddenly seized her by the end of her upper garment
as she attempted to run away. And seized with violence by Kichaka, the
beautiful princess, unable to tolerate it, and with frame trembling with
wrath, and breathing quickly, dashed him to the ground. And dashed to
the ground thus, the sinful wretch tumbled down like a tree whose roots
had been cut. And having thrown Kichaka down on the ground when the
latter had seized her, she, trembling all over rushed to the court,
where king Yudhishthira was, for protection. And while she was running
with all her speed, Kichaka (who followed her), seizing her by the hair,
and bringing her down on the ground, kicked her in the very presence of
the king. Thereupon, O Bharata, the _Rakshasa_ that had been appointed
by Surya to protect Draupadi, gave Kichaka a shove with a force mighty
as that of the wind. And overpowered by the force of _Rakshasa_, Kichaka
reeled and fell down senseless on the ground, even like an uprooted
tree. And both Yudhishthira and Bhimasena who were seated there, beheld
with wrathful eyes that outrage on Krishna by Kichaka. And desirous of
compassing the destruction of the wicked Kichaka, the illustrious Bhima
gnashed his teeth in rage. And his forehead was covered with sweat, and
terrible wrinkles appeared thereon. And a smoky exhalation shot forth
from his eyes, and his eye-lashes stood on end. And that slayer of
hostile heroes pressed his forehead with his hands. And impelled by
rage, he was on the point of starting up with speed. Thereat king
Yudhishthira, apprehensive of discovery, squeezed his thumbs and
commanded Bhima to forbear. And Bhima who then looked like an infuriate
elephant eyeing a large tree, was thus forbidden by his elder brother.
And the latter said, 'Lookest thou, O cook, for trees for fuel. If thou
art in need of faggots, then go out and fell trees.' And the weeping
Draupadi of fair hips, approaching the entrance of the court, and seeing
her melancholy lords, desirous yet of keeping up the disguise duty-bound
by their pledge, with eyes burning in fire, spoke these words unto the
king of the Matsyas, 'Alas, the son of a _Suta_ hath kicked today the
proud and beloved wife of those whose foe can never sleep in peace even
if four kingdoms intervene between him and them. Alas, the son of a
_Suta_ hath kicked today the proud and beloved wife of those truthful
personages, who are devoted to Brahmanas and who always give away
without asking any thing in gift. Alas! the son of a _Suta_ hath kicked
today the proud and beloved wife of those, the sounds of whose
kettle-drums and the twangs of whose bow-strings are ceaselessly heard.
Alas, the son of a _Suta_ hath kicked today the proud and beloved wife
of those who are possessed of abundant energy and might, and who are
liberal in gifts and proud of their dignity. Alas, the son of a _Suta_
hath kicked today the proud and beloved wife of those who, if they had
not been fettered by the ties of duty, could destroy this entire world.
Where, alas, are those mighty warriors today who, though living in
disguise, have always granted protection unto those that solicit it? Oh,
why do those heroes today, endued as they are with strength and
possessed of immeasurable energy, quietly suffer, like eunuchs, their
dear and chaste wife to be thus insulted by a _Suta's_ son? Oh, where is
that wrath of theirs, that prowess, and that energy, when they quietly
bear their wife to be thus insulted by a wicked wretch? What can I (a
weak woman) do when Virata, deficient in virtue, coolly suffereth my
innocent self to be thus wronged by a wretch? Thou dost not, O king, act
like a king towards this Kichaka. Thy behaviour is like that of a
robber, and doth not shine in a court. That I should thus be insulted in
thy very presence, O Matsya, is highly improper. Oh, let all the
courtiers here look at this violence of Kichaka. Kichaka is ignorant of
duty and morality, and Matsya also is equally so. These courtiers also
that wait upon such a king are destitute of virtue.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "With these and other words of the same kind the
beautiful Krishna with tearful eyes rebuked the king of the Matsyas. And
hearing her, Virata said, 'I do not know what your dispute has been out
of our sight. Not knowing the true cause how can I show my
discrimination?' Then the courtiers, having learnt every thing,
applauded Krishna, and they all exclaimed, 'Well done!' 'Well done!' and
censured Kichaka. And the courtiers said, 'That person who owneth this
large-eyed lady having every limb of hers endued with beauty for his
wife, possesseth what is of exceeding value and hath no occasion to
indulge in any grief. Surely, such a damsel of transcendent beauty and
limbs perfectly faultless is rare among men. Indeed, it seems to us that
she is a goddess.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "And while the courtiers, having beheld Krishna
(under such circumstances), were applauding her thus, Yudhishthira's
forehead, from ire, became covered with sweat. And that bull of the Kuru
race then addressed that princess, his beloved spouse, saying, 'Stay not
here, O Sairindhri; but retire to the apartments of Sudeshna. The wives
of heroes bear affliction for the sake of their husbands, and undergoing
toil in ministering unto their lords, they at last attain to region
where their husbands may go. Thy Gandharva husbands, effulgent as the
sun, do not, I imagine, consider this as an occasion for manifesting
their wrath, inasmuch as they do not rush to thy aid. O _Sairindhri_,
thou art ignorant of the timeliness of things, and it is for this that
thou weepest as an actress, besides interrupting the play of dice in
Matsya's court. Retire, O _Sairindhri_; the Gandharvas will do what is
agreeable to thee. And they will surely display thy woe and take the
life of him that hath wronged thee.' Hearing these words the
_Sairindhri_ replied, 'They of whom I am the wedded wife are, I ween,
extremely kind. And as the eldest of them all is addicted to dice, they
are liable to be oppressed by all.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "And having said this, the fair-hipped Krishna
with dishevelled hair and eyes red in anger, ran towards the apartments
of Sudeshna. And in consequence of having wept long her face looked
beautiful like the lunar disc in the firmament, emerged from the clouds.
And beholding her in that condition, Sudeshna asked, 'Who, O beauteous
lady, hath insulted thee? Why, O amiable damsel, dost thou weep? Who,
gentle one, hath done thee wrong? Whence is this thy grief?' Thus
addressed, Draupadi said, 'As I went to bring wine for thee, Kichaka
struck me in the court in the very presence of the king, as if in the
midst of a solitary wood.' Hearing this, Sudeshna said, 'O thou of
tresses ending in beautiful curls, as Kichaka, maddened by lust hath
insulted thee that art incapable of being possessed by him, I shall
cause him to be slain if thou wishest it.' Thereupon Draupadi answered,
'Even others will slay him,--even they whom he hath wronged. I think it
is clear that he will have to go to the abode of Yama this very day!'"


SECTION XVII

Vaisampayana said, "Thus insulted by the _Suta's_ son, that illustrious
princess, the beautiful Krishna, eagerly wishing for the destruction of
Virata's general, went to her quarters. And Drupada's daughter of dark
hue and slender waist then performed her ablutions. And washing her body
and cloths with water Krishna began to ponder weepingly on the means of
dispelling her grief. And she reflected, saying, 'What am I to do?
Whither shall I go? How can my purpose be effected?' And while she was
thinking thus, she remembered Bhima and said to herself, 'There is none
else, save Bhima, that can today accomplish the purpose on which my
heart is set!' And afflicted with great grief, the large-eyed and
intelligent Krishna possessed of powerful protectors then rose up at
night, and leaving her bed speedily proceeded towards the quarters of
Bhimasena, desirous of beholding her lord. And possessed of great
intelligence, the daughter of Drupada entered her husband's quarters,
saying, 'How canst thou sleep while that wretched commander of Virata's
forces, who is my foe, yet liveth, having perpetrated today _that_ (foul
act)?'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then the chamber where Bhima slept, breathing
hard like a lion, being filled with the beauty of Drupada's daughter and
of the high-souled Bhima, blazed forth in splendour. And Krishna of
sweet smiles, finding Bhimasena in the cooking apartments, approached
him with the eagerness of a three-year old cow brought up in the woods,
approaching a powerful bull, in her first season, or of a she-crane
living by the water-side approaching her mate in the pairing season. And
the Princess of Panchala then embraced the second son of Pandu, even as
a creeper embraces a huge and mighty _Sala_ on the banks of the Gomati.
And embracing him with her arms, Krishna of faultless features awaked
him as a lioness awaketh a sleeping lion in a trackless forest. And
embracing Bhimasena even as a she-elephant embraceth her mighty mate,
the faultless Panchali addressed him in voice sweet as the sound of a
stringed instrument emitting _Gandhara_ note. And she said, 'Arise,
arise! Why dost thou, O Bhimasena, lie down as one dead? Surely, he that
is not dead, never suffereth a wicked wretch that hath disgraced his
wife, to live.' And awakened by the princess, Bhima of mighty arms, then
rose up, and sat upon his couch overlaid with a rich bed. And he of the
Kuru race then addressed the princess--his beloved wife, saying, 'For
what purpose hast thou come hither in such a hurry? Thy colour is gone
and thou lookest lean and pale. Tell me everything in detail. I must
know the truth. Whether it be pleasurable or painful, agreeable, or
disagreeable, tell me all. Having heard everything, I shall apply the
remedy. I alone, O Krishna, am entitled to thy confidence in all things,
for it is I who deliver thee from perils again and again! Tell me
quickly what is thy wish, and what is the purpose that is in thy view,
and return thou to thy bed before others awake.'"


SECTION XVIII

"Draupadi said, 'What grief hath she not who hath Yudhishthira for her
husband? Knowing all my griefs, why dost thou ask me? The _Pratikamin_
dragged me to the court in the midst of an assembly of courtiers,
calling me a slave. That grief, O Bharata, consumeth me. What other
princess, save Draupadi, would live having suffered such intense misery?
Who else, save myself, could bear such second insult as the wicked
Saindhava offered me while residing in the forest? Who else of my
position, save myself, could live, having been kicked by Kichaka in the
very sight of the wicked king of the Matsyas? Of what value is life, O
Bharata, when thou, O son of Kunti, dost not think me miserable,
although I am afflicted with such woes? That vile and wicked wretch, O
Bharata, known by the name of Kichaka, who is the brother-in-law of king
Virata and the commander of his forces, every day, O tiger among men,
addresses me who am residing in the palace as a _Sairindhri_, saying,
_Do thou become my wife_.--Thus solicited, O slayer of foes, by that
wretch deserving to be slain, my heart is bursting like a fruit ripened
in season. Censure thou that elder brother of thine addicted to
execrable dice, through whose act alone I have been afflicted with such
woe. Who else, save him that is a desperate gambler, would play, giving
up kingdom and everything including even myself, in order to lead a life
in the woods? If he had gambled morning and evening for many years
together, staking _nishkas_ by thousand and other kinds of substantial
wealth, still his silver, and gold, and robes, and vehicles, and teams,
and goats, and sheep, and multitudes of steeds and mares and mules would
not have sustained any diminution. But now deprived of prosperity by the
rivalry of dice, he sits dumb like a fool, reflecting on his own
misdeeds. Alas, he who, while sojourning, was followed by ten thousand
elephants adorned with golden garlands now supports himself by casting
dice. That Yudhishthira who at Indraprastha was adored by kings of
incomparable prowess by hundreds of thousands, that mighty monarch in
whose kitchen a hundred thousand maid-servants, plate in hand, used
every day to feed numerous guests day and night, that best of liberal
men, who gave (every day) a thousand _nishkas_, alas, even he
overwhelmed with woe in consequence of gambling which is the root of all
evil, now supporteth himself by casting dice. Bards and encomiasts by
thousands decked with ear-rings set with brilliant gems, and gifted with
melodious voice, used to pay him homage morning and evening. Alas, that
Yudhishthira, who was daily waited upon by a thousand sages of ascetic
merit, versed in the _Vedas_ and having every desire gratified, as his
courtiers,--that Yudhishthira who maintained eighty-eight thousands of
domestic _Snatakas_ with thirty maid-servants assigned unto each, as
also ten thousand _yatis_ not accepting anything in gift and with vital
seed drawn up,--alas, even that mighty king now liveth in such guise.
That Yudhishthira who is without malice, who is full of kindness, and
who giveth every creature his due, who hath all these excellent
attributes, alas--even he now liveth in such guise. Possessed of
firmness and unbaffled prowess, with heart disposed to give every
creature his due, king Yudhishthira, moved by compassion, constantly
maintained in his kingdom the blind, the old, the helpless, the
parentless and all others in his dominions in such distress. Alas, that
Yudhishthira becoming a dependant and a servant of Matsya, a caster of
dice in his court, now calls himself Kanka. He unto whom while residing
at Indraprastha, all the rulers of earth used to pay timely
tribute,--alas, even he now begs for subsistence at another's hands. He
to whom the kings of the earth were in subjection,--alas, even that king
having lost his liberty, liveth in subjection to others. Having dazzled
the entire earth like the sun by his energy, that Yudhishthira, alas, is
now a courtier of king Virata. O Pandu's son, that Pandava who was
respectfully waited upon in court by kings and sages, behold him now
waiting upon another. Alas, beholding Yudhishthira a courtier sitting
beside another and breathing adulatory speeches to the other, who can
help being afflicted with grief? And beholding the highly wise and
virtuous Yudhishthira, undeserving as he is of serving others, actually
serving another for sustenance, who can help being afflicted with grief?
And, O hero, that Bharata who was worshipped in court by the entire
earth, do thou now behold him worshipping another. Why then, O Bharata,
dost thou not regard me as one afflicted with diverse miseries, like one
forlorn and immersed in a sea of sorrow?'"


SECTION XIX

"Draupadi said, 'This O Bharata, that I am going to tell thee is another
great grief of mine. Thou shouldst not blame me, for I tell thee this
from sadness of heart. Who is there whose grief is not enhanced at sight
of thee, O bull of the Bharata race, engaged in the ignoble office of a
cook, so entirely beneath thee and calling thyself as one _of Vallava_
caste? What can be sadder than this, that people should know thee as
Virata's cook, Vallava by name, and therefore one that is sunk in
servitude? Alas, when thy work of the kitchen is over, thou humbly
sittest beside Virata, calling thyself as Vallava the cook, then
despondency seizeth my heart. When the king of kings in joy maketh thee
fight with elephants, and the women of the inner apartments (of the
palace) laugh all the while, then I am sorely distressed. When thou
fightest in the inner apartments with lions, tigers, and buffaloes, the
princess Kaikeyi looking on, then I almost swoon away. And when Kaikeyi
and those maidservants, leaving their seats, come to assist me and find
that instead of suffering any injury in limbs mine is only a swoon, the
princess speaks unto her women, saying, 'Surely, it is from affection
and the duty begot of intercourse that this lady of sweet smiles
grieveth for the exceedingly powerful cook when he fights with the
beasts. Sairindhri is possessed of great beauty and Vallava also is
eminently handsome. The heart of woman is hard to know, and they, I
fancy, are deserving of each other. It is, therefore, likely that the
Sairindhri invariably weepeth (at such times) on account of her
connection with her lover. And then, they both have entered this royal
family at the same time. And speaking such words she always upbraideth
me. And beholding me wroth at this, she suspects me to be attached to
thee.' When she speaketh thus, great is the grief that I feel. Indeed,
on beholding thee, O Bhima of terrible prowess, afflicted with such
calamity, sunk as I already am in grief on account of Yudhishthira, I do
not desire to live. That youth who on a single car had vanquished all
celestials and men, is now, alas, the dancing master of king Virata's
daughter. That Pritha's son of immeasurable soul, who had gratified Agni
in the forest of Khandava, is now living in the inner apartments (of a
palace) like fire hid in a well. Alas, the bull among men, Dhananjaya,
who was ever the terror of foes, is now living in a guise that is
despaired by all. Alas, he whose mace-like arms have been cicatrized in
consequence of the strokes of his bow-string, alas that Dhananjaya is
passing the days in grief covering his wrists with bracelets of conchs.
Alas, that Dhananjaya the twang of whose bow-string and the sound of
whose leathern fences made every foe tremble, now entertains only
gladdened women with his songs. Oh, that Dhananjaya whose head was
formerly decked with a diadem of solar splendour, is now wearing braids
ending in unsightly curls. O Bhima, beholding that terrible bowman,
Arjuna, now wearing braids and in the midst of women, my heart is
stricken with woe. That high-souled hero who is master of all the
