suggest anything. When they welled up from the Apostle's glowing
heart they were like a fiery lava-stream. But the stream has cooled,
and, to a good many of us, they seem as barren and sterile as the
long ago cast out coils of lava on the sides of a quiescent volcano.
They are so well-worn and familiar to our ears that they create but
vague conceptions in our minds, and they seem to many of us to be far
away from a bearing upon our daily lives. But you much mistake Paul
if you take him to be a mere theological writer. He is an earnest
evangelist, trying to draw men to love and trust in Jesus Christ. And
his writings, however old-fashioned and doctrinally hard they may
seem to you, are all throbbing with life--instinct with truths that
belong to all ages and places, and which fit close to every one of
us.

I do not know if I can give any kind of freshness to these words, but
I wish to try. To begin with, I notice the highly-imaginative and
picturesque form into which the Apostle casts his thoughts here. He,
as it were, draws back a curtain, and lets us see two royal figures,
which are eternally opposed and dividing the dominion between them.
Then he shows us the issues to which these two rulers respectively
conduct their subjects; and the question that is trembling on his
lips is 'Under which of them do you stand?' Surely that is not fossil
theology, but truths that are of the highest importance, and ought to
be of the deepest interest, to every one of us. They are to you the
former, whether they are the latter or not.

I. So, first, look at the two Queens who rule over human life.

Sin and Grace are both personified; and they are both conceived of as
female figures, and both as exercising dominion. They stand face to
face, and each recognises as her enemy the other. The one has
established her dominion: 'Sin _hath_ reigned.' The other is
fighting to establish hers: 'That Grace _might_ reign.' And the
struggle is going on between them, not only on the wide field of the
world; but in the narrow lists of the heart of each of us.

Sin reigns. The truths that underlie that solemn picture are plain
enough, however unwelcome they may be to some of us, and however
remote from the construction of the universe which many of us are
disposed to take.

Now, let us understand our terms. Suppose a man commits a theft. You
may describe it from three different points of view. He has thereby
broken the law of the land; and when we are thinking about that we
call it crime. He has also broken the law of 'morality,' as we call
it; and when we are looking at his deed from that point of view, we
call it vice. Is that all? He has broken something else. He has
broken the law of God; and when we look at it from that point of view
we call it sin. Now, there are a great many things which are sins
that are not crimes; and, with due limitations, I might venture to
say that there are some things which are sins that are not to be
qualified as vices. Sin implies God. The Psalmist was quite right
when he said; 'Against Thee, Thee only have I sinned'; although he
was confessing a foul injury he had done to Bathsheba, and a glaring
crime that he had committed against Uriah. It was as to God, and in
reference to Him only, that his crime and his vice darkened and
solidified into sin.

And what is it, in our actions or in ourselves considered in
reference to God, that makes our actions sins and ourselves sinners?
Remember the prodigal son. 'Father! Give me the portion of goods that
falleth to me.' There you have it all. He went away, and 'wasted his
substance in riotous living.' To claim myself for my own; to act
independently of, or contrary to, the will of God; to try to shake
myself clear of Him; to have nothing to do with Him, even though it
be by mere forgetfulness and negligence, and, in all my ways to
comport myself as if I had no relations of dependence on and
submission to him--that is sin. And there may be that oblivion or
rebellion, not only in the gross vulgar acts which the law calls
crimes, or in those which conscience declares to be vices, but also
in many things which, looked at from a lower point of view, may be
fair and pure and noble. If there is this assertion of self in them,
or oblivion of God and His will in them, I know not how we are to
escape the conclusion that even these fall under the class of sins.
For there can be no act or thought, truly worthy of a man, situated
and circumstanced as we are, which has not, for the very core and
animating motive of it, a reference to God.

Now, when I come and say, as my Bible teaches me to say, that this is
the deepest view of the state of humanity that sin reigns, I do not
wish to fall into the exaggerations by which sometimes that statement
has been darkened and discredited; but I do want to press upon you,
dear brethren, this, as a matter of _personal_ experience, that
wherever there is a heart that loves, and leaves God out, and
wherever there is a will that resolves, determines, impels to action,
and does not bow itself before Him, and wherever there are hands that
labour, or feet that run, at tasks and in paths self-chosen and
unconsecrated by reference to our Father in heaven, no matter how
great and beautiful subsidiary lustres may light up their deeds, the
very heart of them all is transgression of the law of God. For this,
and nothing else or less, is His law: 'Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, and with all thy mind.' I do not charge you with crimes.
You know how far it would be right to charge you with vices. _I_
do not charge you with anything; but I pray you to come with me and
confess: 'We all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.'

I suppose I need not dwell upon the difficulty of getting a lodgment
for this conviction in men's hearts. There is no sadder, and no more
conclusive proof, of the tremendous power of sin over us, than that
it has lulled us into unconsciousness, hard to be broken, of its own
presence and existence. You remember the old stories--I suppose there
is no truth in them, but they will do for an illustration--about some
kind of a blood-sucking animal that perched upon a sleeping man, and
with its leathern wings fanned him into deeper drowsiness whilst it
drew from him his life-blood. That is what this hideous Queen does
for men. She robes herself in a dark cloud, and sends out her behests
from obscurity. And men fancy that they are free whilst all the while
they are her servants. Oh, dear brethren! you may call this theology,
but it is a simple statement of the facts of our condition. 'Sin hath
reigned.'

And now turn to the other picture, 'Grace might reign.' Then there is
an antagonistic power that rises up to confront the widespread
dominion of this anarch of old. And this Queen comes with twenty
thousand to war against her that has but ten thousand on her side.

Again I say, let us understand our terms. I suppose, there are few of
the keywords of the New Testament which have lost more of their
radiance, like quicksilver, by exposure in the air during the
centuries than that great word Grace, which is always on the lips of
this Apostle, and to him had music in its sound, and which to us is a
piece of dead doctrine, associated with certain high Calvinistic
theories which we enlightened people have long ago grown beyond, and
got rid of. Perhaps Paul was more right than we when his heart leaped
up within him at the very thought of all which he saw to lie
palpitating and throbbing with eager desire to bless men, in that
great word. What does he mean by it? Let me put it into the shortest
possible terms. This antagonist Queen is nothing but the love of God
raying out for ever to us inferior creatures, who, by reason of our
sinfulness, have deserved something widely different. Sin stands
there, a hideous hag, though a queen; Grace stands here, 'in all her
gestures dignity and love,' fair and self-communicative, though a
sovereign. The love of God in exercise to sinful men: that is what
the New Testament means by grace. And is it not a great thought?

Notice, for further elucidation of the Apostle's conception, how he
sacrifices the verbal correctness of his antithesis in order to get
to the real opposition. What is the opposite of Sin? Righteousness.
Why does he not say, then, that 'as Sin hath reigned unto death, even
so might Righteousness reign unto life'? Why? Because it is not man,
or anything in man, that can be the true antagonist of, and victor
over, the regnant Sin of humanity; but God Himself comes into the
field, and only He is the foe that Sin dreads. That is to say, the
only hope for a sin-tyrannised world is in the out-throb of the love
of the great heart of God. For, notice the weapon with which He
fights man's transgression, if I may vary the figure for a moment. It
is only subordinately punishment, or law, or threatening, or the
revelation of the wickedness of the transgression. All these have
their places, but they are secondary places. The thing that will
conquer a world's wickedness is nothing else but the manifested love
of God. Only the patient shining down of the sun will ever melt the
icebergs that float in all our hearts. And wonderful and blessed it
is to think that, in whatsoever aspects man's sin may have been an
interruption and a contradiction of the divine purpose, out of the
evil has come a good; that the more obdurate and universal the
rebellion, the more has it evoked a deeper and more wondrous
tenderness. The blacker the thundercloud, the brighter glows the
rainbow that is flung across it. So these two front each other, the
one settled in her established throne--

'Fierce as ten furies, terrible as hell--'

the other coming on her adventurous errand to conquer the world to
herself, and to banish the foul tyranny under which men groan. 'Sin
hath reigned.' Grace is on her way to her dominion.

II. Notice the gifts of these two Queens to their subjects.

'Sin hath reigned in death' (as the accurate translation has it);
'Grace reigns unto eternal life.' The one has established her
dominion, and its results are wrought out, her reign is, as it were,
a reign in a cemetery; and her subjects are dead. If you want a
modern instance to illustrate an ancient saw, think of Armenia. There
is a reign whose gifts to its subjects are death. Sin reigns, says
Paul, and for proof points to the fact that men die.

Now, I am not going to enter into the question here, and now, whether
physical death passes over mankind because of the fact of
transgression. I do not suppose that this is so. But I ask you to
remember that when the Bible says that 'Death passed upon all men,
for all have sinned,' it does not merely mean the physical fact of
dissolution, but it means that fact along with the accompaniments of
it, and the forerunners of it, in men's consciences. 'The sting of
death is sin,' says Paul, in another place. By which he implies,
I presume, that, if it were not for the fact of alienation from God
and opposition to His holy will, men might lie down and die as
placidly as an animal does, and might strip themselves for it 'as for
a bed, that longing they'd been sick for.' No doubt, there was death
in the world long before there were men in it. No doubt, also, the
complex whole phenomenon gets its terror from the fact of men's sin.

But it is not so much that physical fact with its accompaniments
which Paul is thinking about when he says that 'sin reigns in death,'
as it is that solemn truth which he is always reiterating, and which
I pray you, dear friends, to lay to heart, that, whatever activity
there may be in the life of a man who has rent himself away from
dependence upon God--however vigorous his brain, however active his
hand, however full charged with other interests his life, in the very
depth of it is a living death, and the right name for it is death. So
this is Sin's gift--that over our whole nature there come mortality
and decay, and that they who live as her subjects are dead whilst
they live. Dear brethren, that may be figurative, but it seems to me
that it is absurd for you to turn away from such thoughts, shrug your
shoulders, and say, 'Old-fashioned Calvinistic theology!' It is
simply putting into a vivid form the facts of your life and of your
condition in relation to God, if you are subjects of Sin.

Then, on the other hand, the other queenly figure has her hands
filled with one great gift which, like the fatal bestowment which Sin
gives to her subjects, has two aspects, a present and a future one.
Life, which is given in our redemption from Death and Sin, and in
union with God; that is the present gift that the love of God holds
out to every one of us. That life, in its very incompleteness here,
carries in itself the prophecy of its own completion hereafter, in a
higher form and world, just as truly as the bud is the prophet of the
flower and of the fruit; just as truly as a half-reared building is
the prophecy of its own completion when the roof tree is put upon it.
The men that here have, as we all may have if we choose, the gift of
life eternal in the knowledge of God through Jesus Christ His Son,
must necessarily tend onwards and upwards to a region where Death is
beneath the horizon, and Life flows and flushes the whole heaven.
Brother! do you put out your whole hand to take the poisoned gift
from the claw-like hand of that hideous Queen; or do you turn and
take the gift of life eternal from the hands of the queenly Grace?

III. How this queenly Grace gives her gifts.

You observe that the Apostle, as is his wont--I was going to
say--gets himself entangled in a couple of almost parenthetical or,
at all events, subsidiary sentences. I suppose when he began to write
he meant to say, simply, 'as Sin hath reigned unto death, so Grace
might reign unto life.' But notice that he inserts two
qualifications: 'through righteousness,' 'through Jesus Christ our
Lord.' What does he mean by these?

He means this, first, that even that great love of God, coming
throbbing straight from His heart, cannot give eternal life as a mere
matter of arbitrary will. God can make His sun to shine and His rain
to fall, 'on the unthankful and on the evil,' and if God could, God
would give eternal life to everybody, bad and good; but He cannot.
There must be righteousness if there is to be life. Just as sin's
fruit is death, the fruit of righteousness is life.

He means, in the next place, that whilst there is no life without
righteousness, there is no righteousness without God's gift. You
cannot break away from the dominion of Sin, and, as it were,
establish yourselves in a little fortress of your own, repelling her
assaults by any power of yours. Dear brethren, we cannot undo the
past; we cannot strip off the poisoned garment that clings to our
limbs; we can mend ourselves in many respects, but we cannot of our
own volition and motion clothe ourselves with that righteousness of
which the wearers shall be worthy to 'pass through the gate into the
city.' There is no righteousness without God's gift.

And the other subsidiary clause completes the thought: 'through
Christ.' In Him is all the grace, the manifest love, of God gathered
together. It is not diffused as the nebulous light in some chaotic
incipient system, but it is gathered into a sun that is set in the
centre, in order that it may pour down warmth and life upon its
circling planets. The grace of God is in Christ Jesus our Lord. In
Him is life eternal; therefore, if we desire to possess it we must
possess Him. In Him is righteousness; therefore, if we desire our own
foulness to be changed into the holiness which shall see God, we must
go to Jesus Christ. Grace reigns in life, but it is life through
righteousness, which is through Jesus Christ our Lord.

So, then, brother, my message and my petition to each of you
are--knit yourself to Him by faith in Him. Then He who is 'full of
grace and truth' will come to you; and, coming, will bring in His
hands righteousness and life eternal. If only we rest ourselves on
Him, and keep ourselves close in touch with Him; then we shall be
delivered from the tyranny of the darkness, and translated into the
Kingdom of the Son of His love.




'THE FORM OF TEACHING'

   '... Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine
   which was delivered you.'--ROMANS vi. 17.


There is room for difference of opinion as to what Paul precisely
means by 'form' here. The word so rendered appears in English as
_type_, and has a similar variety of meaning. It signifies
originally a mark made by pressure or impact; and then, by natural
transitions, a _mould_, or more generally a _pattern_ or _example_,
and then the copy of such an example or pattern, or the cast from
such a mould. It has also the other meaning which its English
equivalent has taken on very extensively of late years, such as, for
instance, you find in expressions like 'An English type of face,'
meaning thereby the general outline which preserves the
distinguishing characteristics of a thing. Now we may choose between
these two meanings in our text. If the Apostle means type in the
latter sense of the word, then the rendering 'form' is adequate, and
he is thinking of the Christian teaching which had been given to the
Roman Christians as possessing certain well-defined characteristics
which distinguished it from other kinds of teaching--such, for
instance, as Jewish or heathen.

But if we take the other meaning, then he is, in true Pauline
fashion, bringing in a vivid and picturesque metaphor to enforce his
thought, and is thinking of the teaching which the Roman Christians
had received as being a kind of mould into which they were thrown, a
pattern to which they were to be conformed. And that that is his
meaning seems to me to be made a little more probable by the fact
that the last words of my text would be more accurate if inverted,
and instead of reading, as the Authorised Version does, 'that form of
doctrine which was delivered you,' we were to read, as the Revised
Version does, 'that form whereunto ye were delivered.'

If this be the general meaning of the words before us, there are
three thoughts arising from them to which I turn briefly. First,
Paul's Gospel was a definite body of teaching; secondly, that
teaching is a mould for conduct and character; lastly, that teaching
therefore demands obedience. Take, then, these three thoughts.

I. First, Paul's Gospel was a definite body of teaching.

Now the word 'doctrine,' which is employed in my text, has, in the
lapse of years since the Authorised Version was made, narrowed its
significance. At the date of our Authorised translation 'doctrine'
was probably equivalent to 'teaching,' of whatever sort it might be.
Since then it has become equivalent to a statement of abstract
principles, and that is not at all what Paul means. He does not mean
to say that his gospel was a form of doctrine in the sense of being a
theological system, but he means to say that it was a body of
teaching, the nature of the teaching not being defined at all by the
word. Therefore we have to notice that the great, blessed peculiarity
of the Gospel is that it is a teaching, not of abstract dry
principles, but of concrete historical facts. From these principles
in plenty may be gathered, but in its first form as it comes to men
fresh from God it is not a set of propositions, but a history of
deeds that were done upon earth. And, therefore, is it fitted to be
the food of every soul and the mould of every character.

Jesus Christ did not come and talk to men about God, and say to them
what His Apostles afterwards said, 'God is love,' but He lived and
died, and that mainly was His teaching about God. He did not come to
men and lay down a theory of atonement or a doctrine of propitiation,
or theology about sin and its relations to God, but He went to the
Cross and gave Himself for us, and that was His teaching about
sacrifice. He did not say to men 'There is a future life, and it is
of such and such a sort,' but He came out of the grave and He said
'Touch Me, and handle Me. A spirit hath not flesh and bones,' and
_therefore_ He brought life and immortality to light, by no empty
words but by the solid realities of facts. He did not lecture upon
ethics, but He lived a perfect human life out of which all moral
principles that will guide human conduct may be gathered. And so,
instead of presenting us with a _hortus siccus_, with a botanic
collection of scientifically arranged and dead propositions, He led
us into the meadow where the flowers grow, living and fair. His life
and death, with all that they imply, are the teaching.

Let us not forget, on the other hand, that the history of a fact is
not the mere statement of the outward thing that has happened.
Suppose four people, for instance, standing at the foot of Christ's
Cross; four other 'evangelists' than the four that we know. There is
a Roman soldier; there is a Pharisee; there is one of the weeping
crowd of poor women, not disciples; and there is a disciple. The
first man tells the fact as he saw it: 'A Jewish rebel was crucified
this morning.' The second man tells the fact: 'A blaspheming apostate
suffered what he deserved to-day.' The woman tells the fact: 'A poor,
gentle, fair soul was martyred to-day.' And the fourth one tells the
fact: 'Jesus Christ, the Son of God, died for our sins.' The three
tell the same fact; the fourth preaches the Gospel--that is to say,
Christian teaching is the facts plus their explanation; and it is
that which differentiates it from the mere record which is of no
avail to anybody. So Paul himself in one of his other letters puts
it. This is his gospel: Jesus of Nazareth 'died for _our_ sins
according to the Scriptures, and He was buried, and rose again the
third day, according to the Scriptures.' That is what turns the bald
story of the facts into teaching, which is the mould for life.

So on the one hand, dear brethren, do not let us fall into the
superficial error of fancying that our religion is a religion of
emotion and morality only. It is a religion with a basis of divine
truth, which, being struck away, all the rest goes. There is a revolt
against dogma to-day, a revolt which in large measure is justified as
an essential of progress, and in large measure as an instance of
progress; but human nature is ever prone to extremes, and in the
revolt from man's dogma there is danger of casting away God's truth.
Christianity is not preserved when we hold by the bare facts of the
outward history, unless we take with these facts the interpretation
of them, which declares the divinity and the sacrifice of the Son of
God.

And on the other hand, let us keep very clear in our minds the broad
and impassable gulf of separation between the Christian teaching as
embodied in the Scripture and the systems which Christianity has
evolved therefrom. Men's intellects must work upon the pabulum that
is provided for them, and a theology in a systematised form is a
necessity for the intellectual and reasonable life of the Christian
Church. But there is all the difference between man's inferences from
and systematising of the Christian truth and the truth that lies
here. The one is the golden roof that is cast over us; the other is
too often but the spiders' webs that are spun across and darken its
splendour. It is a sign of a wholesome change in the whole sentiment
and attitude of the modern Christian mind that the word 'doctrine,'
which has come to mean men's inferences from God's truth, should have
been substituted as it has been in our Revised Version of my text, by
the wholesome Christian word 'teaching.' The teaching is the facts
with the inspired commentary on them.

II. Secondly, notice that this teaching is in Paul's judgment a mould
or pattern according to which men's lives are to be conformed.

There can be no question but that, in that teaching as set forth in
Scripture, there does lie the mightiest formative power for shaping
our lives, and emancipating us from our evil.

Christ is _the_ type, the mould into which men are to be cast.
The Gospel, as presented in Scripture, gives us three things. It
gives us the perfect mould; it gives us the perfect motive; it gives
us the perfect power. And in all three things appears its distinctive
glory, apart from and above all other systems that have ever tried to
affect the conduct or to mould the character of man.

In Jesus Christ we have in due combination, in perfect proportion,
all the possible excellences of humanity. As in other cases of
perfect symmetry, the very precision of the balanced proportions
detracts from the apparent magnitude of the statue or of the fair
building, so to a superficial eye there is but little beauty there
that we should desire Him, but as we learn to know Him, and live
nearer to Him, and get more familiar with all His sweetness, and with
all His power, He towers before us in ever greater and yet never
repellent or exaggerated magnitude, and never loses the reality of
His brotherhood in the completeness of His perfection. We have in the
Christ the one type, the one mould and pattern for all striving, the
'glass of form,' the perfect Man.

And that likeness is not reproduced in us by pressure or by a blow,
but by the slow and blessed process of gazing until we become like,
beholding the glory until we are changed into the glory.

It is no use having a mould and metal unless you have a fire. It is
no use having a perfect Pattern unless you have a motive to copy it.
Men do not go to the devil for want of examples; and morality is not
at a low ebb by reason of ignorance of what the true type of life is.
But nowhere but in the full-orbed teaching of the New Testament will
you find a motive strong enough to melt down all the obstinate
hardness of the 'northern iron' of the human will, and to make it
plastic to His hand. If we can say, 'He loved me and gave Himself for
me' then the sum of all morality, the old commandment that 'ye love
one another' receives a new stringency, and a fresh motive as well as
a deepened interpretation, when His love is our pattern. The one
thing that will make men willing to be like Christ is their faith
that Christ is their Sacrifice and their Saviour. And sure I am of
this, that no form of mutilated Christianity, which leaves out or
falteringly proclaims the truth that Christ died on the Cross for the
sins of the world, will ever generate heat enough to mould men's
wills, or kindle motives powerful enough to lead to a life of growing
imitation of and resemblance to Him. The dial may be all right, the
hours most accurately marked in their proper places, every minute
registered on the circle, the hands may be all right, delicately
fashioned, truly poised, but if there is no main-spring inside, dial
and hands are of little use, and a Christianity which says, 'Christ
is the Teacher; do you obey Him?' is as impotent as the dial face
with the broken main-spring. What we need, and what, thank God, in
'the teaching' we have, is the pattern brought near to us, and the
motive for imitating the pattern, set in motion by the great thought,
'He loved me and gave Himself for me.'

Still further, the teaching is a power to fashion life, inasmuch as
it brings with it a gift which secures the transformation of the
believer into the likeness of his Lord. Part of 'the teaching' is the
fact of Pentecost; part of the teaching is the fact of the Ascension;
and the consequence of the Ascension and the sure promise of the
Pentecost is that all who love Him, and wait upon Him, shall receive
into their hearts the 'Spirit of life in Christ Jesus' which shall
make them free from the law of sin and death.

So, dear friends, on the one hand, let us remember that our religion
is meant to work, that we have nothing in our creed that should not
be in our character, that all our _credenda_ are to be our _agenda_;
everything _believed_ to be something _done_; and that if we content
ourselves with the simple acceptance of the teaching, and make no
effort to translate that teaching into life, we are hypocrites or
self-deceivers.

And, on the other hand, do not let us forget that religion is the
soul of which morality is the body, and that it is impossible in the
nature of things that you shall ever get a true, lofty, moral life
which is not based upon religion. I do not say that men cannot be
sure of the outlines of their duty without Christianity, though I am
free to confess that I think it is a very maimed and shabby version
of human duty, which is supplied, minus the special revelation of
that duty which Christianity makes; but my point is, that the
knowledge will not work without the Gospel.

The Christian type of character is a distinct and manifestly separate
thing from the pagan heroism or from the virtues and the
righteousnesses of other systems. Just as the musician's ear can
tell, by half a dozen bars, whether that strain was Beethoven's, or
Handel's, or Mendelssohn's, just as the trained eye can see
Raffaelle's magic in every touch of his pencil, so Christ, the
Teacher, has a style; and all the scholars of His school carry with
them a certain mark which tells where they got their education and
who is their Master, if they are scholars indeed. And that leads me
to the last word.

III. This mould demands obedience.

By the very necessity of things it is so. If the 'teaching' was but a
teaching of abstract truths it would be enough to assent to them. I
believe that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right
angles, and I have done my duty by that proposition when I have said
'Yes! it is so.' But the 'teaching' which Jesus Christ gives and
_is_, needs a good deal more than that. By the very nature of the
teaching, assent drags after it submission. You can please yourself
whether you let Jesus Christ into your minds or not, but if you
do let Him in, He will be Master. There is no such thing as taking
Him in and not obeying.

And so the requirement of the Gospel which we call faith has in it
quite as much of the element of obedience as of the element of trust.
And the presence of that element is just what makes the difference
between a sham and a real faith. 'Faith which has not works is dead,
being alone.' A faith which is all trust and no obedience is neither
trust nor obedience.

And that is why so many of us do not care to yield ourselves to the
faith that is in Jesus Christ. If it simply came to us and said, 'If
you will trust Me you will get pardon,' I fancy there would be a good
many more of us honest Christians than are so. But Christ comes and
says, 'Trust Me, follow Me, and take Me for your Master; and be like
Me,' and one's will kicks, and one's passions recoil, and a thousand
of the devil's servants within us prick their ears up and stiffen
their backs in remonstrance and opposition. 'Submit' is Christ's
first word; submit by faith, submit in love.

That heart obedience, which is the requirement of Christianity, means
freedom. The Apostle draws a wonderful contrast in the context
between the slavery to lust and sin, and the freedom which comes from
obedience to God and to righteousness. Obey the Truth, and the Truth,
in your obeying, shall make you free, for freedom is the willing
submission to the limitations which are best. 'I will walk at liberty
for I keep Thy precepts.' Take Christ for your Master, and, being His
servants, you are your own masters, and the world's to boot. For 'all
things are yours if ye are Christ's.' Refuse to bow your necks to
that yoke which is easy, and to take upon your shoulders that burden
which is light, and you do not buy liberty, though you buy
licentiousness, for you become the slaves and downtrodden vassals of
the world and the flesh and the devil, and while you promise
yourselves liberty, you become the bondsmen of corruption. Oh! then,
let us obey from the heart that mould of teaching to which we are
delivered, and so obeying, we shall be free indeed.




'THY FREE SPIRIT'

   'The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made
   me free from the law of sin and death.'--ROMANS viii. 2.


We have to distinguish two meanings of law. In the stricter sense, it
signifies the authoritative expressions of the will of a ruler
proposed for the obedience of man; in the wider, almost figurative
sense, it means nothing more than the generalised expression of
constant similar facts. For instance, objects attract one another in
certain circumstances with a force which in the same circumstances is
always the same. When that fact is stated generally, we get the law
of gravitation. Thus the word comes to mean little more than a
regular process. In our text the word is used in a sense much nearer
the latter than the former of these two. 'The law of sin and of
death' cannot mean a series of commandments; it certainly does not
mean the Mosaic law. It must either be entirely figurative, taking
sin and death as two great tyrants who domineer over men; or it must
mean the continuous action of these powers, the process by which they
work. These two come substantially to the same idea. The law of sin
and of death describes a certain constancy of operation, uniform and
fixed, under the dominion of which men are struggling. But there is
another constancy of operation, uniform and fixed too, a mighty
antagonistic power, which frees from the dominion of the former: it
is 'the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus.'

I. The bondage.

The Apostle is speaking about himself as he was, and we have our own
consciousness to verify his transcript of his own personal experience.
Paul had found that, by an inexorable iron sequence, sin
worked in himself the true death of the soul, in separation from God,
in the extinction of good and noble capacities, in the atrophying of
all that was best in himself, in the death of joy and peace. And this
iron sequence he, with an eloquent paradox, calls a 'law,' though its
very characteristic is that it is lawless transgression of the true
law of humanity. He so describes it, partly, because he would place
emphasis on its dominion over us. Sin rules with iron sway; men madly
obey it, and even when they think themselves free, are under a bitter
tyranny. Further, he desires to emphasise the fact that sin and death
are parts of one process which operates constantly and uniformly.
This dark anarchy and wild chaos of disobedience and transgression
has its laws. All happens there according to rule. Rigid and
inevitable as the courses of the stars, or the fall of the leaf from
the tree, is sin hurrying on to its natural goal in death. In this
fatal dance, sin leads in death; the one fair spoken and full of
dazzling promises, the other in the end throws off the mask, and
slays. It is true of all who listen to the tempting voice, and the
deluded victim 'knows not that the dead are there, and that her
guests are in the depth of hell.'

II. The method of deliverance.

The previous chapter sounded the depths of human impotence, and
showed the tragic impossibility of human efforts to strip off the
poisoned garment. Here the Apostle tells the wonderful story of how
he himself was delivered, in the full rejoicing confidence that what
availed for his emancipation would equally avail for every captived
soul. Because he himself has experienced a divine power which breaks
the dreadful sequence of sin and of death, he knows that every soul
may share in the experience. No mere outward means will be sufficient
to emancipate a spirit; no merely intellectual methods will avail to
set free the passions and desires which have been captured by sin. It
is vain to seek deliverance from a perverted will by any
republication, however emphatic, of a law of duty. Nothing can touch
the necessities of the case but a gift of power which becomes an
abiding influence in us, and develops a mightier energy to overcome
the evil tendencies of a sinful soul.

That communicated power must impart life. Nothing short of a Spirit
of life, quick and powerful, with an immortal and intense energy,
will avail to meet the need. Such a Spirit must give the life which
it possesses, must quicken and bring into action dormant powers in
the spirit that it would free. It must implant new energies and
directions, new motives, desires, tastes, and tendencies. It must
bring into play mightier attractions to neutralise and deaden
existing ones; as when to some chemical compound a substance is added
which has a stronger affinity for one of the elements, a new thing is
made.

Paul's experience, which he had a right to cast into general terms
and potentially to extend to all mankind, had taught him that such a
new life for such a spirit had come to him by union with Jesus
Christ. Such a union, deep and mystical as it is, is, thank God, an
experience universal in all true Christians, and constitutes the very
heart of the Gospel which Paul rejoiced to believe was entrusted to
his hands for the world. His great message of 'Christ in us' has been
wofully curtailed and mangled when his other message of 'Christ for
us' has been taken, as it too often has been, to be the whole of his
Gospel. They who take either of these inseparable elements to be the
whole, rend into two imperfect halves the perfect oneness of the
Gospel of Christ.

We are often told that Paul was the true author of Christian
doctrine, and are bidden to go back from him to Jesus. If we do so,
we hear His grave sweet voice uttering in the upper-room the deep
words, 'I am the Vine, ye are the branches'; and, surely, Paul is but
repeating, without metaphor, what Christ, once for all, set forth in
that lovely emblem, when he says that 'the law of the Spirit of life
in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death.' The
branches in their multitude make the Vine in its unity, and the sap
which rises from the deep root through the brown stem, passes to
every tremulous leaf, and brings bloom and savour into every cluster.
Jesus drew His emblem from the noblest form of vegetative life; Paul,
in other places, draws his from the highest form of bodily life, when
he points to the many members in one body, and the Head which governs
all, and says, 'So also is Christ.' In another place he points to the
noblest form of earthly love and unity. The blessed fellowship and
sacred oneness of husband and wife are an emblem sweet, though
inadequate, of the fellowship in love and unity of spirit between
Christ and His Church.

And all this mysterious oneness of life has an intensely practical
side. In Jesus, and by union with Him, we receive a power that
delivers from sin and arrests the stealthy progress of sin's
follower, death. Love to Him, the result of fellowship with Him, and
the consequence of life received from Him, becomes the motive which
makes the redeemed heart delight to do His will, and takes all the
power out of every temptation. We are in Him, and He in us, on
condition, and by means, of our humble faith; and because my faith
thus knits me to Him it is 'the victory that overcomes the world' and
breaks the chains of many sins. So this communion with Jesus Christ
is the way by which we shall increase that triumphant spiritual life,
which is the only victorious antagonist of the else inevitable
consequence which declares that the 'soul that sinneth it shall die,'
and die even in sinning.

III. The process of the deliverance.

Following the R.V. we read 'made me free,' not 'hath made me.' The
reference is obviously, as the Greek more clearly shows, to a single
historical event, which some would take to be the Apostle's baptism,
but which is more properly supposed to be his conversion. His strong
bold language here does not mean that he claims to be sinless. The
emancipation is effected, although it is but begun. He holds that at
that moment when Jesus appeared to him on the road to Damascus, and
he yielded to Him as Lord, his deliverance was real, though not
complete. He was conscious of a real change of position in reference
to that law of sin and of death. Paul distinguishes between the true
self and the accumulation of selfish and sensual habits which make up
so much of ourselves. The deeper and purer self may be vitalised in
will and heart, and set free even while the emancipation is not
worked out in the life. The parable of the leaven applies in the
individual renewal; and there is no fanaticism, and no harm, in
Paul's point of view, if only it be remembered that sins by which
passion and externals overbear my better self are mine in
responsibility and in consequences. Thus guarded, we may be wholly
right in thinking of all the evils which still cleave to the
renewed Christian soul as not being part of it, but destined to drop
away.

And this bold declaration is to be vindicated as a prophetic
confidence in the supremacy and ultimate dominion of the new power
which works even through much antagonism in an imperfect Christian.
Paul, too, calls 'things that are not as though they were.' If my
spirit of life is the 'Spirit of life in Christ,' it will go on to
perfection. It is Spirit, therefore it is informing and conquering
the material; it is a divine Spirit, therefore it is omnipotent; it
is the Spirit of life, leading in and imparting life like itself,
which is kindred with it and is its source; it is the Spirit of life
in Christ, therefore leading to life like His, bringing us to
conformity with Him because the same causes produce the same effects;
it is a life in Christ having a law and regular orderly course of
development. So, just as if we have the germ we may hope for fruit,
and can see the infantile oak in the tightly-shut acorn, or in the
egg the creature which shall afterwards grow there, we have in this
gift of the Spirit, the victory. If we have the cause, we have the
effects implicitly folded in it; and we have but to wait further
development.

The Christian life is to be one long effort, partial, and gradual, to
unfold the freedom possessed. Paul knew full well that his
emancipation was not perfect. It was, probably, after this triumphant
expression of confidence that he wrote, 'Not as though I had already
attained, either were already perfect.' The first stage is the gift
of power, the appropriation and development of that power is the work
of a life; and it ought to pass through a well-marked series and
cycle of growing changes. The way to develop it is by constant
application to the source of all freedom, the life-giving Spirit, and
by constant effort to conquer sins and temptations. There is no such
thing in the Christian conflict as a painless development. We must
mortify the deeds of the body if we are to live in the Spirit. The
Christian progress has in it the nature of a crucifixion. It is to be
effort, steadily directed for the sake of Christ, and in the joy of
His Spirit, to destroy sin, and to win practical holiness. Homely
moralities are the outcome and the test of all pretensions to
spiritual communion.

We are, further, to perfect holiness in the fear of the Lord, by
'waiting for the Redemption,' which is not merely passive waiting,
but active expectation, as of one who stretches out a welcoming hand
to an approaching friend. Nor must we forget that this accomplished
deliverance is but partial whilst upon earth. 'The body is dead
because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness.' But
there may be indefinite approximation to complete deliverance. The
metaphors in Scripture under which Christian progress is described,
whether drawn from a conflict or a race, or from a building, or from
the growth of a tree, all suggest the idea of constant advance
against hindrances, which yet, constant though it is, does not reach
the goal here. And this is our noblest earthly condition--not to be
pure, but to be tending towards it and conscious of impurity. Hence
our tempers should be those of humility, strenuous effort, firm hope.
We are as slaves who have escaped, but are still in the wilderness,
with the enemies' dogs baying at our feet; but we shall come to the
land of freedom, on whose sacred soil sin and death can never tread.




CHRIST CONDEMNING SIN

   'For what the law could not do, in that it was weak
   through the flesh, God sending His own Son in the
   likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin
   in the flesh.'--ROMANS viii. 3.


In the first verse of this chapter we read that 'There is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus.' The reason of that
is, that they are set free from the terrible sequence of cause and
effect which constitutes 'the law of sin and death'; and the reason
why they are freed from that awful sequence by the power of Christ
is, because He has 'condemned sin in the flesh.' The occurrence of
the two words 'condemnation' (ver. 1) and 'condemned' (ver. 3) should
be noted. Sin is personified as dwelling in the flesh, which
expression here means, not merely the body, but unregenerate human
nature. He has made his fortress there, and rules over it all. The
strong man keeps his house and his goods are in peace. He laughs to
scorn the attempts of laws and moralities of all sorts to cast him
out. His dominion is death to the human nature over which he
tyrannises. Condemnation is inevitable to the men over whom he rules.
They or he must perish. If he escape they die. If he could be slain
they might live. Christ comes, condemns the tyrant, and casts him
out. So, he being condemned, we are acquitted; and he being slain
there is no death for us. Let us try to elucidate a little further
this great metaphor by just pondering the two points prominent in
it--Sin tyrannising over human nature and resisting all attempts to
overcome it, and Christ's condemnation and casting out of the tyrant.

I. Sin tyrannising over human nature, and resisting all attempts to
overcome it.

Paul is generalising his own experience when he speaks of the
condemnation of an intrusive alien force that holds unregenerate
human nature in bondage. He is writing a page of his own
autobiography, and he is sure that all the rest of us have like pages
in ours. Heart answereth unto heart as in a mirror. If each man is a
unity, the poison must run through all his veins and affect his whole
nature. Will, understanding, heart, must all be affected and each in
its own way by the intruder; and if men are a collective whole, each
man's experience is repeated in his brother's.

The Apostle is equally transcribing his own experience when in the
text he sadly admits the futility of all efforts to shake the
dominion of sin. He has found in his own case that even the loftiest
revelation in the Mosaic law utterly fails in the attempt to condemn
