operations as distinctively our own--something that belongs to us
personally--that it is difficult for us to realize that Mind-substance is
a Universal principle just as Matter or Energy, and that we are but
drawing upon the Universal supply in our mental operations. And more than
this, the particular portion of Mind-substance that we are using,
although separated from the Mind-substance used by other individuals by a
thin wall of the very finest kind of Matter, is really in touch with the
other apparently separated minds, and with the Universal Mind of which it
forms a part. Just as is the Matter of which our physical bodies are
composed really in touch with all Matter; and just as is the Vital Force
used by us really in touch with all Energy; so is our Mind-substance
really in touch with all Mind-substance. It is as if the Ego in its
progress were moving through great oceans of Matter, Energy, or
Mind-substance, making use of that of each which it needed and which
immediately surrounded it, and leaving each behind as it moved on through
the great volume of the ocean. This illustration is clumsy, but it may
bring to your consciousness a realization that the Ego is the only thing
that is really _Yours_, unchangeable and unaltered, and that all the rest
is merely that portion of the Universal supply that you draw to yourself
for the wants of the moment. It may also bring more clearly before your
mind the great Unity of things--may enable you to see things as a Whole,
rather than as separated parts. Remember, _You_--the "I"--are the only
Real thing about and around you--all that has permanence--and Matter,
Force and even Mind-substance, are but your instruments for use and
expression. There are great oceans of each surrounding the "I" as it
moves along.

It is well for you also to bear in mind the Universality of Life. All of
the Universe is alive, vibrating and pulsating with life and energy and
motion. There is nothing dead in the Universe. Life is everywhere, and
always accompanied by intelligence. There is no such thing as a dead,
unintelligent Universe. _Instead of being atoms of Life floating in a sea
of death, we are atoms of Life surrounded by an ocean of Life, pulsating,
moving, thinking, living._ Every atom of what we call Matter is alive. It
has energy or force with it, and is always accompanied by intelligence
and life. Look around us as we will--at the animal world--at the plant
world--yes, even at the world of minerals and we see life, life,
life--all alive and having intelligence. When we are able to bring this
conception into the realm of actual consciousness--when we are able not
only to intellectually accept this fact, but to even go still further and
_feel_ and be conscious of this Universal Life on all sides, then are we
well on the road to attaining the Cosmic Consciousness.

But all these things are but steps leading up to the realization of
the Oneness in Spirit, on the part of the Individual. Gradually there
dawns upon him the realization that there is a Unity in the manifestation
of Spirit from the Absolute--a unity with itself, and a Union with the
Absolute. All this manifestation of Spirit on the part of the
Absolute--all this begetting of Divine Children--was in the nature of a
single act rather than as a series of acts, if we may be permitted
to speak of the manifestation as an _act_. Each Ego is a Centre of
Consciousness in this great ocean of Spirit--each is a Real Self,
apparently separate from the others and from its source, but the
separation is only apparent in both cases, for there is the closest
bond of union between the Egos of the Universe of Universes--each is knit
to the other in the closest bond of union, and each is still attached to
the Absolute by spiritual filaments, if we may use the term. In time we
shall grow more conscious of this mutual relationship, as the sheaths are
outgrown and cast aside, and in the end we will be withdrawn into the
Absolute--shall return to the Mansion of the Father.

It is of the highest importance to the developing soul to unfold into a
realization of this relationship and unity, _for when this conception is
once fully established the soul is enabled to rise above certain of the
lower planes, and is free from the operation of certain laws that bind
the undeveloped soul_. Therefore the Yogi teachers are constantly leading
the Candidates toward this goal. First by this path, and then by that
one, giving them different glimpses of the desired point, until finally
the student finds a path best fitted for his feet, and he moves along
straight to the mark, and throwing aside the confining bonds that have
proved so irksome, he cries aloud for joy at his new found Freedom.

The following exercises and Mental Drills are intended to aid the
Candidate in his work of growing into a realization of his relationship
with the Whole of Life and Being.


MENTAL DRILL.

(1) Read over what we have said in the "Advanced Course" regarding
the principle known as Matter. Realize that all Matter is One at the
last--that the real underlying substance of Matter is _Akasa_ or
Ether, and that all the varying forms evident to our senses are but
modifications and grosser forms of that underlying principle. Realize
that by known chemical processes all forms of Matter known to us, or
rather all combinations resulting in "forms," may be resolved into their
original elements, and that these elements are merely _Akasa_ in
different states of vibration. Let the idea of the Oneness of the visible
Universe sink deeply into your mind, until it becomes fixed there. The
erroneous conception of diversity in the material world must be replaced
by the consciousness of Unity--Oneness, at the last, in spite of the
appearance of variety and manifold forms. You must grow to see behind the
world of forms of Matter, and see the great principle of Matter (_Akasa_
or Ether) back of, within, and under it all. You must grow to _feel_
this, as well as to intellectually see it.

(2) Meditate over the last mentioned truths, and then follow the matter
still further. Read what we have said in the "Advanced Course" (Lesson
XI) about the last analysis of Matter showing it fading away into Force
or Energy until the dividing line is lost, and Matter merges into Energy
or Force, showing them both to be but the same thing, Matter being a
grosser form of Energy or Force. This idea should be impressed upon the
understanding, in order that the complete edifice of the Knowing of the
Oneness may be complete in all of its parts.

(3) Then read in the "Advanced Lessons" about Energy or Force, in the
oneness underlying its various manifestations. Consider how one form of
Energy may be transformed into another, and so on around the circle, the
one principle producing the entire chain of appearances. Realize that the
energy within you by which you move and act, is but one of the forms of
this great Principle of Energy with which the Universe is filled, and
that you may draw to you the required Energy from the great Universal
supply. But above all endeavor to grasp the idea of the Oneness pervading
the world of Energy or Force, or Motion. See it in its entirety, rather
than in its apparent separateness. These steps may appear somewhat
tedious and useless, but take our word for it, they are all helps in
fitting the mind to grasp the idea of the Oneness of All. Each step is
important, and renders the next higher one more easily attained. In this
mental drill, it will be well to mentally picture the Universe in
perpetual motion--everything is in motion--all matter is moving and
changing its forms, and manifesting the Energy within it. Suns and worlds
rush through space, their particles constantly changing and moving.
Chemical composition and decomposition is constant and unceasing,
everywhere the work of building up and breaking down is going on. New
combinations of atoms and worlds are constantly being formed and
dissolved. And after considering this Oneness of the principle of Energy,
reflect that through all these changes of form the Ego--the Real
Self--YOU--stand unchanged and unharmed--Eternal, Invincible,
Indestructible, Invulnerable, _Real_ and Constant among this changing
world of forms and force. You are above it all, and it revolves around
and about you--Spirit.

(4) Read what we have said in the "Advanced Course" about Force or
Energy, shading into Mind-substance which is its parent. Realize that
Mind is back of all this great exhibition of Energy and Force that you
have been considering. Then will you be ready to consider the Oneness of
Mind.

(5) Read what we have said in the "Advanced Lessons" about
Mind-substance. Realize that there is a great world of Mind-substance,
or an Universal Mind, which is at the disposal of the Ego. All Thought is
the product of the Ego's use of this Mind-substance, its tool and
instrument. Realize that this Ocean of Mind is entire and Whole, and that
the Ego may draw freely from it. Realize that _You_ have this great ocean
of Mind at your command, when you unfold sufficiently to use it. Realize
that Mind is back of and underneath all of the world of form and names
and action, and that in that sense: "All is Mind," although still higher
in the scale than even Mind are _You_, the Real Self, the Ego, the
Manifestation of the Absolute.

(6) Realize your identity with and relationship to All of Life. Look
around you at Life in all its forms, from the lowest to the highest, all
being exhibitions of the great principle of Life in operation along
different stages of The Path. Scorn not the humblest forms, but look
behind the form and see the reality--Life. Feel yourself a part of the
great Universal Life. Let your thought sink to the depths of the ocean,
and realize your kinship with the Life back of the forms dwelling there.
Do not confound the forms (often hideous from your personal point of
view) with the principle behind them. Look at the plant-life, and the
animal life, and seek to see behind the veil of form into the real Life
behind and underneath the form. Learn to feel your Life throbbing and
thrilling with the Life Principle in these other forms, and in the forms
of those of your own race. Gaze into the starry skies and see there the
numerous suns and worlds, all peopled with life in some of its myriad
forms, and feel your kinship to it. If you can grasp this thought and
consciousness, you will find yourself at-one-ment with those whirling
worlds, and, instead of feeling small and insignificant by comparison,
you will be conscious of an expansion of Self, until you feel that in
those circling worlds is a part of yourself--that You are there also,
while standing upon the Earth--that you are akin to all parts of the
Universe--nay, more, that they are as much your home as is the spot upon
which you are standing. You will find sweeping upon you a sense of
consciousness that the Universe is your home--not merely a part of it, as
you had previously thought. You will experience a sense of greatness, and
broadness and grandness such as you have never dreamed of. You will begin
to realize at least a part of your Divine inheritance, and to know indeed
that you are a Child of the Infinite, the very essence of your Divine
Parent being in the fibres of your being, At such times of realization
one becomes conscious of what lies before the soul in its upward path,
and how small the greatest prizes that Earth has to offer are when
compared to some of these things before the soul, as seen by the eyes of
the Spiritual Mind in moments of clear vision.

You must not dispute with these visions of the greatness of the soul, but
must treat them hospitably, for they are your very own, coming to you
from the regions of your Spiritual Mind which are unfolding into
consciousness.

(7) The highest step in this dawning consciousness of the Oneness of All,
is the one in which is realized that there is but One Reality, and at the
same time the sense of consciousness that the "I" is in that Reality. It
is most difficult to express this thought in words for it is something
that must be felt, rather than seen by the Intellect. When the Soul
realizes that the Spirit within it is, at the last, the only _real_ part
of it, and that the Absolute and its manifestation as Spirit is the only
_real_ thing in the Universe, a great step has been taken. But there is
still one higher step to be taken before the full sense of the Oneness
and Reality comes to us. That step is the one in which we realize the
Identity of the "I" with the great "I" of the Universe. The mystery of
the manifestation of the Absolute in the form of the Spirit, is veiled
from us--the mind confesses its inability to penetrate behind the veil
shielding the Absolute from view, although it will give us a report of
its being conscious of the presence of the Absolute just at the edge of
the boundary line. But the highest region of the Spiritual Mind, when
explored by the advanced souls who are well along the Path, reports that
it sees beyond the apparent separation of Spirit from Spirit, and
realizes that there is but one Reality of Spirit, and that all the "I"'s
are really but different views of that One--Centres of Consciousness upon
the surface of the One Great "I," the Centre of which is the Absolute
Itself. This certainly penetrates the whole region of the Spiritual Mind,
and gives us all the message of Oneness of the Spirit, just as the
Intellect satisfies us with its message of the Oneness of Matter, Energy,
and Mind. The idea of Oneness permeates all planes of Life.

The sense of Reality of the "I" that is apparent to You in the moments of
your clearest mental vision, is really the reflection of the sense of
Reality underlying the Whole--it is the consciousness of the Whole,
manifesting through your point or Centre of Consciousness. The advanced
student or Initiate finds his consciousness gradually enlarging until it
realizes its identity with the Whole. He realizes that under all the
forms and names of the visible world, there is to be found One Life--One
Force--One Substance--One Existence--One Reality--ONE. And, instead of
his experiencing any sense of the loss of identity or individuality, he
becomes conscious of an enlargement of an expansion of individuality or
identity--instead of feeling himself absorbed in the Whole, he feels that
he is spreading out and embracing the Whole. This is most hard to express
in words, for there are no words to fit the conception, and all that we
can hope to do is to start into motion, by means of our words, the
vibrations that will find a response in the minds of those who read the
words, to the end that they will experience the consciousness which will
bring its own understanding. This consciousness cannot be transmitted by
words proceeding from the Intellect, but vibrations may be set up that
will prepare the mind to receive the message from its own higher planes.

Even in the early stages of this dawning consciousness, one is enabled to
identify the _real_ part of himself with the _real_ part of all the other
forms of life that pass before his notice. In every other man--in every
animal--in every plant--in every mineral--he sees behind the sheath and
form of appearance, an evidence of the presence of the Spirit which is
akin to his own Spirit--yea, more than akin, for the two are One. He sees
Himself in all forms of life, in all time in all places. He realizes that
the Real Self is everywhere present and everlasting, and that the Life
within himself is also within all the Universe--in everything, for there
is nothing dead in the Universe, and all Life, in all of its varying
phases, is simply the One Life, held, used and enjoyed in common by all.
Each Ego is a Centre of Consciousness in this great ocean of Life, and
while apparently separate and distinct, is yet really in touch with the
Whole, and with every apparent part.

It is not our intention, in this lesson, to go into the details of this
great mystery of Life, or to recite the comparatively little of the Truth
that the most advanced teachers and Masters have handed down. This is not
the place for it--it belongs to the subject of Gnani Yoga rather than to
Raja Yoga--and we touch upon it here, not for the purpose of trying to
explain the scientific side of it to you, but merely in order that your
minds may be led to take up the idea and gradually manifest it in
conscious realization. There is quite a difference between the
scientific, intellectual teaching of Gnani Yoga, whereby the metaphysical
and scientific sides of the Yogi teachings are presented to the minds of
the students, in a logical, scientific manner, and the methods of Raja
Yoga, in which the Candidate is led by degrees to a _consciousness_
(outside of mere intellectual belief) of his real nature and powers. We
are following the latter plan, for this course is a Course in _Raja_
Yoga. We are aiming to present the matter to the mind in such a manner
that it may prepare the way for the dawning consciousness, by brushing
away the preconceived notions and prejudices, and allowing a clean
entrance for the new conception. Much that we have said in this lesson
may appear, on the one hand, like useless repetition, and, on the other
hand, like an incomplete presentation of the scientific side of the Yogi
teachings. But it will be found, in time, that the effect has been that
the mind of the student has undergone a change from the absorbing of the
idea of the Oneness of Life, and the Expansion of the Self. The Candidate
is urged not to be in too much of a hurry. Development must not be
forced. Read what we have written, and practice the Mental Drills we have
given, even if they may appear trifling and childish to some of you--we
know what they will do for you, and you will agree with us in time. Make
haste slowly. You will find that the mind will work out the matter, even
though you be engaged in your ordinary work, and have forgotten the
subject for the time. The greater portion of mental work is done in this
way, while you are busy with something else, or even asleep, for the
sub-conscious portion of the mind works along the lines pointed out for
it, and performs its task.

As we have said, the purpose of this lesson is to bring you in the way of
the unfoldment of consciousness, rather than to teach you the details of
the scientific side of the Yogi teachings. Development is the keynote of
Raja Yoga. And the reason that we wish to develop this sense of the
Reality of the "I," and the Expansion of the Self, at this place is that
thereby you may assert your Mastery over Matter, Energy and Mind. Before
you may mount your throne as King, you must fully realize in
consciousness that you _are_ the _Reality_ in this world of appearances.
You must realize that you--the _real_ You--are not only existent, and
real, but that you are in touch with all else that is real, and that the
roots of your being are grounded in the Absolute itself. You must realize
that instead of being a separate atom of Reality, isolated and fixed in a
narrow space, you are a Centre of Consciousness in the Whole of Reality,
and that the Universe of Universes is your home--that your Centre of
Consciousness might be moved on to a point trillions of miles from the
Earth (which distance would be as nothing in Space) and still you--the
awakened soul--would be just as much at home there as here--that even
while you are here, your influence extends far out into space. Your real
state, which will be revealed to you, gradually, throughout the ages, is
so great and grand, that your mind in its present state of development
cannot grasp even the faint reflection of that glory.

We wish you to try to form at least a faint idea of your Real State of
Being, in order that you may control the lower principles by the force of
your awakened Will, which Will depends upon your degree of consciousness
of the Real Self.

As man grows in understanding and consciousness of the Real Self, so does
his ability to use his Will grow. Will is the attribute of the Real Self.
It is well that this great realization of the Real Self brings with it
Love for all of Life, and Kindness, for, were it not so, the Will that
comes to him who grows into a realization of his real being could be used
to the great hurt of those of the race who had not progressed so far
(their _relative_ hurt, we mean, for in the end, and at the last, no soul
is ever really _hurt_). But the dawning power brings with it greater Love
and Kindness, and the higher the soul mounts the more is it filled with
the higher ideals and the more does it throw from it the lower animal
attributes. It is true that some souls growing into a consciousness of
their real nature, without an understanding of what it all means, may
commit the error of using the awakened Will for selfish ends, as may be
seen in the cases of the Black Magicians spoken of in the occult
writings, and also in the cases of well known characters in history and
in modern life, who manifest an enormous Will which they misuse. All of
this class of people of great Will have stumbled or grown blindly into a
consciousness (or partial consciousness) of the real nature, but lack the
restraining influence of the higher teachings. But such misuse of the
Will brings pain and unrest to the user, and he is eventually driven into
the right road.

We do not expect our students to grasp fully this idea of the Expansion
of Self. Even the highest grasp it only partially. But until you get a
glimmering of the consciousness you will not be able to progress far
on the path of Raja Yoga. You must understand _what you are_, before you
are able to use the power that lies dormant within you. You must realize
that you are the Master, before you can claim the powers of the Master,
and expect to have your commands obeyed. So bear patiently with us, your
Teachers, while we set before you the lessons to be learned--the tasks to
be performed. The road is long, and is rough in places--the feet may
become tired and bruised, but the reward is great, and there are resting
places along the path. Be not discouraged if your progress seem slow, for
the soul must unfold naturally as does the flower, without haste, without
force.

And be not dismayed nor affrighted if you occasionally catch a glimpse
of your higher self. As "M.C." says, in her notes on "Light on the Path"
(see "Advanced Course," page 95): "To have seen thy soul in its bloom, is
to have obtained a momentary glimpse in thyself of the transfiguration
which shall eventually make thee more than man; to recognize, is to
achieve the great task of gazing upon the blazing light without dropping
the eyes, and not falling back in terror as though before some ghastly
phantom. This happens to some, and so, when the victory is all but won,
it is lost."

Peace be with thee.


MANTRAM (AFFIRMATION) FOR THE THIRD LESSON.

There is but one ultimate form of Matter; one ultimate form of Energy;
one ultimate form of Mind. Matter proceeds from Energy, and Energy from
Mind, and all are an emanation of the Absolute, threefold in appearance
but One in substance. There is but One Life, and that permeates the
Universe, manifesting in various forms, but being, at the last, but One.
My body is one with Universal Matter; My energy and vital force is one
with the Universal Energy; My Mind is one with the Universal Mind; My
Life is one with the Universal Life. The Absolute has expressed and
manifested itself in Spirit, which is the real "I" overshadowing and
embracing all the apparently separate "I"s. "I" feel my identity with
Spirit and realize the Oneness of All Reality. I feel my unity with all
Spirit, and my Union (through Spirit) with the Absolute. I realize that
"I" am an Expression and Manifestation of the Absolute, and that its
