for meanly evading them;--_such_ a nation is very differently
conditioned from what it would be, if the will of one man or of a
few governed. In such a nation, rebellion, or any evasion of Law,
becomes a more serious moral evil. Rebellion _there_ can scarcely be
called for; and it were difficult to gauge the dimensions of its
unrighteousness!

4. To justify rebellion, it is necessary that there should be a fair
prospect of successful resistance--of an overthrow of the
government. If the resistance is not likely to be successful for
good, but is only likely to cost the lives of the resisting
individuals and others; then, such individuals are sacrificing
themselves and others for no good purpose,--which is a thing that
cannot be justified to reason or religion. A man has no right to
fling away his life for a mere sentiment, and leave his wife a
widow, or his gray-haired parents without a son to solace them.
There must be some fair prospect of great good to come from it,
before one can justly fling his life into the scale, in a violent
contest with the government.

5. To justify rebellion, there must be a fair prospect of the firm
_establishment of a letter government_, and the enactment of more
just laws, after the present government is overturned. Nothing can
justify a revolution, a conflict, a waste of treasure and blood,
which are not going _to gain anything_ in the end.--Again, the last
four years' experience of European nations may read us a lesson.

6. To justify rebellion, or what is the same thing, violent
resistance to the execution of the laws, it is necessary that
something more than a _small fraction_ of the people should rise in
such a resistance. If the people in general are ready for it, and
are willing to run all the hazards of a rebellious conflict with the
government, conscious that they have righteousness and the God of
righteousness on their side; this is a very different affair from
what it would be, if only a minority of the people were ready for
rebellion. Such a minority have no right, on account of their deemed
injuries, to plunge the nation into a civil war, for the purpose of
over-turning a government which suits the great mass of the
people;--a civil war, in which there is every prospect, that the
government and the majority who aim to support it will prevail; and
prevailing, must crush their hostile opponents, this hasty and
reckless minority.

These are some of the things which appear necessary, in order to
justify violent resistance of Law. They must _all_ exist, or such
resistance would be criminal,--contrary to reason, to benevolence,
and to Christ.

It is not a thing to be expected at all among mankind, that all laws
should be right, or "just and equal." Human legislation must be
expected to bear the marks of an imperfection, which attaches itself
to everything human. If obedience to government were obligatory,
only on the condition that all the laws of that government are just;
then, such obedience would mean nothing at all, and every man would
be absolved from all allegiance to the government, and from all
obligations to obey. Such is man, so limited his wisdom and so
imperfect his holiness, that human laws must necessarily be
imperfect, and must, therefore, necessarily operate hardly in some
instances, upon more or less of the people. It is impossible, that
the thing should be otherwise--in the very nature of the case, it is
impossible. And if every individual were allowed to be the judge in
his own case, whether or not the law operated so hardly upon him
that he might disobey; _then_ his _obligation_ to obedience would
mean just nothing at all, and Law would be nothing more to him than
mere advice. It might be very good advice, but he might spurn it, if
he chose. _I_ may think it hard and unjust upon myself, that, in the
great "Empire State," by a sort of "bill of attainder," (I know not
what else to call it,--I suppose I must not call it a _slave law_,)
I am prohibited from holding any "office of profit or trust,"
because I _will preach_ the gospel, and people will hear me;--but
notwithstanding this law, (which you will not allow me to call by
any hard name,) you think me under obligation to obey the
government,--and I think so too. I shall not rebel.

The _execution_ of the Law also, must necessarily be imperfect, for
the same great reason--human imperfection: judges and jurors are not
infallible. But, what then? _God knew all this_ when he ordained
human government, and commanded us to be subject to it. Such
government, with all its unavoidable imperfection and errors, on the
whole is beneficial--indispensable--we could not do without it.--And
rarely, very rarely indeed, is there a single instance of an
individual man, here or beyond the Potomac, whom Law has injured
_more_ than it has benefited. Even if that Law unjustly takes away
his liberty or his life, it may have done him more good than injury;
his liberty or his life might have been sooner and more cruelly
destroyed without it. It would be hard to prove the contrary, in any
one case that ever existed or ever will, here or elsewhere.

The best and wisest Laws ever enacted by man, or that ever will be
enacted by man, may sometimes operate hardly, even destructively,
upon some particular persons. An innocent man may be accused of
murder, tried, convicted, and sentenced to ignominious execution.
But, _what then_? May this man, who _knows_ his innocence, justly
arm himself with deadly weapons, and kill the officer who would
execute the sentence of the Law upon him,--and thus get out of his
hands? May this innocent man's neighbors, who know his innocence as
well as he, "_lawfully interpose their own persons_" betwixt him and
the officer of Law, and thus rescue him?--and may they do this,
because they have decided for themselves, that this is not a case
"_where the administration of justice is concerned_?" If so, then
all Law and Government must soon come to an end, and anarchy, mobs
and confusion reign! If so, then each man becomes really his own
Lawmaker, and when _he thinks_ the Law unjust towards him, may
resist it unto blood! If one man is at liberty to "_be fully
prepared for_ his own defense," and calling the legal officer an
"assailant," or an "assassin," may resist the execution of one law
which he deems hard upon him, then another man may do the same thing
in reference to another law; and the consequence inevitably must be,
that all Government, Law and security are at end! If my neighbor may
arm _himself_, and kill a legal officer who attempts the discharge
of his sworn duty; then I may arm _myself_ also, when I deem the Law
unjust to me, and kill another legal officer, who attempts to
execute the Law! And if all this may be, LAW is nothing but a
bugbear or a bubble--is a dead letter--and the texts of God's word
which we have just read to you may be disobeyed, and ought to be
blotted from the Bible!

My brethren, this is a very solemn subject! No theme of earth could
be more so. All our earthly benefits, and no small part of our
spiritual privileges and hopes are wrapped up in it. Religion
_cannot_ prosper, if Law is not potential--if the minds of the
people are to be perpetually agitated, distracted and tormented, by
confusion, fear and uncertainty!

       *       *       *       *       *
