
That the cause of the redeemer was to be depressed, before its
universal prevalence in the latter days, is plainly revealed. The only
difficulty is to ascertain the manner. Bishop Newton expects another
confederacy of the catholic powers to destroy the followers of the
Lamb, which will so nearly succeed, that for a short term none will
dare to appear as his followers. But if infidelity was to intervene
the antichristian defection, and prevalence of religion in the latter
days, is this hypothesis probable? Is it not more reasonable to expect
that destruction of the witnesses in another way, and by other
enemies--by the mockers and scoffers of the last times, who should be
generated by papal error and superstition? And doth not the present
state of the world confirm these expectations? The catholic religion
hath been declining for several ages. It received a deadly wound from
Luther and his associates, which hath not yet been healed. From that
period it hath dwindled, and is now little more than a name. But
infidelity hath been, for almost an equal term progressing, and
already stalks out to public view: Yea, it vaunts with shameless
pride, as though sure of victory. And we are constrained to
acknowledge, that "of a truth, it hath laid waste nations and their
countries!"

Our expectation is farther confirmed by observing the change which is
made in the weapons of internal warfare. These are no longer bonds,
imprisonments, tortures and death, but the shafts of ridicule, and
sneers of contempt. "Trials of cruel mocking," now exercise the faith
and patience of the saints. Religion, the dignity and hope of man,
hath become the sport of stupid infidels! The jest of sorry witlings!
These hissings of the serpent are every where to be heard!

Internal malice, never before made so general attack in this way.
Perhaps, with all his sagacity the adversary did not suspect that
creatures made for eternity could be driven from the way of peace by
the derision of fools, till taught it by experience. But this hath
been found his most successful weapon! It hath done greater mischief
to Christianity, than all the rage of persecution!

Many account it honorable, to suffer, pain or loss, with patience, and
to face danger and death with fortitude; but few think themselves
honored by scorn and reproach. Human nature is here attacked on its
weakest side.

Some European scoffers, of high rank, during the last age took the
lead in this mode of attack on Christianity; and have been followed by
a countless throng of noble and ignoble, learned and unlearned, down
to this day. Few infidels are so modest as not to affect wit on the
subject of religion; few witticisms so contemptible as not to meet the
approbation and receive the applause of brother infidels.

That strong combinations have been formed against Christianity, and
also against civil government, in the kingdoms of Europe, and that
they have too successfully undermined both, is an acknowledged fact.

In the leaders of those conspiracies we discover all the traits of
character, attributed in prophecy to the scoffers who should arise in
the last days. When every circumstance, in events so remarkable agree
with the predictions, can doubt remain whether the predictions are
fulfilled?

There hath been faith in this land. It is not yet extinct. But we are
importing the principles, and practices of Europe. "The Mockers of the
last times" are now to be seen on this side the Atlantic. "Many follow
their pernicious ways." We have reason to expect the evils to increase
till "The godly cease and the faithful fail" from among us. _For when
the Son of man cometh shall he find faith on the earth_? This land
will also be overspread with infidelity! "The whole world lie in
wickedness!"

There may be partial revivals of religion, but no general reformation
is to be expected; and after every refreshing, the declensions will
probably be greater than before. Fanatic emotions, here and there, may
flatter some who are friends to religion, but they only serve to
accelerate the spread of infidelity.

It is a gloomy thought! The serious soul saddens; sorrow fills the
good man's heart, if, when he sees little regard paid to religion, he
expects yet greater defections! If when he sees but few of those who
are rising into life, paying attention to the best things, he expects
still fewer of their descendants to be wise and good! Yea that the
declensions will continue and increase, "till all flesh shall become
corrupt, and the earth be filled with violence!" Would to God these
expectations might not be realized; for they are exceedingly
distressing. But they appear to us to be dictated by the spirit of
truth, and confirmed by the history of the world, and by the progress
of events opening to view.

One consideration, however, ministers consolation, shining through the
gloom; namely, the long, holy, happy period, which may be expected to
follow the dark term now approaching.

By _dark_ we mean only in a moral view. Respecting arts and sciences,
mankind may never have been more enlightened than at present. But this
is foreign to religion. When Egypt, Greece, and Rome, were the seats
of the muses, they remained as devoid of religious knowledge, as the
most ignorant barbarians. Arts and sciences may still flourish, and
yet deeper researches be made into the _arcana_ of nature, while
religion is dying and atheism succeeding in its place.

Some intervening links are necessary to connect present age with the
happy times now distant. Who shall fill them, the divine sovereign
will determine. An hour of temptation must try all who dwell upon the
earth. These are the times in which we are tried.

Do we envy those who may live during the Peaceful reign of the
Redeemer? Let us not forget that we are favored above many who have
gone before us--above some of our contemporaries and probably above
those who will succeed us, before the commencement of that happy era.
Nothing necessary to salvation is denied us. If straitened it is in
our own bowels. If faithful to improve the talents put into our hands,
"our labor will not be in vain in the Lord"--God will keep us to his
kingdom. There we shall see Christ's glory, though we may never see it
here as some others who come after us.

Be it also remembered, that the rewards of the coming world, will be
proportioned to the difficulties we may have to encounter here in
this. Those who make their way to heaven through darkness and
temptations, and force their way through hostile bands, will rise to
greater honors there, than though they had ascended by an easier and a
smoother road. Nothing done or suffered in the way of duty will loose
its reward. God hath not said "seek ye my face in vain."

"Wherefore, brethren give diligence to make your calling and election
sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall; for so an
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be glory, both now
and forever. Amen."



 * * * * * *



SERMON V.

Abram's Horror of great Darkness.

Genesis xv. 12.

"And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and
lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him."


If we consider the sketch, given us in scripture, of the life of this
patriarch, we shall find that few have had equal manifestations of the
divine favor. But the light did not at all times shine on him. He had
his dark hours while dwelling in this strange land. Here we find _an
horror of great darkness to have fallen upon him_. The language used
to describe his state, on this occasion, is strong. It expresses more
than the want of God's sensible presence. It describes a state similar
to that of the psalmist, "While I suffer thy terrors I am distracted."
His sufferings probably bore an affinity to those of the Savior when
the father hid his face from him; at which period there was more than
the withdrawing of his sensible presence, the powers of darkness were
suffered to terrify and afflict him--"It was their hour"--God had left
him in their hands. So Abram on this occasion.

Just before God had smiled upon him--"Fear not, Abram: I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward." Then all was light and love.
"The candle of the Lord shone on his head." When he complained that he
had no child to comfort him, or inherit his possessions, God promised
him an heir, and countless progeny--"Look now toward heaven and tell
the stars, if thou be able to number them--So shall thy seed be. And
he believed the Lord; and he counted it to him for righteousness."
What an occasion of joy? What strange manifestation of divine favor?
They are scarcely paralleled in the history of man. But how sudden the
reverse? The same day--_when the sun was going down_; lo! the
brightness disappears, and _an horror of great darkness fell upon
him_.

A deep _sleep fell upon Abram_. This was not a natural sleep. There is
no probability that he would have given way to weakness, and fallen
into a common sleep, while engaged in covenanting with God; binding
himself with solemn engagements, and receiving tokens of the divine
favor, and the promise of blessings for a great while to come. If he
could have slept while receiving such manifestations of the divine
friendship, it is not probable that his dreams would have been
terrifying: His situation would rather have inspired joyful
sensations, and exciting pleasing expectations. THAT which for want of
language more pertinent and expressive, is here termed sleep, seems to
have been divine ecstasy--such influence of the holy spirit operating
in the soul, as locked it up from everything earthly, and shut out
worldly things, as effectually as a deep sleep, which shuts up the
soul and closeth all its avenues, so that nothing terrestrial can find
admittance.

This was often experienced by the prophets, when God revealed himself
to them, and made known his will. Thus Daniel, when the angel Gabriel
was sent to solve his doubts, and let him into futurity--"Now as he
was speaking with me, I was in a deep sleep on my face toward the
ground." The holy prophet, filled with fear at the approach of the
celestial messenger, could not have fallen asleep, like some careless
attendant in the house of God. Yet such is the language used to
express his situation at that time, and afterwards on a similar
occasion.* The three disciples, who witnessed the transfiguration,
experienced similar sensations--sensations which absorbed the soul,
and shut out terrestrial objects, which the evangelist compares to
sleep.

* Daniel viii. 18, x. 9.

But why was Abram's joy, occasioned by the communications of the
morning, so soon turned to horror.

The reasons are with him "Whose judgments are unsearchable, and his
ways past finding out." We may observe, however, that such is the way
of God with man, while here on trial. If at any time a person seems
peculiarly favored of heaven, something of a different nature is
commonly set over against it. Perhaps to remind him that this is not
his rest. We seldom enjoy prosperity without a sensible mixture of
adversity; or without somewhat adverse following in quick succession.
"Even in laughter, the heart is sorrowful, and the end of mirth is
heaviness." Neither are special trials or sorrows sent alone; comforts
and consolations are usually joined with the, or soon succeed them. If
we consider the matter, we shall observe this in ourselves; and may
often discover it in others. We see it in the history of this
patriarch, and that of many of his descendants.

The pilgrimage of Jacob, how remarkably diversified with good and
evil, with joy and sorrow? That also of Joseph--of Moses--of Daniel?
At times each of these were raised high and brought low--sometimes
found themselves at the summit of earthly honor and felicity; at other
times, were cast down, and hope seemed ready to forsake them.

In the history of Job the same things are exemplified in still
stronger colors. That holy man experienced the extremes of honor and
infamy, joy and grief, hope and terror. The prophets and apostles,
passed through scenes in many respects similar; their joys and sorrows
were contrasted to each other. Daniel's mournings and fastings were
followed with remarkable discoveries and cheering revelations; but the
divine communications were almost too strong for frail humanity; they
filled him with dismay, and had well nigh destroyed his mortal body.
"He fainted and was sick certain days."

St. Paul was "caught up into paradise and heard unspeakable words,
which it was not possible for a man to utter"--had a view of the
ineffable glory of the upper world; but trials no less remarkable, and
very severe, were contrasted to those strange distinctions, and more
than earthly joys! "Lest I should be exalted above measure, through
the abundance of the revelations, there was given me a thorn in the
flesh, a messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be exalted
above measure." *

* 2 Corinthians xii. 4-7.

St. john suffered sore persecutions--was banished from the society of
his fellow Christians, if not from the society of men. But divine
discoveries repaid all his sufferings--heaven's ineffable glories were
opened to his view! What he witnessed could be but very partially
communicated. Language is weak; only faint hints and general
intimations could be given of the "glory which is to be revealed." But
the suffering apostle enjoyed it, and was supported, yea, enraptured
by it.

This life is filled with changes. Good and evil, hope and fear, light
and darkness, are set over against each other. The saints, while they
dwell in the dust, sometimes walk in darkness, and have their hours of
gloom and horror--"The whole creation groaneth and travaileth together
in pain until now--Even those who have the first fruits of the spirit,
groan within themselves, waiting for--the redemption of the body.
Those of whom the world is not worthy, are often in heaviness, through
manifold temptations."

We may wonder at these things: but when we consider them as ordered of
God, the consideration, should calm our minds, and bring us to say
with the astonished Shunamite of old, "It is well." *

* 2 Kings iv. 26.

God doth not order sorrows to his creatures here, because he delights
in their sufferings. "He grieves not willingly, neither afflicts the
children of men. He doth it for their profit, that they may be
partakers of his holiness." And which of the saints hath not received
benefit from it? Who among them hath not sometimes been ready to adopt
the language of the psalmist, "It is good for me, that I have been
afflicted."

"Born of the earth, we are earthly"--our afflictions naturally
descend. We are prone to set our affections on temporal things, and
set up our rest where there is no abiding. Therefore do we need
afflictions to keep us mindful of our situation. Such remains of
depravity are left in the renewed, that prosperity often corrupts
them. But for the sorrows and sufferings ordered out to them, they
would forget God and lose themselves among the deceitful cares, and
infatuating allurements of this strange land.

Intervals of comfort are also needful for them. Were these denied
them, "the spirits would fail before God, and the souls which he hath
made." And intervals of light and joy are given to refresh and cheer,
and animate them to the duties required in this land of darkness and
doubt. But they are not intended to satisfy. They answer like ends to
the Christian during his earthly pilgrimage, as the fruits of Canaan,
carried by the spies into the wilderness did to Israel while
journeying toward the land of promise--serve to give them a glance of
the good things prepared for them, to increase their longings after
them, and animate them to press forward and make their way to the
possession.

Such may be some of the reasons of those varied scenes through which
the people of God are doomed to make their way to glory.

Often the saints find themselves unable to penetrate the design of
heaven in the trials through which lies their way--especially in the
hidings of God's face, so that they cannot discover him. This made no
small part of Job's trial--"Behold I go forward but he is not there;
and backward, but I cannot perceive him; on the left hand where he
doth work, but I cannot behold him; he hideth himself on the right
hand that I cannot see him." Could he have known the reasons of his
trials it would have been a great consolations, but it was denied him,
and the reasons of God's hiding his face from him, no less than those
of his other trials.

So it is also with others. The darkness which involves them makes part
of their trials. It is a common trial of the saints. God will have his
people "live by faith and walk by faith." To live by faith, implies
want of light, and ignorance of the designs of providence. A great
part of the good man's trial here, consists in trusting God without
knowing why such things are required, or such trails ordered out to
him. In this way the saints had great trials under the former
dispensations. A veil was then spread over the method of grace, or way
in which God would bring salvation to men. Even the religious rites
enjoined by the law, were not understood, though they made part of the
duties of every day; they remained mysterious, till Christ removed the
covering cast over them; made known the hidden mystery, and opened
"the way into the holiest by his blood."

Under every dispensation religion greatly consists in referring every
thing to God, and trusting in him, without being let into his designs,
or knowing reasons of his orders. "Blessed is he who hath not seen and
yet hath believed"--Blessed is he who without penetrating the designs
of heaven trusts in God, and conforms to his requirements, not
doubting but all will turn out right--that God will lead him in right
ways, though they may be ways which he knows not.

Abram discovered much of this temper--in obedience to divine order he
left his father's house, and "went forth, not knowing whither he
went." And afterwards, when commanded of God, he took a three days
journey, to offer his son, Isaac, at the place which should be shewn
him.

The trial of this patriarch, recorded in the text, might be, at
that time particularly necessary. God had then admitted him to special
nearness; and special trials might be requisite to keep him humble,
and prevent high thoughts of himself. For such is fallen human nature,
that particular distinctions, even divine communications, though of
grace, are apt to be abused; to foster pride! Though man is poor and
dependant, pride is a sin which very easily besets him. If Paul needed
something to keep him humble when favored with revelations, why not
Abram? Abram was then in the body--compassed with infirmity--liable
to temptation, and prone to seduction. God knew his state--corrected
him therefore, to give him a sense of demerit, when he received him
into covenant and engaged to be his God.

Another design of his darkness and horror at that time, might be to
fill him with awe and reverence of the divine majesty. Had he
experienced nothing of this kind, the strange familiarity to which he
had been admitted of the most high, might have diminished his fear of
God, and caused him to think lightly of the great supreme.

The horror and distress he now experienced might also serve to prepare
him for holy joy, when God should lift on him the light of his
countenance. Light and joy are most refreshing when they follow
darkness and terror. Therefore the joy of those who have been pricked
in their hearts for sin and made to know its exceeding sinfulness,
when they are brought to hope in divine mercy, and believe themselves
forgiven of God. There is reason to believe that the sorrows of this
state will give a zest to the joys of heaven--the darkness of this
state, to the light of that in which darkness is done away--the fear
