It is pretty clear that the first introduction of Hinayanist Buddhism
into Siam was from Southern Burma and Pegu, but that somewhat later
Ceylon was accepted as the standard of orthodoxy. A learned thera who
knew the Sinhalese Tipitaka was imported thence, as well as a branch
of the Bo-tree. But Siamese patriotism flattered itself by imagining
that the national religion was due to personal contact with the
Buddha, although not even early legends can be cited in support of
such traditions. In 1602 a mark in the rocks, now known as the Phra:
Bat, was discovered in the hills north of Ayuthia and identified as a
footprint of the Buddha similar to that found on Adam's Peak and in
other places. Burma and Ceylon both claim the honour of a visit from
the Buddha but the Siamese go further, for it is popularly believed
that he died at Praten, a little to the north of Phra Pathom, on a
spot marked by a slab of rock under great trees.[240] For this reason
when the Government of India presented the king of Siam with the
relics found in the Piprava vase, the gift though received with
honour, aroused little enthusiasm and was placed in a somewhat
secluded shrine.[241]

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 188: The principal sources for information about Siamese
Buddhism are: _Journal of Siam Society_, 1904, and onwards.

L. Fournereau, _Le Siam Ancien_, 2 vols. 1895 and 1908 in _Annales du
Musee Guimet_. Cited here as Fournereau.

Mission Pavie II, _Histoire du Laos, du Cambodge et du Siam_, 1898.

Gerini, _Researches on Ptolemy's Geography of Eastern Asia_, 1909.
Cited here as Gerini, _Ptolemy_.

Gerini, _Chulakantamangala or Tonsure Ceremony_, 1893.

H. Alabaster, _The Wheel of the Law_, 1871.

P.A. Thompson, _Lotus Land_, 1906.

W.A. Graham, _Siam_, 1912.

Petithuguenin, "Notes critiques pour servir a l'histoire du Siam,"
_B.E.F.E.O._ 1916, No. 3.

Coedes, "Documents sur la Dynastie de Sukhodaya," _ib._ 1917, No. 2.

Much curious information may be found in the _Directory for Bangkok
and Siam_, a most interesting book. I have only the issue for 1907.

I have adopted the conventional European spelling for such words as
may be said to have one. For other words I have followed Pallegoix's
dictionary (1896) for rendering the vowels and tones in Roman
characters, but have departed in some respects from his system of
transliterating consonants as I think it unnecessary and misleading to
write j and x for sounds which apparently correspond to y and ch as
pronounced in English.

The King of Siam has published a work on the spelling of His Majesty's
own language in Latin letters which ought to be authoritative, but it
came into my hands too late for me to modify the orthography here
adopted.

As Pallegoix's spelling involves the use of a great many accents I
have sometimes begun by using the strictly correct orthography and
afterwards a simpler but intelligible form. It should be noted that in
this orthography ":" is not a colon but a sign that the vowel before
it is very short.]

[Footnote 189: The name is found on Champan inscriptions of 1050 A.D.
and according to Gerini appears in Ptolemy's _Samarade_ =
Samarattha. See Gerini, _Ptolemy_, p. 170. But Samarade is
located near Bangkok and there can hardly have been Tais there in
Ptolemy's time.]

[Footnote 190: So too in Central Asia Kustana appears to be a learned
distortion of the name Khotan, made to give it a meaning in Sanskrit.]

[Footnote 191: Gerini states (_Ptolemy_, p. 107) that there are Pali
manuscript chronicles of Lamphun apparently going back to 924 A.D.]

[Footnote 192: Strictly Sukhothai.]

[Footnote 193: Phongsa va: dan or Vamsavada. See for Siamese
chronicles, _B.E.F.E.O._ 1914, No. 3, "Recension palie des annales
d'Ayuthia," and _ibid._ 1916, pp. 5-7.]

[Footnote 194: _E.g._ Aymonier in _J.A._ 1903, p. 186, and Gerini in
_Journal of Siam Society_, vol. II. part 1, 1905.]

[Footnote 195: See especially Fournereau and the publications of the
Mission Pavie and _B.E.F.E.O._]

[Footnote 196: Gerini, _Ptolemy_, p. 176.]

[Footnote 197: See Fournereau, I. p. 225. _B.E.F.E.O._ 1916, III. pp.
8-13, and especially Bradley in _J. Siam Society_, 1909, pp. 1-68.]

[Footnote 198: This alphabet appears to be borrowed from Cambojan but
some of the letters particularly in their later shapes show the
influence of the Mon or Talaing script. The modern Cambojan alphabet,
which is commonly used for ecclesiastical purposes in Siam, is little
more than an elaborate form of Siamese.]

[Footnote 199: See _B.E.F.E.O._ 1904, p. 161.]

[Footnote 200: Bradley, _J. Siam Society_, 1913, p. 10, seems to think
that Pali Buddhism may have come thence but the objection is that we
know a good deal about the religion of Camboja and that there is no
trace of Pali Buddhism there until it was imported from Siam. The fact
that the Siamese alphabet was borrowed from Camboja does not prove
that religion was borrowed in the same way. The Mongol alphabet can be
traced to a Nestorian source.]

[Footnote 201: See for these inscriptions papers on the Malay
Peninsula and Siam by Finot and Lajonquiere in _Bull. de la Comm.
Archeol. de l'Indo-Chine_, 1909, 1910 and 1912.]

[Footnote 202: Fournereau, pp. 157 ff. and Coedes in _B.E.F.E.O._
1917, No. 2. Besides the inscription itself, which is badly defaced in
parts, we have (1) a similar inscription in Thai, which is not however
a translation, (2) a modern Siamese translation, used by Schmitt but
severely criticized by Coedes and Petithuguenin.]

[Footnote 203: This portion of the narrative is found only in
Schmitt's version of the Siamese translation. The part of the stone
where it would have occurred is defaced.]

[Footnote 204: See Fournereau, vol. II. inscriptions xv and xvi and
the account of the Jatakas, p. 43.]

[Footnote 205: Fournereau, I. pp. 247, 273. _B.E.F.E.O._ 1917, No. 2,
p. 29.]

[Footnote 206: See the texts in _B.E.F.E.O. l.c._ The Bodhisattvas are
described as Ariyametteyadinam dasannam Bodhisattanam. The vow to
become a Buddha should it seems be placed in the mouth of the King,
not of the Metropolitan as in Schmitt's translation.]

[Footnote 207: See Fournereau, pp. 209 ff. Dharmasokaraja may perhaps
be the same as Mahadharmaraja who reigned 1388-1415. But the word may
also be a mere title applied to all kings of this dynasty, so that
this may be another inscription of Sri Suryavamsa Rama.]

[Footnote 208: 1350 is the accepted date but M. Aymonier, _J.A._ 1903,
pp. 185 ff. argues in favour of about 1460. See Fournereau, _Ancien
Siam_, p. 242, inscription of 1426 A.D. and p. 186, inscription of
1510 described as Groupe de Sajjanalaya et Sukhodaya.]

[Footnote 209: Fournereau, vol. I. pp. 186 ff.]

[Footnote 210: O. Frankfurter, "King Mongkut," _Journal of Siam
Society_, vol. I. 1904.]

[Footnote 211: But it was his son who first decreed in 1868 that no
Siamese could be born a slave. Slavery for debt, though illegal, is
said not to be practically extinct.]

[Footnote 212: = Culalankara.]

[Footnote 213: The word has been derived from Vata, a grove, but may
it not be the Pali Vatthu, Sanskrit Vastu, a site or building?]

[Footnote 214: = Uposatha.]

[Footnote 215: These finials are very common on the roof ends of
Siamese temples and palaces. It is strange that they also are found in
conjunction with multiple roofs in Norwegian Churches of eleventh
century. See de Beylie, _Architecture hindoue dans l'extreme Orient_,
pp. 47, 48.]

[Footnote 216: The Buddha is generally known as Phra: Khodom
(=Gotama).]

[Footnote 217: In an old Siamese bronze from Kampeng Pet, figured in
Grunwedel's _Buddhist Art in India_, p. 179, fig. 127, the Siro rot
seems to be in process of evolution.]

[Footnote 218: P.A. Thompson, _Lotus Land_, 1906, p. 100.]

[Footnote 219: Four images facing the four quarters are considered in
Burma to represent the last four Buddhas and among the Jains some of
the Tirthankaras are so represented, the legend being that whenever
they preached they seemed to face their hearers on every side.]

[Footnote 220: These figures only take account of twelve out of the
seventeen provinces.]

[Footnote 221: Thompson, _Lotus Land_, p. 120.]

[Footnote 222: They bear the title of Somdet Phra: Chao
Rajagama and have authority respectively over (_a_) ordinary Buddhists
in northern Siam, (_b_) ordinary Buddhists in the south, (_c_)
hermits, (_d_) the Dhammayut sect.]

[Footnote 223: For this and many other details I am indebted to P.A.
Thompson, _Lotus Land_, p. 123.]

[Footnote 224: When gifts of food are made to monks on ceremonial
occasions, they usually acknowledge the receipt by reciting verses 7
and 8 of this Sutta, commonly known as _Yatha_ from the first word.]

[Footnote 225: Kathina in Pali. See Mahavag. cap. VII.]

[Footnote 226: Fournereau, p. 225.]

[Footnote 227: The ploughing festival is a recognized imperial
ceremony in China. In India ceremonies for private landowners are
prescribed in the Grihya Sutras but I do not know if their
performance by kings is anywhere definitely ordered. However in the
Nidana Katha 270 the Buddha's father celebrates an imposing ploughing
ceremony.]

[Footnote 228: _I.e._ Tusita. Compare such English names descriptive
of beautiful scenery as Heaven's Gate.]

[Footnote 229: See Keith, _Aitereya Aranyaka_, pp. 174-178. The
ceremony there described undoubtedly originated in a very ancient
popular festival.]

[Footnote 230: _I.e._ float-raft. Most authors give the word as
Krathong, but Pallegoix prefers Kathong.]

[Footnote 231: _Chulakantamangalam_, Bangkok, 1893.]

[Footnote 232: P.A. Thompson, _Lotus Land_, p. 134.]

[Footnote 233: For the Brahmans of Siam see Frankfurter, _Oriental.
Archiv._ 1913, pp. 196-7.]

[Footnote 234: _Chulakantamangala_, p. 56.]

[Footnote 235: They are mostly observances such as Gotama would have
classed among "low arts" (tiracchanavijja). At present the monks of
Siam deal freely in charms and exorcisms but on important occasions
public opinion seems to have greater confidence in the skill and power
of Brahmans.]

[Footnote 236: King Sri Suryavamsa Rama relates in an
inscription of about 1365 how he set up statues of Paramesvara and
Vishnukarma (?) and appointed Brahmans to serve them.]

[Footnote 237: Maj. Nik. 47.]

[Footnote 238: _Siam Society_, vol. IV. part ii. 1907. _Some Siamese
ghost-lore_ by A.J. Irwin.]

[Footnote 239: _Jour. Siam Soc._ 1909, p. 28. "In yonder mountain is a
demon spirit Phra Khaphung that is greater than every other
spirit in this realm. If any Prince ruling this realm reverences him
well with proper offerings, this realm stands firm, this realm
prospers. If the spirit be not reverenced well, if the offerings be
not right, the spirit in the mountain does not protect, does not
regard:--this realm perishes."]

[Footnote 240: The most popular life of the Buddha in Siamese is
called Pa:thomma Somphothiyan, translated by Alabaster in
_The Wheel of the Law_. But like the Lalita vistara and other Indian
lives on which it is modelled it stops short at the enlightenment.
Another well-known religious book is the Traiphum (=Tribhumi), an
account of the universe according to Hindu principles, compiled in
1776 from various ancient works.

The Pali literature of Siam is not very large. Some account of it is
given by Coedes in _B.E.F.E.O._ 1915, III. pp. 39-46.]

[Footnote 241: When in Bangkok in 1907 I saw in a photographer's shop
a photograph of the procession which escorted these relics to their
destination. It was inscribed "Arrival of Buddha's tooth from Kandy."
This shows how deceptive historical evidence may be. The inscription
was the testimony of an eye-witness and yet it was entirely wrong.]




CHAPTER XXXVIII

CAMBOJA[242]

1


The French Protectorate of Camboja corresponds roughly to the nucleus,
though by no means to the whole extent of the former Empire of the
Khmers. The affinities of this race have given rise to considerable
discussion and it has been proposed to connect them with the
Munda tribes of India on one side and with the Malays and
Polynesians on the other.[243] They are allied linguistically to the
Mons or Talaings of Lower Burma and to the Khasias of Assam, but it is
not proved that they are similarly related to the Annamites, and
recent investigators are not disposed to maintain the Mon-Annam family
of languages proposed by Logan and others. But the undoubted
similarity of the Mon and Khmer languages suggests that the ancestors
of those who now speak them were at one time spread over the central
and western parts of Indo-China but were subsequently divided and
deprived of much territory by the southward invasions of the Thais in
the middle ages.

The Khmers also called themselves Kambuja or Kamvuja and their name
for the country is still either Srok Kampuchea or Srok Khmer.[244]
Attempts have been made to find a Malay origin for this name Kambuja
but native tradition regards it as a link with India and affirms that
the race is descended from Kambu Svayambhuva and Mera or Pera who was
given to him by Siva as wife.[245] This legend hardly proves that the
Khmer people came from India but they undoubtedly received thence
their civilization, their royal family and a considerable number of
Hindu immigrants, so that the mythical ancestor of their kings
naturally came to be regarded as the progenitor of the race. The
Chinese traveller Chou Ta-kuan (1296 A.D.) says that the country known
to the Chinese as Chen-la is called by the natives Kan-po-chih but
that the present dynasty call it Kan-p'u-chih on the authority of
Sanskrit (Hsi-fan) works. The origin of the name Chen-la is unknown.

There has been much discussion respecting the relation of Chen-la to
the older kingdom of Fu-nan which is the name given by Chinese
historians until the early part of the seventh century to a state
occupying the south-eastern and perhaps central portions of
Indo-China. It has been argued that Chen-la is simply the older name
of Fu-nan and on the other hand that Fu-nan is a wider designation
including several states, one of which, Chen-la or Camboja, became
paramount at the expense of the others.[246] But the point seems
unimportant for their religious history with which we have to
deal. In religion and general civilization both were subject to Indian
influence and it is not recorded that the political circumstances
which turned Fu-nan into Chen-la were attended by any religious
revolution.

The most important fact in the history of these countries, as in
Champa and Java, is the presence from early times of Indian influence
as a result of commerce, colonization, or conquest. Orientalists have
only recently freed themselves from the idea that the ancient Hindus,
and especially their religion, were restricted to the limits of India.
In mediaeval times this was true. Emigration was rare and it was only
in the nineteenth century that the travelling Hindu became a familiar
and in some British colonies not very welcome visitor. Even now Hindus
of the higher caste evade rather than deny the rule which forbids them
to cross the ocean.[247] But for a long while Hindus have frequented
the coast of East Africa[248] and in earlier centuries their
traders, soldiers and missionaries covered considerable distances by
sea. The Jatakas[249] mention voyages to Babylon: Vijaya and Mahinda
reached Ceylon in the fifth and third centuries B.C. respectively.
There is no certain evidence as to the epoch when Hindus first
penetrated beyond the Malay peninsula, but Java is mentioned in the
Ramayana:[250] the earliest Sanskrit inscriptions of Champa date from
our third or perhaps second century, and the Chinese Annals of the
Tsin indicate that at a period considerably anterior to that dynasty
there were Hindus in Fu-nan.[251] It is therefore safe to conclude
that they must have reached these regions about the beginning of the
Christian era and, should any evidence be forthcoming, there is no
reason why this date should not be put further back. At present we can
only say that the establishment of Hindu kingdoms probably implies
earlier visits of Hindu traders and that voyages to the south coast of
Indo-China and the Archipelago were probably preceded by settlements
on the Isthmus of Kra, for instance at Ligor.

The motives which prompted this eastward movement have been variously
connected with religious persecution in India, missionary enterprise,
commerce and political adventure. The first is the least probable.
There is little evidence for the systematic persecution of Buddhists
in India and still less for the persecution of Brahmans by Buddhists.
Nor can these Indian settlements be regarded as primarily religious
missions. The Brahmans have always been willing to follow and
supervise the progress of Hindu civilization, but they have never
shown any disposition to evangelize foreign countries apart from Hindu
settlements in them. The Buddhists had this evangelistic temper and
the journeys of their missionaries doubtless stimulated other classes
to go abroad, but still no inscriptions or annals suggest that the
Hindu migrations to Java and Camboja were parallel to Mahinda's
mission to Ceylon. Nor is there any reason to think that they were
commanded or encouraged by Indian Rajas, for no mention of their
despatch has been found in India, and no Indian state is recorded to
have claimed suzerainty over these colonies. It therefore seems likely
that they were founded by traders and also by adventurers who followed
existing trade routes and had their own reasons for leaving India. In
a country where dynastic quarrels were frequent and the younger sons
of Rajas had a precarious tenure of life, such reasons can be easily
imagined. In Camboja we find an Indian dynasty established after a
short struggle, but in other countries, such as Java and Sumatra,
Indian civilization endured because it was freely adopted by native
chiefs and not because it was forced on them as a result of conquest.

The inscriptions discovered in Camboja and deciphered by the labours
of French savants offer with one lacuna (about 650-800 A.D.) a fairly
continuous history of the country from the sixth to the thirteenth
centuries. For earlier periods we depend almost entirely on Chinese
accounts which are fragmentary and not interested in anything but the
occasional relations of China with Fu-nan. The annals of the Tsin
dynasty[252] already cited say that from 265 A.D. onwards the kings
of Fu-nan sent several embassies to the Chinese Court, adding that the
people have books and that their writing resembles that of the Hu. The
Hu are properly speaking a tribe of Central Asia, but the expression
doubtless means no more than alphabetic writing as opposed to Chinese
characters and such an alphabet can hardly have had other than an
Indian origin. Originally, adds the Annalist, the sovereign was a
woman, but there came a stranger called Hun-Hui who worshipped the
Devas and had had a dream in which one of them gave him a bow[253] and
ordered him to sail for Fu-nan. He conquered the country and married
the Queen but his descendants deteriorated and one Fan-Hsun founded
another dynasty. The annals of the Ch'i dynasty (479-501) give
substantially the same story but say that the stranger was called
Hun-T'ien (which is probably the correct form of the name) and that he
came from Chi or Chiao, an unknown locality. The same annals state
that towards the end of the fifth century the king of Fu-nan who
bore the family name of Ch'iao-ch'en-ju[254] or Kaundinya and
the personal name of She-yeh-po-mo (Jayavarman) traded with Canton. A
Buddhist monk named Nagasena returned thence with some Cambojan
merchants and so impressed this king with his account of China that he
was sent back in 484 to beg for the protection of the Emperor. The
king's petition and a supplementary paper by Nagasena are preserved in
the annals. They seem to be an attempt to represent the country as
Buddhist, while explaining that Mahesvara is its tutelary deity.

The Liang annals also state that during the Wu dynasty (222-280) Fan
Chan, then king of Fu-nan, sent a relative named Su-Wu on an embassy
to India, to a king called Mao-lun, which probably represents
Murunda, a people of the Ganges valley mentioned by the
Puranas and by Ptolemy. This king despatched a return embassy to
Fu-nan and his ambassadors met there an official sent by the Emperor
of China.[255] The early date ascribed to these events is noticeable.

The Liang annals contain also the following statements. Between the
years 357 and 424 A.D. named as the dates of embassies sent to China,
an Indian Brahman called Ch'iao-ch'en-ju (Kaundinya) heard a
supernatural voice bidding him go and reign in Fu-nan. He met with a
good reception and was elected king. He changed the customs of the
country and made them conform to those of India. One of his
successors, Jayavarman, sent a coral image of Buddha in 503 to the
Emperor Wu-ti (502-550). The inhabitants of Fu-nan are said to make
bronze images of the heavenly genii with two or four heads and four or
eight arms. Jayavarman was succeeded by a usurper named Liu-t'o-pa-mo
(Rudravarman) who sent an image made of sandal wood to the Emperor in
519 and in 539 offered him a hair of the Buddha twelve feet long. The
Sui annals (589-618) state that Citrasena, king of Chen-la, conquered
Fu-nan and was succeeded by his son Isanasena.

Two monks of Fu-nan are mentioned among the translators of the Chinese
scriptures,[256] namely, Sanghapala and Mandra. Both arrived in
China during the first years of the sixth century and their works are
extant. The pilgrim I-Ching who returned from India in 695 says[257]
that to the S.W. of Champa lies the country Po-nan, formerly called
Fu-nan, which is the southern corner of Jambudvipa. He says that "of
old it was a country the inhabitants of which lived naked; the people
were mostly worshippers of devas and later on Buddhism flourished
there, but a wicked king has now expelled and exterminated them all
and there are no members of the Buddhist brotherhood at all."

These data from Chinese authorities are on the whole confirmed by the
Cambojan inscriptions. Rudravarman is mentioned[258] and the kings
claim to belong to the race of Kaundinya.[259] This is the name
of a Brahman gotra, but such designations were often borne by
Kshatriyas and the conqueror of Camboja probably belonged to that
caste. It may be affirmed with some certainty that he started from
south-eastern India and possibly he sailed from Mahabalipur (also
called the Seven Pagodas). Masulipatam was also a port of embarcation
for the East and was connected with Broach by a trade route running
through Tagara, now Ter in the Nizam's dominions. By using this road,
it was possible to avoid the west coast, which was infested by
pirates.

The earliest Cambojan inscriptions date from the beginning of the
seventh century and are written in an alphabet closely resembling that
of the inscriptions in the temple of Papanatha at Pattadkal in
the Bijapur district.[260] They are composed in Sanskrit verse of a
somewhat exuberant style, which revels in the commonplaces of Indian
poetry. The deities most frequently mentioned are Siva by himself
and Siva united with Vishnu in the form Hari-Hara. The names of
the kings end in Varman and this termination is also specially
frequent in names of the Pallava dynasty.[261] The magnificent
monuments still extant attest a taste for architecture on a large
scale similar to that found among the Dravidians. These and many other
indications justify the conclusion that the Indian civilization and
religion which became predominant in Camboja were imported from the
Deccan.

The Chinese accounts distinctly mention two invasions, one under
Ch'iao-ch'en-ju (Kaundinya) about 400 A.D. and one considerably
anterior to 265 under Hun-T'ien. It might be supposed that this name
also represents Kaundinya and that there is a confusion of
dates. But the available evidence is certainly in favour of the
establishment of Hindu civilization in Fu-nan long before 400 A.D. and
there is nothing improbable in the story of the two invasions and even
of two Kaundinyas. Maspero suggests that the first invasion came
from Java and formed part of the same movement which founded the
kingdom of Champa. It is remarkable that an inscription in Sanskrit
found on the east coast of Borneo and apparently dating from the fifth
century mentions Kundagga as the grandfather of the reigning
king, and the Liang annals say that the king of Poli (probably in
Borneo but according to some in Sumatra) was called Ch'iao-ch'en-ju.
It seems likely that the Indian family of Kaundinya was
established somewhere in the South Seas (perhaps in Java) at an early
period and thence invaded various countries at various times. But
Fu-nan is a vague geographical term and it may be that Hun-T'ien
founded a Hindu dynasty in Champa.

It is clear that during the period of the inscriptions the
religion of Camboja was a mixture of Brahmanism and Buddhism, the only
change noticeable being the preponderance of one or other element in
different centuries. But it would be interesting to know the value of
I-Ching's statement that Buddhism flourished in Fu-nan in early times
and was then subverted by a wicked king, by whom Bhavavarman[262] may
be meant. _Prima facie_ the statement is not improbable, for there is
no reason why the first immigrants should not have been Buddhists, but
the traditions connecting these countries with early Hinayanist
missionaries are vague. Taranatha[263] states that the disciples of
Vasubandhu introduced Buddhism into the country of Koki (Indo-China)
but his authority does not count for much in such a matter. The
statement of I-Ching however has considerable weight, especially as
the earliest inscription found in Champa (that of Vocan) appears to be
inspired by Buddhism.

2


It may be well to state briefly the chief facts of Cambojan
history[264] before considering the phases through which religion
passed. Until the thirteenth century our chief authorities are the
Sanskrit and Khmer inscriptions, supplemented by notices in the
Chinese annals. The Khmer inscriptions are often only a translation or
paraphrase of Sanskrit texts found in the same locality and, as a
rule, are more popular, having little literary pretension. They
frequently contain lists of donations or of articles to be supplied by
the population for the upkeep of pious foundations. After the
fourteenth century we have Cambojan annals of dubious value and we
also find inscriptions in Pali or in modern Cambojan. The earliest
Sanskrit inscriptions date from the beginning of the seventh century
and mention works undertaken in 604 and 624.

The first important king is Bhavavarman (c. 500 A.D.), a conqueror
and probably a usurper, who extended his kingdom considerably towards
the west. His career of conquest was continued by Mahavarman (also
called Citrasena), by Isanavarman and by Jayavarman.[265] This last
prince was on the throne in 667, but his reign is followed by a lacuna
of more than a century. Notices in the Chinese annals, confirmed by
the double genealogies given for this period in later inscriptions,
indicate that Camboja was divided for some time into two states, one
littoral and the other inland.

Clear history begins again with the reign of Jayavarman II (802-869).
Later sovereigns evidently regard him as the great national hero and
he lives in popular legend as the builder of a magnificent palace,
Beng Mealea, whose ruins still exist[266] and as the recipient of the
sacred sword of Indra which is preserved at Phnom-penh to this day. We
are told that he "came from Java," which is more likely to be some
locality in the Malay Peninsula or Laos than the island of that name.
It is possible that Jayavarman was carried away captive to this region
but returned to found a dynasty independent of it.[267]

The ancient city of Angkor has probably done more to make Camboja
known in Europe than any recent achievements of the Khmer race. In the
centre of it stands the temple now called Bayon and outside its walls
are many other edifices of which the majestic Angkor Wat is the
largest and best preserved. King Indravarman (877-899) seems
responsible for the selection of the site but he merely commenced the
construction of the Bayon. The edifice was completed by his son
Yasovarman (889-908) who also built a town round it, called
Yasod harapura, Kambupuri or Mahanagara. Angkor Thom is the
Cambojan translation of this last name, Angkor being a corruption of
Nokor ( = Nagara). Yasovarman's empire comprised nearly all
Indo-China between Burma and Champa and he has been identified with
the Leper king of Cambojan legend. His successors continued to
embellish Angkor Thom, but Jayavarman IV abandoned it and it was
deserted for several years until Rajendravarman II (944-968) made it
the capital again. The Chinese Annals, supported by allusions in the
inscriptions, state that this prince conquered Champa. The long
reigns of Jayavarman V, Suryavarman I, and Udayadityavarman, which
cover more than a century (968-1079) seem to mark a prosperous period
when architecture flourished, although Udayadityavarman had to contend
with two rebellions. Another great king, Suryavarman II (1112-1162)
followed shortly after them, and for a time succeeded in uniting
Camboja and Champa under his sway. Some authorities credit him with a
successful expedition to Ceylon. There is not sufficient evidence for
this, but he was a great prince and, in spite of his foreign wars,
maintained peace and order at home.

Jayavarman VII, who appears to have reigned from 1162 to 1201, reduced
to obedience his unruly vassals of the north and successfully invaded
Champa which remained for thirty years, though not without rebellion,
the vassal of Camboja. It was evacuated by his successor Indravarman
in 1220.

After this date there is again a gap of more than a century in
Cambojan history, and when the sequence of events becomes clear again,
we find that Siam has grown to be a dangerous and aggressive enemy.
But though the vigour of the kingdom may have declined, the account of
the Chinese traveller Chou Ta-kuan who visited Angkor Thom in 1296
shows that it was not in a state of anarchy nor conquered by Siam.
There had however been a recent war with Siam and he mentions that the
country was devastated. He unfortunately does not tell us the name of
the reigning king and the list of sovereigns begins again only in 1340
when the Annals of Camboja take up the history. They are not of great
value. The custom of recording all events of importance prevailed at
the Cambojan Court in earlier times but these chronicles were lost in
the eighteenth century. King Ang Chan (1796-1834) ordered that they
should be re-written with the aid of the Siamese chronicles and such
other materials as were available and fixed 1340 as the point of
departure, apparently because the Siamese chronicles start from that
date.[268] Although the period of the annals offers little but a
narrative of dissensions at home and abroad, of the interference of
Annam on one side and of Siam on the other, yet it does not seem that
the sudden cessation of inscriptions and of the ancient style of
architecture in the thirteenth century was due to the collapse of
Camboja, for even in the sixteenth century it offered a valiant, and
often successful, resistance to aggressions from the west. But Angkor
Thom and the principal monuments were situated near the Siamese
frontier and felt the shock of every collision. The sense of security,
essential for the construction of great architectural works, had
disappeared and the population became less submissive and less willing
to supply forced labour without which such monuments could not be
erected.

The Siamese captured Angkor Thom in 1313, 1351 and 1420 but did not on
any occasion hold it for long. Again in 1473 they occupied Chantaboun,
Korat and Angkor but had to retire and conclude peace. King Ang Chan I
successfully disputed the right of Siam to treat him as a vassal and
established his capital at Lovek, which he fortified and ornamented.
He reigned from 1505 to 1555 and both he and his son, Barom Racha,
seem entitled to rank among the great kings of Camboja. But the
situation was clearly precarious and when a minor succeeded to the
throne in 1574 the Siamese seized the opportunity and recaptured Lovek
and Chantaboun. Though this capture was the death blow to the power of
the Khmers, the kingdom of Camboja did not cease to exist but for
nearly three centuries continued to have an eventful but uninteresting
history as the vassal of Siam or Annam or even of both,[269] until
in the middle of the nineteenth century the intervention of France
substituted a European Protectorate for these Asiatic rivalries.

The provinces of Siem-reap and Battambang, in which Angkor Thom and
the principal ancient monuments are situated, were annexed by Siam at
the end of the eighteenth century, but in virtue of an arrangement
negotiated by the French Government they were restored to Camboja in
1907, Krat and certain territories being at the same time ceded to
Siam.[270]

3


The religious history of Camboja may be divided into two periods,
exclusive of the possible existence there of Hinayanist Buddhism in
the early centuries of our era. In the first period, which witnessed
the construction of the great monuments and the reigns of the great
kings, both Brahmanism and Mahayanist Buddhism nourished, but as in
Java and Champa without mutual hostility. This period extends
certainly from the sixth to the thirteenth centuries and perhaps its
limits should be stretched to 400-1400 A.D. In any case it passed
without abrupt transition into the second period in which, under
Siamese influence, Hinayanist Buddhism supplanted the older faiths,
although the ceremonies of the Cambojan court still preserve a good
deal of Brahmanic ritual.

During the first period, Brahmanism and Mahayanism were professed by
the Court and nobility. The multitude of great temples and opulent
endowments, the knowledge of Sanskrit literature and the use of Indian
names, leave no doubt about this, but it is highly probable that the
mass of the people had their own humbler forms of worship. Still there
is no record of anything that can be called Khmer--as opposed to
Indian--religion. As in Siam, the veneration of nature spirits is
universal in Camboja and little shrines elevated on poles are erected
in their honour in the neighbourhood of almost every house.
Possibly the more important of these spirits were identified in
early times with Indian deities or received Sanskrit names. Thus we
hear of a pious foundation in honour of Brahmarakshas,[271] perhaps a
local mountain spirit. Siva is adored under the name of Sri
Sikharesvara, the Lord of the Peak and Krishna appears to be
identified with a local god called Sri Champesvara who was
worshipped by Jayavarman VI.[272]

The practice of accepting and hinduizing strange gods with whom they
came in contact was so familiar to the Brahmans that it would be odd
if no examples of it occurred in Camboja. Still the Brahmanic religion
which has left such clear records there was in the main not a
hinduized form of any local cult but a direct importation of Indian
thought, ritual and literature. The Indian invaders or colonists were
accompanied by Brahmans: their descendants continued to bear Indian
names and to give them to all places of importance: Sanskrit was the
ecclesiastical and official language, for the inscriptions written in
Khmer are clearly half-contemptuous notifications to the common
people, respecting such details as specially concerned them:
_Asramas_ and castes (_varna_) are mentioned[273] and it is
probable that natives were only gradually and grudgingly admitted to
the higher castes. There is also reason to believe that this Hindu
civilization was from time to time vivified by direct contact with
India. The embassy of Su-Wu has already been mentioned[274] and an
inscription records the marriage of a Cambojan princess with a Brahman
called Divakara who came from the banks of the Yamuna, "where
Krishna sported in his infancy."

During the whole period of the inscriptions the worship of Siva seems
to have been the principal cultus and to some extent the state
religion, for even kings who express themselves in their inscriptions
as devout Buddhists do not fail to invoke him. But there is no trace
of hostility to Vishnuism and the earlier inscriptions constantly
celebrate the praises of the compound deity Vishnu-Siva, known under
such names as Hari-Hara,[275] Sambhu-Vishnu, Sankara-Narayana, etc.
Thus an inscription of Ang-Pou dating from Isanavarman's reign says
"Victorious are Hara and Acyuta become one for the good of the world,
though as the spouses of Parvati and Sri they have different
forms."[276] But the worship of this double being is accompanied by
pure Sivaism and by the adoration of other deities. In the earliest
inscriptions Bhavavarman invokes Siva and dedicates a linga. He also
celebrates the compound deity under the name of Sambhu-Vishnu and
mentions Uma, Lakshmi, Bharati, Dharma, the Maruts, and Vishnu under
the names of Caturbhuja and Trailokyasara. There appears to be no
allusion to the worship of Vishnu-Siva as two in one after the seventh
century, but though Siva became exalted at the expense of his partner,
Vishnu must have had adorers for two kings, Jayavarman III and
Suryavarman II, were known after their death by the names of
Vishnu-loka and Parama-Vishnu-loka.

Siva became generally recognized as the supreme deity, in a
comprehensive but not an exclusive sense. He is the universal spirit
from whom emanate Brahma and Vishnu. His character as the Destroyer
is not much emphasized: he is the God of change, and therefore of
reproduction, whose symbol is the Linga. It is remarkable to find that
a pantheistic form of Sivaism is clearly enunciated in one of the
earliest inscriptions.[277] Siva is there styled Vibhu, the
omnipresent, Paramvrahma ( = Brahma), Jagatpati, Pasupati. An
inscription found at Angkor[278] mentions an Acarya of the
Pasupatas as well as an Acarya of the Saivas and Chou Ta-kuan
seems to allude to the worshippers of Pasupati under the name of
Pa-ssu-wei. It would therefore appear that the Pasupatas existed
in Camboja as a distinct sect and there are some indications[279] that
ideas which prevailed among the Lingayats also found their way
thither.

The most interesting and original aspect of Cambojan religion is its
connection with the state and the worship of deities somehow
identified with the king or with prominent personages.[280] These
features are also found in Champa and Java. In all these countries it
was usual that when a king founded a temple, the god worshipped in it
should be called by his name or by something like it. Thus when
Bhadravarman dedicated a temple to Siva, the god was styled
Bhadresvara. More than this, when a king or any distinguished person
died, he was commemorated by a statue which reproduced his features
but represented him with the attributes of his favourite god. Thus
Indravarman and Yasovarman dedicated at Bako and Lolei shrines in
which deceased members of the royal family were commemorated in the
form of images of Siva and Devi bearing names similar to their own.
Another form of apotheosis was to describe a king by a posthumous
title, indicating that he had gone to the heaven of his divine patron
such as Paramavishnuloka or Buddhaloka. The temple of Bayon was a
truly national fane, almost a Westminster abbey, in whose many shrines
all the gods and great men of the country were commemorated. The
French archaeologists recognize four classes of these shrines
dedicated respectively to (_a_) Indian deities, mostly special forms
of Siva, Devi and Vishnu; (_b_) Mahayanist Buddhas, especially Buddhas
of healing, who were regarded as the patron saints of various towns
and mountains; (_c_) similar local deities apparently of Cambojan
origin and perhaps corresponding to the God of the City worshipped in
every Chinese town; (_d_) deified kings and notables, who appear to
have been represented in two forms, the human and divine, bearing
slightly different names. Thus one inscription speaks of Sri
Mahendresvari who is the divine form (vrah rupa) of the lady Sri
Mahendralakshmi.

The presiding deity of the Bayon was Siva, adored under the form of
the linga. The principal external ornaments of the building are forty
towers each surmounted by four heads. These were formerly thought to
represent Brahma but there is little doubt that they are meant for
lingas bearing four faces of Siva, since each head has three
eyes. Such lingas are occasionally seen in India[281] and many metal
cases bearing faces and made to be fitted on lingas have been
discovered in Champa. These four-headed columns are found on the gates
of Angkor Thom as well as in the Bayon and are singularly impressive.
The emblem adored in the central shrine of the Bayon was probably a
linga but its title was _Kamraten jagat ta raja_ or _Devaraja_, the
king-god. More explicitly still it is styled _Kamraten jagat ta
rajya_, the god who is the kingdom. It typified and contained the
royal essence present in the living king of Camboja and in all her
kings. Several inscriptions make it clear that not only dead but
living people could be represented by statue-portraits which
identified them with a deity, and in one very remarkable record a
general offers to the king the booty he has captured, asking him to
present it "to your subtle ego who is Isvara dwelling in a golden
linga."[282] Thus this subtle ego dwells in a linga, is identical with
Siva, and manifests itself in the successive kings of the royal
house.

The practices described have some analogies in India. The custom of
describing the god of a temple by the name of the founder was known
there.[283] The veneration of ancestors is universal; there are some
mausolea (for instance at Ahar near Udeypore) and the notion that in
life the soul can reside elsewhere than in the body is an occasional
popular superstition. Still these ideas and practices are not
conspicuous features of Hinduism and the Cambojans had probably come
within the sphere of another influence. In all eastern Asia the
veneration of the dead is the fundamental and ubiquitous form of
religion and in China we find fully developed such ideas as that the
great should be buried in monumental tombs, that a spirit can be made
to reside in a tablet or image, and that the human soul is compound so
that portions of it can be in different places. These beliefs combined
with the Indian doctrine that the deity is manifested in
incarnations, in the human soul and in images afford a good
theoretical basis for the worship of the Devaraja. It was also
agreeable to far-eastern ideas that religion and the state should be
closely associated and the Cambojan kings would be glad to imitate the
glories of the Son of Heaven. But probably a simpler cause tended to
unite church and state in all these Hindu colonies. In mediaeval India
the Brahmans became so powerful that they could claim to represent
religion and civilization apart from the state. But in Camboja and
Champa Brahmanic religion and civilization were bound up with the
state. Both were attacked by and ultimately succumbed to the same
enemies.

The Brahmanism of Camboja, as we know it from the inscriptions, was so
largely concerned with the worship of this "Royal God" that it might
almost be considered a department of the court. It seems to have been
thought essential to the dignity of a Sovereign who aspired to be more
than a local prince, that his Chaplain or preceptor should have a
pontifical position. A curious parallel to this is shown by those
mediaeval princes of eastern Europe who claimed for their chief bishops
the title of patriarch as a complement to their own imperial
pretensions. In its ultimate form the Cambojan hierarchy was the work
of Jayavarman II, who, it will be remembered, reestablished the
kingdom after an obscure but apparently disastrous interregnum. He
made the priesthood of the Royal God hereditary in the family of
Sivakaivalya and the sacerdotal dynasty thus founded enjoyed during
some centuries a power inferior only to that of the kings.

In the inscriptions of Sdok Kak Thom[284] the history of this family
is traced from the reign of Jayavarman II to 1052. The beginning of
the story as related in both the Sanskrit and Khmer texts is
interesting but obscure. It is to the effect that Jayavarman, anxious
to assure his position as an Emperor (Cakravartin) independent of
Java,[285] summoned from Janapada a Brahman called Hiranyadama,
learned in magic (siddhividya), who arranged the rules (viddhi) for
the worship of the Royal God and taught the king's Chaplain,
Sivakaivalya, four treatises called Vrah Vinasikha, Nayottara, Sammoha
and Sirascheda. These works are not otherwise known.[286] The king
made a solemn compact that "only the members of his (Sivakaivalya's)
maternal[287] family, men and women, should be Yajakas (sacrificers or
officiants) to the exclusion of all others." The restriction refers no
doubt only to the cult of the Royal God and the office of court
chaplain, called Purohita, Guru or Hotri, of whom there were at least
two.

The outline of this narrative, that a learned Brahman was imported and
charged with the instruction of the royal chaplain, is simple and
probable but the details are perplexing. The Sanskrit treatises
mentioned are unknown and the names singular. Janapada as the name of
a definite locality is also strange,[288] but it is conceivable that
the word may have been used in Khmer as a designation of India or a
part of it.

The inscription goes on to relate the gratifying history of the
priestly family, the grants of land made to them, the honours they
received. We gather that it was usual for an estate to be given to a
priest with the right to claim forced labour from the population. He
then proceeded to erect a town or village embellished with temples and
tanks. The hold of Brahmanism on the country probably depended more on
such priestly towns than on the convictions of the people. The
inscriptions often speak of religious establishments being restored
and sometimes say that they had become deserted and overgrown. We may
conclude that if the Brahman lords of a village ceased for any reason
to give it their attention, the labour and contributions requisite for
the upkeep of the temples were not forthcoming and the jungle was
allowed to grow over the buildings.

Numerous inscriptions testify to the grandeur of the Sivakaivalya
family. The monotonous lists of their properties and slaves, of the
statues erected in their honour and the number of parasols borne
before them show that their position was almost regal, even when the
king was a Buddhist. They prudently refrained from attempting to
occupy the throne, but probably no king could succeed unless
consecrated by them. Sadasiva, Sankarapandita and Divakarapandita
formed an ecclesiastical dynasty from about 1000 to 1100 A.D. parallel
to the long reigns of the kings in the same period.[289] The
last-named mentions in an inscription that he had consecrated three
kings and Sankarapandita, a man of great learning, was _de facto_
sovereign during the minority of his pupil Udayadityavarman nor did he
lose his influence when the young king attained his majority.

The shrine of the Royal God was first near Mt. Mahendra and was then
moved to Hariharalaya.[290] Its location was definitely fixed in the
reign of Indravarman, about 877 A.D. Two Sivakaivalya Brahmans,
Sivasoma and his pupil Vamasiva, chaplain of the king, built a
temple called the Sivasrama and erected a linga therein. It is
agreed that this building is the Bayon, which formed the centre of the
later city of Angkor. Indravarman also illustrated another
characteristic of the court religion by placing in the temple now
called Prah Kou three statues of Siva with the features of his
father, grandfather and Jayavarman II together with corresponding
statues of Sakti in the likeness of their wives. The next king,
Yasovarman, who founded the town of Angkor round the Bayon, built
near his palace another linga temple, now known as Ba-puon. He also
erected two convents, one Brahmanic and one Buddhist. An
inscription[291] gives several interesting particulars respecting the
former. It fixes the provisions to be supplied to priests and students
and the honours to be rendered to distinguished visitors. The right of
sanctuary is accorded and the sick and helpless are to receive food
and medicine. Also funeral rites are to be celebrated within its
precincts for the repose of the friendless and those who have died in
war. The royal residence was moved from Angkor in 928, but about
twenty years later the court returned thither and the inscriptions
record that the Royal God accompanied it.

The cultus was probably similar to what may be seen in the Sivaite
temples of India to-day. The principal lingam was placed in a shrine
approached through other chambers and accessible only to privileged
persons. Libations were poured over the emblem and sacred books were
recited. An interesting inscription[292] of about 600 A.D. relates how
Srisomasarman (probably a Brahman) presented to a temple "the
Ramayana, the Purana and complete Bharata" and made arrangements
for their recitation. Sanskrit literature was held in esteem. We are
told that Suryavarman I was versed in the Atharva-Veda and also in the
Bhashya, Kavyas, the six Darsanas, and the Dharmasastras.[293]
Sacrifices are also frequently mentioned and one inscription records
the performance of a Kotihoma.[294] The old Vedic ritual remained
to some extent in practice, for no circumstances are more favourable
to its survival than a wealthy court dominated by a powerful
hierarchy. Such ceremonies were probably performed in the ample
enclosures surrounding the temples.[295]

4


Mahayanist Buddhism existed in Camboja during the whole of the period
covered by the inscriptions, but it remained in such close alliance
with Brahmanism that it is hard to say whether it should be regarded
as a separate religion. The idea that the two systems were
incompatible obviously never occurred to the writers of the
inscriptions and Buddhism was not regarded as more distinct from
Sivaism and Vishnuism than these from one another. It had
nevertheless many fervent and generous, if not exclusive, admirers.
The earliest record of its existence is a short inscription dating
from the end of the sixth or beginning of the seventh century,[296]
which relates how a person called Pon Prajna Candra dedicated male and
female slaves to the three Bodhisattvas, Sasta,[297] Maitreya and
Avalokitesvara. The title given to the Bodhisattvas (Vrah
Kamrataan) which is also borne by Indian deities shows that this
Buddhism was not very different from the Brahmanic cult of Camboja.

It is interesting to find that Yasovarman founded in Angkor Thom a
Saugatasrama or Buddhist monastery parallel to his Brahmanasrama
already described. Its inmates enjoyed the same privileges and had
nearly the same rules and duties, being bound to afford sanctuary,
maintain the destitute and perform funeral masses. It is laid down
that an Acarya versed in Buddhist lore corresponds in rank to the
Acaryas of the Saivas and Pasupatas and that in both institutions
greater honour is to be shown to such Acaryas as also are learned in
grammar. A Buddhist Acarya ought to be honoured a little less than a
learned Brahman. Even in form the inscriptions recording the
foundation of the two Asramas show a remarkable parallelism. Both
begin with two stanzas addressed to Siva: then the Buddhist
inscription inserts a stanza in honour of the Buddha who delivers from
transmigration and gives nirvana, and then the two texts are identical
for several stanzas.[298]

Mahayanism appears to have flourished here especially from the tenth
to the thirteenth centuries and throughout the greater part of this
period we find the same feature that its principal devotees were not
the kings but their ministers. Suryavarman I (A.D. 1049) and
Jayavarman VII (A.D. 1221) in some sense deserved the name of
Buddhists since the posthumous title of the former was Nirvanapada and
the latter left a long inscription[299] beginning with a definitely
Buddhist invocation. Yet an inscription of Suryavarman which states in
its second verse that only the word of the Buddha is true, opens by
singing the praises of Siva, and Jayavarman certainly did not neglect
the Brahmanic gods. But for about a hundred years there was a series
of great ministers who specially encouraged Buddhism. Such were
Satyavarman (_c._ 900 A.D.), who was charged with the erection of the
building in Angkor known as Phimeanakas; Kavindrarimathana, minister
under Rajendravarman II and Jayavarman V, who erected many Buddhist
statues and Kirtipandita, minister of Jayavarman V. Kirtipandita was
the author[300] of the inscription found at Srey Santhor, which
states that thanks to his efforts the pure doctrine of the Buddha
reappeared like the moon from behind the clouds or the sun at dawn.

It may be easily imagined that the power enjoyed by the court chaplain
would dispose the intelligent classes to revolt against this hierarchy
and to favour liberty and variety in religion, so far as was safe.
Possibly the kings, while co-operating with a priesthood which
recognized them as semi-divine, were glad enough to let other
religious elements form some sort of counterpoise to a priestly family
which threatened to be omnipotent. Though the identification of
Sivaism and Buddhism became so complete that we actually find a
Trinity composed of Padmodbhava (Brahma), Ambhojanetra (Vishnu) and
the Buddha,[301] the inscriptions of the Buddhist ministers are marked
by a certain diplomacy and self-congratulation on the success of their
efforts, as if they felt that their position was meritorious, yet
delicate.

Thus in an inscription, the object of which seems to be to record the
erection of a statue of Prajna-paramita by Kavindrarimathana we are
told that the king charged him with the embellishment of
Yasodharapura because "though an eminent Buddhist" his loyalty was
above suspicion.[302] The same minister erected three towers at Bat
Cum with inscriptions[303] which record the dedication of a
tank. The first invokes the Buddha, Vajrapani[304] and Lokesvara.
In the others Lokesvara is replaced by Prajna-paramita who here, as
elsewhere, is treated as a goddess or Sakti and referred to as Devi
in another stanza.[305] The three inscriptions commemorate the
construction of a sacred tank but, though the author was a
Buddhist, he expressly restricts the use of it to Brahmanic
functionaries.

The inscription of Srey Santhor[306] (_c_. 975 A.D.) describes the
successful efforts of Kirtipandita to restore Buddhism and
gives the instructions of the king (Jayavarman V) as to its status.
The royal chaplain is by no means to abandon the worship of Siva
but he is to be well versed in Buddhist learning and on feast days he
will bathe the statue of the Buddha with due ceremony.

A point of interest in this inscription is the statement that
Kirtipandita introduced Buddhist books from abroad, including
the Sastra Madhyavibhaga and the commentary on the Tattvasangraha.
The first of these is probably the Madhyantavibhaga sastra[307] by
Vasubandhu and the authorship is worth attention as supporting
Taranatha's statement that the disciples of Vasubandhu introduced
Buddhism into Indo-China.

In the time of Jayavarman VII (_c_. 1185 A.D.), although Hindu
mythology is not discarded and though the king's chaplain (presumably
a Sivaite) receives every honour, yet Mahayanist Buddhism seems to
be frankly professed as the royal religion. It is noteworthy that
about the same time it becomes more prominent in Java and Champa.
Probably the flourishing condition of the faith in Ceylon and Burma
increased the prestige of all forms of Buddhism throughout
south-eastern Asia. A long inscription of Jayavarman in 145 stanzas
has been preserved in the temple of Ta Prohm near Angkor. It opens
with an invocation to the Buddha, in which are mentioned the three
bodies, Lokesvara,[308] and the Mother of the Jinas, by whom
Prajna-paramita must be meant. Siva is not invoked but allusion is
made to many Brahmanic deities and Bhikkhus and Brahmans are mentioned
together. The inscription contains a curious list of the materials
supplied daily for the temple services and of the personnel. Ample
provision is made for both, but it is not clear how far a purely
Buddhist ritual is contemplated and it seems probable that an
extensive Brahmanic cultus existed side by side with the Buddhist
ceremonial. We learn that there were clothes for the deities and
forty-five mosquito nets of Chinese material to protect their statues.
The Uposatha days seem to be alluded to[309] and the spring festival
is described, when "Bhagavat and Bhagavati" are to be escorted in
solemn procession with parasols, music, banners and dancing girls. The
whole staff, including Burmese and Chams (probably slaves), is put
down at the enormous figure of 79,365, which perhaps includes all the
