    God's truth abideth still,
      His kingdom is for ever.

Martin Luther was born in Eisleben, in Saxony, Nov. 10, 1483. He was
educated at the University of Erfurth, and became an Augustinian monk
and Professor of Philosophy and Divinity in the University of
Wittenberg. In 1517 he composed and placarded his ninety-five Theses
condemning certain practices of the Romish Church and three years later
the Pope published a bull excommunicating him, which he burnt openly
before a sympathetic multitude in Wittenberg. His life was a stormy one,
and he was more than once in mortal danger by reason of his antagonism
to the papal authority, but he found powerful patrons, and lived to see
the Reformation an organized fact. He died in his birthplace, Eisleben,
Feb. 18th, 1546.

The translation of the "Ein feste burg," given above, in part, is by
Rev. Frederick Henry Hedge, D.D., born in Cambridge, March 1805, a
graduate of Harvard, and formerly minister of the Unitarian Church in
Bangor, Me. Died, 1890.

Luther wrote thirty-six hymns, to some of which he fitted his own music,
for he was a musician and singer as well as an eloquent preacher. The
tune in which "Ein feste Burg" is sung in the hymnals, was composed by
himself. The hymn has also a noble rendering in the music of Sebastian
Bach, 8-4 time, found in _Hymns Ancient and Modern_.


BARTHOLOMEW RINGWALDT.

"Great God, What Do I See and Hear?"

The history of this hymn is somewhat indefinite, though common consent
now attributes to Ringwaldt the stanza beginning with the above line.
The imitation of the "Dies Irae" in German which was first in use was
printed in Jacob Klug's "_Gesangbuch_" in 1535. Ringwaldt's hymn of the
Last Day, also inspired from the ancient Latin original, appears in his
_Handbuchlin_ of 1586, but does not contain this stanza. The first line
is, "The awful Day will surely come," (Es ist gewisslich an der Zeit).
Nevertheless through the more than two hundred years that the hymn has
been translated and re-translated, and gone through inevitable
revisions, some vital identity in the spirit and tone of the one
seven-line stanza has steadily connected it with Ringwaldt's name.
Apparently it is the single survivor of a great lost hymn--edited and
altered out of recognition. But its power evidently inspired the added
verses, as we have them. Dr. Collyer found it, and, regretting that it
was too short to sing in public service, composed stanzas 2d, 3d and
4th. It is likely that Collyer first met with it in _Psalms and Hymns
for Public and Private Devotion_, Sheffield 1802, where it appeared
anonymously. So far as known this was its first publication in English.
Ringwaldt's stanza and two of Collyer's are here given:

    Great God, what do I see and hear!
      The end of things created!
    The Judge of mankind doth appear
      On clouds of glory seated.
    The trumpet sounds, the graves restore
    The dead which they contained before;
      Prepare, my soul, to meet Him.

    The dead in Christ shall first arise
      At the last trumpet sounding,
    Caught up to meet Him in the skies,
      With joy their Lord surrounding.
    No gloomy fears their souls dismay
    His presence sheds eternal day
      On those prepared to meet Him.

    Far over space to distant spheres
      The lightnings are prevailing
    Th' ungodly rise, and all their tears
      And sighs are unavailing.
    The day of grace is past and gone;
    They shake before the Judge's Throne
      All unprepared to meet Him.

Bartholomew Ringwaldt, pastor of the Lutheran Church of Longfeld,
Prussia, was born in 1531, and died in 1599. His hymns appear in a
collection entitled _Hymns for the Sundays and Festivals of the Whole
Year_.

Rev. William Bengo Collyer D.D., was born at Blackheath near London,
April 14, 1782, educated at Homerton College and settled over a
Congregational Church in Peckham. In 1812 he published a book of hymns,
and in 1837 a _Service Book_ to which he contributed eighty-nine hymns.
He died Jan, 9, 1854.


_THE TUNE._

Probably it was the customary singing of Ringwaldt's hymn (in Germany)
to Luther's tune that gave it for some time the designation of "Luther's
Hymn," the title by which the music is still known--an air either
composed or adapted by Luther, and rendered perhaps unisonously or with
extempore chords. It was not until early in the last century that
Vincent Novello wrote to it the noble arrangement now in use. It is a
strong, even-time harmony with lofty tenor range, and very impressive
with full choir and organ or the vocal volume of a congregation. In
_Cheetham's Psalmody_ is it written with a trumpet obligato.

Vincent Novello, born in London, Sept. 6, 1781, the intimate friend of
Lamb, Shelley, Keats, Hunt and Hazlitt, was a professor of music who
attained great eminence as an organist and composer of hymn-tunes and
sacred pieces. He was the founder of the publishing house of Novello and
Ewer, and father of a famous musical family. Died at Nice, Aug. 9, 1861.


ST. FRANCIS XAVIER.

"_O Deus, Ego Amo Te._"

Francis Xavier, the celebrated Jesuit missionary, called "The Apostle of
the Indies," was a Spaniard, born in 1506. While a student in Paris he
met Ignatius Loyola, and joined him in the formation of the new "Society
for the Propagation of the Faith." He was sent out on a mission to the
East Indies and Japan, and gave himself to the work with a martyr's
devotion. The stations he established in Japan were maintained more than
a hundred years. He died in China, Dec. 1552.

His hymn, some time out of use, is being revived in later singing-books
as expressive of the purest and highest Christian sentiment:

        O Deus, ego amo Te.
        Nec amo Te, ut salves me,
        Aut quia non amantes Te
        AEterno punis igne.

    My God, I love Thee--not because
      I hope for heaven thereby;
    Nor yet because who love Thee not
      Must burn eternally.

After recounting Christ's vicarious sufferings as the chief claim to His
disciples' unselfish love, the hymn continues,--

        Cur igitur non amem Te,
        O Jesu amantissime!
        Non, ut in coelo salves me,
        Aut in aeternum damnes me.

    Then why, O blessed Jesus Christ,
      Should I not love Thee well?
    Not for the sake of winning heaven,
      Nor of escaping hell;

    Not with the hope of gaining aught,
      Nor seeking a reward,
    But as Thyself hast loved me,
      Oh, ever-loving Lord!

    E'en so I love Thee, and will love,
      And in Thy praise will sing;
    Solely because Thou art my God
      And my eternal King.

The translation is by Rev. Edward Caswall, 1814-1878, a priest in the
Church of Rome. Besides his translations, he published the _Lyra
Catholica_, the _Masque of Mary_, and several other poetical works.
(Page 101.)


_THE TUNE._

"St. Bernard"--apparently so named because originally composed to
Caswall's translation of one of Bernard of Clairvaux's hymns--is by
John Richardson, born in Preston, Eng., Dec. 4, 1817, and died there
April 13, 1879. He was an organist in Liverpool, and noted as a composer
of glees, but was the author of several sacred tunes.


SIR WALTER RALEIGH.

"Give Me My Scallop-Shell of Quiet."

Few of the hymns of the Elizabethan era survive, though the Ambrosian
Midnight Hymn, "Hark, 'tis the Midnight Cry," and the hymns of St.
Bernard and Bernard of Cluny, are still tones in the church, and the
religious poetry of Sir Walter Raleigh comes down to us associated with
the history of his brilliant, though tragic career. The following poem
has some fine lines in the quaint English style of the period, and was
composed by Sir Walter during his first imprisonment:

    Give me my scallop-shell of quiet,
      My staff of faith to walk upon,
    My scrip of joy--immortal diet--
      My bottle of salvation,
    My gown of glory, hope's true gage--
    And thus I take my pilgrimage.

    Blood must be my body's balmer,
    While my soul, like faithful palmer,
    Travelleth toward the land of heaven;
    Other balm will not be given.

    Over the silver mountains
    Where spring the nectar fountains,
    There will I kiss the bowl of bliss,
    And drink my everlasting fill,
    Upon every milken hill;
    My soul will be a-dry before,
    But after that will thirst no more.

The musings of the unfortunate but high-souled nobleman in expectation
of ignominious death are interesting and pathetic, but they have no
claim to a tune, even if they were less rugged and unmetrical. But the
poem stands notable among the pious witnesses.


MARY QUEEN OF SCOTS.

"_O Domine Deus, Speravi in Te._"

This last passionate prayer of the unhappy Mary Stuart just before her
execution--in a language which perhaps flowed from her pen more easily
than even her English or French--is another witness of supplicating
faith that struggles out of darkness with a song. In her extremity the
devoted Catholic forgets her petitions to the Virgin, and comes to
Christ:

        O Domine Deus, Speravi in Te;
        O care mi Jesu, nunc libera me!
    In dura catena, in misera poena
          Desidero Te!
    Languendo, gemendo, et genuflectendo
    Adoro, imploro ut liberes me!

    My Lord and my God! I have trusted in Thee;
    O Jesus, my Saviour belov'd, set me free:
    In rigorous chains, in piteous pains,
        I am longing for Thee!
    In weakness appealing, in agony kneeling,
    I pray, I beseech Thee, O Lord, set me free!

One would, at first thought, judge this simple but eloquent cry worthy
of an appropriate tone-expression--to be sung by prison evangelists like
the Volunteers of America, to convicts in the jails and penitentiaries.
But its special errand and burden are voiced so literally that hardened
hearers would probably misapply it--however sincerely the petitioner
herself meant to invoke spiritual rather than temporal deliverance. The
hymn, if we may call it so, is _too_ literal. Possibly at some time or
other it may have been set to music but not for ordinary choir service.


SAMUEL RUTHERFORD.

    The sands of time are sinking,

       *       *       *       *       *

    But, glory, glory dwelleth
    In Immanuel's Land.

This hymn is biographical, but not autobiographical. Like the discourses
in Herodotus and Plutarch, it is the voice of the dead speaking through
the sympathetic genius of the living after long generations. The strong,
stern Calvinist of 1636 in Aberdeen was not a poet, but he bequeathed
his spirit and life to the verse of a poet of 1845 in Melrose. Anne Ross
Cousin read his two hundred and twenty letters written during a two
years' captivity for his fidelity to the purer faith, and studied his
whole history and experience till her soul took his soul's place and
felt what he felt. Her poem of nineteen stanzas (152 lines) is the voice
of Rutherford the Covenanter, with the prolixity of his manner and age
sweetened by his triumphant piety, and that is why it belongs with the
_Hymns of Great Witnesses_. The three or four stanzas still occasionally
printed and sung are only recalled to memory by the above three lines.

Samuel Rutherford was born in Nisbet Parish, Scotland, in 1600. His
settled ministry was at Anworth, in Galloway--1630-1651--with a break
between 1636 and 1638, when Charles I. angered by his anti-prelatical
writings, silenced and banished him. Shut up in Aberdeen, but allowed,
like Paul in Rome, to live "in his own hired house" and write letters,
he poured out his heart's love in Epistles to his Anworth flock and to
the Non-conformists of Scotland. When his countrymen rose against the
attempted imposition of a new holy Romish service-book on their
churches, he escaped to his people, and soon after appeared in Edinburgh
and signed the covenant with the assembled ministers. Thirteen years
later, after Cromwell's death and the accession of Charles II. the wrath
of the prelates fell on him at St. Andrews, where the Presbytery had
made him rector of the college. The King's decree indicted him for
treason, stripped him of all his offices, and would have forced him to
the block had he not been stricken with his last sickness. When the
officers came to take him he said, "I am summoned before a higher Judge
and Judicatory, and I am behooved to attend them." He died soon after,
in the year 1661.

The first, and a few other of the choicest stanzas of the hymn inspired
by his life and death are here given:

    The sands of time are sinking,
      The dawn of heaven breaks,
    The summer morn I've sighed for--
      The fair, sweet morn--awakes.
    Dark, dark hath been the midnight,
      But dayspring is at hand;
    And glory, glory dwelleth
      In Immanuel's land.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Oh! well it is for ever--
      Oh! well for evermore:
    My nest hung in no forest
      Of all this death-doomed shore;
    Yea, let this vain world vanish,
      As from the ship the strand,
    While glory, glory dwelleth
      In Immanuel's land.

       *       *       *       *       *

    The little birds of Anworth--
      I used to count them blest;
    Now beside happier altars
      I go to build my nest;
    O'er these there broods no silence
      No graves around them stand;
    For glory deathless dwelleth
      In Immanuel's land.

    I have borne scorn and hatred,
      I have borne wrong and shame,
    Earth's proud ones have reproached me
      For Christ's thrice blessed name.
    Where God's seals set the fairest,
      They've stamped their foulest brand;
    But judgment shines like noonday
      In Immanuel's land.

    They've summoned me before them,
      But there I may not come;
    My Lord says, "Come up hither;"
      My Lord says, "Welcome home;"
    My King at His white throne
      My presence doth command,
    Where glory, glory dwelleth,
      In Immanuel's land.

A reminiscence of St. Paul in his second Epistle to Timothy (chap. 4)
comes with the last two stanzas.


_THE TUNE._

The tender and appropriate choral in B flat, named "Rutherford" was
composed by D'Urhan, a French musician, probably a hundred years ago. It
was doubtless named by those who long afterwards fitted it to the words,
and knew whose spiritual proxy the lady stood who indited the hymn. It
is reprinted in Peloubet's _Select Songs_, and in the _Coronation
Hymnal_. Naturally in the days of the hymn's more frequent use people
became accustomed to calling "The sands of time are sinking,"
"Rutherford's Hymn." Rutherford's own words certainly furnished the
memorable refrain with its immortal glow and gladness. One of his joyful
exclamations as he lay dying of his lingering disease was, "Glory
shineth in Immanuel's Land!"

Chretien (Christian) Urhan, or D'Urhan, was born at Montjoie, France,
about 1788, and died, in Paris, 1845. He was a noted violin-player, and
composer, also, of vocal and instrumental music.

Mrs. Anne Ross (Cundell) Cousin, daughter of David Ross Cundell, M.D.,
and widow of Rev. William Cousin of the Free church of Scotland, was
born in Melrose (?), 1824. She wrote many poems, most of which are
beautiful meditations rather than lyrics suitable for public song. Her
"Rutherford Hymn" was first published in the _Christian Treasury_, 1857.


GUSTAVUS ADOLPHUS.

"_Verzage Nicht Du Hauflein Klein._"

The historian tells us that before the battle of Lutzen, during the
Thirty Years' War (1618-1648), King Gustavus of Sweden, in the thick fog
of an autumn morning, with the Bohemian and Austrian armies of Emperor
Ferdinand in front of him, knelt before his troops, and his whole army
knelt with him in prayer. Then ten thousand voices and the whole concert
of regimental bands burst forth in this brave song:

    Fear not, O little flock, the foe
    Who madly seeks your overthrow,
      Dread not his rage and power:
    What though your courage sometimes faints,
    His seeming triumph o'er God's saints
      Lasts but a little hour.

    Be of good cheer, your cause belongs
    To Him who can avenge your wrongs;
      Leave it to Him, our Lord:
    Though hidden yet from all our eyes,
    He sees the Gideon who shall rise
      To save us and His word.

    As true as God's own word is true,
    Nor earth nor hell with all their crew,
      Against us shall prevail:
    A jest and by-word they are grown;
    God is with us, we are His own,
      Our victory cannot fail.

    Amen, Lord Jesus, grant our prayer!
    Great Captain, now Thine arm make bare,
      Fight for us once again:
    So shall Thy saints and martyrs raise
    A mighty chorus to Thy praise,
      World without end. Amen.

The army of Gustavus moved forward to victory as the fog lifted; but at
the moment of triumph a riderless horse came galloping back to the camp.
It was the horse of the martyred King.

The battle song just quoted--next to Luther's "Ein feste Burg" the most
famous German hymn--has always since that day been called "Gustavus
Adolphus' Hymn"; and the mingled sorrow and joy of the event at Lutzen
named it also "King Gustavus' Swan Song." Gustavus Adolphus did not
write hymns. He could sing them, and he could make them historic--and it
was this connection that identified him with the famous battle song. Its
author was the Rev. Johan Michael Altenburg, a Lutheran clergyman, who
composed apparently both hymn and tune on receiving news of the king's
victory at Leipsic a year before.

Gustavus Adolphus was born in 1594. His death on the battlefield
occurred Nov. 5, 1632--when he was in the prime of his manhood. He was
one of the greatest military commanders in history, besides being a
great ruler and administrator, and a devout Christian. He was, during
the Thirty Years' War (until his untimely death), the leading champion
of Protestantism in Europe.

The English translator of the battle song was Miss Catherine Winkworth,
born in London, Sept. 13, 1827. She was an industrious and successful
translator of German hymns, contributing many results of her work to two
English editions of the _Lyra Germania_, to the _Church Book of
England_, and to _Christian Singers of Germany_. She died in 1878.

The tune of "Ravendale" by Walter Stokes (born 1847) is the best modern
rendering of the celebrated hymn.


PAUL GERHARDT.

"_Befiehl Du Deine Wege._"

Paul Gerhardt was one of those minstrels of experience who are--

   "Cradled into poetry by wrong,
    And learn in suffering what they teach in song."

He was a graduate of that school when he wrote his "Hymn of Trust:"

    Commit thou all thy griefs
      And ways into His hands;
    To His sure trust and tender care
      Who earth and heaven commands.

    Thou on the Lord rely,
      So, safe, shalt thou go on;
    Fix on His work thy steadfast eye,
      So shall thy work be done.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Give to the winds thy fears;
      Hope, and be undismayed;
    God hears thy sighs and counts thy tears,
      He shall lift up thy head.

    Through waves and clouds and storms
      He gently clears thy way;
    Wait thou His time, so shall this night
      Soon end in joyous day.

Gerhardt was born at Grafenheinchen, Saxony, 1606. Through the first and
best years of manhood's strength (during the Thirty Years' War), a
wandering preacher tossed from place to place, he was without a parish
and without a home.

After the peace of Westphalia he settled in the little village of
Mittenwalde. He was then forty-four years old. Four years later he
married and removed to a Berlin church. During his residence there he
buried his wife, and four of his children, was deposed from the
ministry because his Lutheran doctrines offended the Elector Frederick,
and finally retired as a simple arch-deacon to a small parish in Lubben,
where he preached, toiled, and suffered amid a rough and uncongenial
people till he died, Jan. 16, 1676.

Few men have ever lived whose case more needed a "Hymn of Trust"--and
fewer still could have written it themselves. Through all those trial
years he was pouring forth his soul in devout verses, making in all no
less than a hundred and twenty-five hymns--every one of them a comfort
to others as well as to himself.

He became a favorite, and for a time _the_ favorite, hymn-writer of all
the German-speaking people. Among these tones of calm faith and joy we
recognize today (in the English tongue),--

    Since Jesus is my Friend,

    Thee, O Immanuel, we praise,

    All my heart this night rejoices,

    How shall I meet Thee,

--and the English translation of his "O Haupt voll Blut und Wunden,"
turned into German by himself from St. Bernard Clairvaux's "Salve caput
cruentatum," and made dear to us in Rev. James Alexander's beautiful
lines--

    O sacred head now wounded,
      With grief and shame weighed down,
    Now scornfully surrounded
      With thorns, Thine only crown.


_THE TUNE._

A plain-song by Alexander Reinagle is used by some congregations, but is
not remarkably expressive. Reinagle, Alexander Robert, (1799-1877) of
Kidlington, Eng., was organist to the church of St. Peter-in-the-East,
Oxford.

The great "Hymn of Trust" could have found no more sympathetic
interpreter than the musician of Gerhardt's own land and language,
Schumann, the gentle genius of Zwickau. It bears the name "Schumann,"
appropriately enough, and its elocution makes a volume of each quatrain,
notably the one--

    Who points the clouds their course,
      Whom wind and seas obey;
    He shall direct thy wandering feet,
      He shall prepare thy way.

Robert Schumann, Ph.D., was born in Zwickau, Saxony, June 8, 1810. He
was a music director and conservatory teacher, and the master-mind of
the pre-Wagnerian period. His compositions became popular, having a
character of their own, combining the intellectual and beautiful in art.
He published in Leipsic a journal promotive of his school of music, and
founded a choral society in Dresden. Happy in the cooeperation of his
wife, herself a skilled musician, he extended his work to Vienna and the
Netherlands; but his zeal wore him out, and he died at the age of
forty-six, universally lamented as "the eminent man who had done so much
for the happiness of others."

Gerhardt's Hymn (ten quatrains) is rarely printed entire, and where six
are printed only four are usually sung. Different collections choose
portions according to the compiler's taste, the stanza beginning--

    Give to the winds thy fears,

--being with some a favorite first verse.

The translation of the hymn from the German is John Wesley's.

Purely legendary is the beautiful story of the composition of the hymn,
"Commit thou all thy griefs"; how, after his exile from Berlin,
traveling on foot with his weeping wife, Gerhardt stopped at a wayside
inn and wrote the lines while he rested; and how a messenger from Duke
Christian found him there, and offered him a home in Meresburg. But the
most ordinary imagination can fill in the possible incidents in a life
of vicissitudes such as Gerhardt's was.


LADY HUNTINGDON.

"When Thou My Righteous Judge Shalt Come."

Selina Shirley, Countess of Huntingdon, born 1707, died 1791, is
familiarly known as the titled friend and patroness of Whitefield and
his fellow-preachers. She early consecrated herself to God, and in the
great spiritual awakening under Whitefield and the Wesleys she was a
punctual and sympathetic helper. Uniting with the Calvinistic
Methodists, she nevertheless stood aloof from none who preached a
personal Christ, and whose watchwords were the salvation of souls and
the purification of the Church. For more than fifty years she devoted
her wealth to benevolence and spiritual ministries, and died at the age
of eighty-four. "I have done my work," was her last testimony. "I have
nothing to do but to go to my Father."

At various times Lady Huntingdon expressed her religious experience in
verse, and the manful vigor of her school of faith recalls the unbending
confidence of Job, for she was not a stranger to affliction.

    God's furnace doth in Zion stand,
      But Zion's God sits by,
    As the refiner views his gold,
      With an observant eye.

    His thoughts are high, His love is wise,
      His wounds a cure intend;
    And, though He does not always smile,
      He loves unto the end.

Her great hymn, that keeps her memory green, has the old-fashioned
flavor. "Massa made God BIG!" was the comment on Dr. Bellany made by his
old negro servant after that noted minister's death. In Puritan piety
the sternest self-depreciation qualified every thought of the creature,
while every allusion to the Creator was a magnificat. Lady Huntingdon's
hymn has no flattering phrases for the human subject. "Worthless worm,"
and "vilest of them all" indicate the true Pauline or Oriental
prostration of self before a superior being; but there is grandeur in
the metre, the awful reverence, and the scene of judgment in the
stanzas--always remembering the mighty choral that has so long given the
lyric its voice in the church, and is ancillary to its fame:

    When Thou, my righteous Judge, shalt come
    To take Thy ransomed people home,
      Shall I among them stand?
    Shall such a worthless worm as I,
    Who sometimes am afraid to die,
      Be found at Thy right hand?

    I love to meet Thy people now,
    Before Thy feet with them to bow,
      Though vilest of them all;
    But can I bear the piercing thought,
    What if my name should be left out,
      When Thou for them shalt call?

    O Lord, prevent it by Thy grace:
    Be Thou my only hiding place,
      In this th' accepted day;
    Thy pardoning voice, oh let me hear,
    To still my unbelieving fear,
      Nor let me fall, I pray.

    Among Thy saints let me be found,
    Whene'er the archangel's trump shall sound,
      To see Thy smiling face;
    Then loudest of the throng I'll sing,
    While heaven's resounding arches ring
      With shouts of sovereign grace.


_THE TUNE._
