go down to the Gave, but was recalled and bidden to dig in the earth of
the Grotto. She did so, and a little muddy water appeared where no soul
in the village knew that there was water. Hour by hour this water waxed
in volume; to-day it pours out in an endless stream, is conducted
through the _piscines_; and it is after washing in this water that
bodies are healed in a fashion for which "science cannot account."
Perhaps it cannot. Perhaps it is not intended. But there are things
besides science, and one of them is religion. Is not the evidence
tolerably strong? Or is it a series of coincidences that the child had
an hallucination, devised some trick with the water, and that this water
happens to be an occasion of healing people declared incurable by known
means?

What is the good of these miracles? If so many are cured, why are not
all? Are the _miracules_ especially distinguished for piety? Is it
to be expected that unbelievers will be convinced? Is it claimed that the
evidence is irresistible? Let us go back to the Gospels. It used to be
said by doubters that the "miraculous element" must have been added
later by the piety of the disciples, because all the world knew now that
"miracles" did not happen. That _a priori_ argument is surely
silenced by Lourdes. "Miracles" in that sense undoubtedly do happen, if
present-day evidence is worth anything whatever. What, then, is the
Christian theory?

It is this. Our Blessed Lord appears to have worked miracles of such a
nature that their significance was not, historically speaking,
absolutely evident to those who, for other reasons, did not "believe in
Him." It is known how some asked for a "sign from heaven" and were
refused it; how He Himself said that even if one rose from the dead,
they would not believe; yet, further, how He begged them to believe Him
even for His work's sake, if for nothing else. We know, finally, how,
when confronted with one particular miracle, His enemies cried out that
it must have been done by diabolical agency.

Very good, then. It would seem that the miracles of Our Lord were of a
nature that strongly disposed to belief those that witnessed them, and
helped vastly in the confirmation of the faith of those who already
believed; but that miracles, as such, cannot absolutely compel the
belief of those who for moral reasons refuse it. If they could, faith
would cease to be faith.

Now, this seems precisely the state of affairs at Lourdes. Even
unbelieving scientists are bound to admit that science at present cannot
account for the facts, which is surely the modern equivalent for the
Beelzebub theory. We have seen, too, how severely scientific persons
such as Dr. Boissarie and Dr. Cox--if they will permit me to quote their
names--knowing as well as anyone what medicine and surgery and hypnotism
and suggestion can and cannot do, corroborate this evidence, and see in
the facts a simple illustration of the truth of that Catholic Faith
which they both hold and practise.

Is not the parallel a fair one? What more, then, do the adversaries
want? There is no arguing with people who say that, since there is
nothing but Nature, no process can be other than natural. There is no
sign, even from heaven, that could break down the intellectual prejudice
of such people. If they saw Jesus Christ Himself in glory, they could
always say that "at present science cannot account for the phenomenon of
a luminous body apparently seated upon a throne, but no doubt it will do
so in the course of time." If they saw a dead and corrupting man rise
from the grave, they could always argue that he could not have been dead
and corrupting, or he could not have risen from the grave. Nothing but
the Last Judgment could convince such persons. Even when the trumpet
sounds, I believe that some of them, when they have recovered from their
first astonishment, will make remarks about aural phenomena.

But for the rest of us, who believe in God and His Son and the Mother of
God on quite other grounds--because our intellect is satisfied, our
heart kindled, our will braced by the belief; and because without that
belief all life falls into chaos, and human evidence is nullified, and
all noble motive and emotion cease--for us, who have received the gift
of faith, in however small a measure, Lourdes is enough. Christ and His
Mother are with us. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, to-day, and for
ever. Is not that, after all, the simplest theory?




V.


After _dejeuner_ I set out again to find the Scottish priest, who hoped
to be able to take me to a certain window in the Rosary Church, where
only a few were admitted, from which we might view the procession and
the Blessing of the Sick. But we were disappointed; and, after a certain
amount of scheming, we managed to get a position at the back of the
crowd on the top of the church steps. I was able to climb up a few
inches above the others, and secured a very tolerable view of the whole
scene.

The crowd was beyond describing. Here about us was a vast concourse of
men; and as far as the eye could reach down the huge oval, and far away
beyond the crowned statue, and on either side back to the Bureau on the
left, and on the slopes on the right, stretched an inconceivable
pavement of heads. Above us, too, on every terrace and step, back to the
doors of the great basilica, we knew very well, was one seething,
singing mob. A great space was kept open on the level ground beneath
us--I should say one hundred by two hundred yards in area--and the
inside fringe of this was composed of the sick, in litters, in chairs,
standing, sitting, lying and kneeling. It was at the farther end that
the procession would enter.

After perhaps half an hour's waiting, during which one incessant gust of
singing rolled this way and that through the crowd, the leaders of the
procession appeared far away--little white or black figures, small as
dolls--and the singing became general. But as the endless files rolled
out, the singing ceased, and a moment later a priest, standing solitary
in the great space began to pray aloud in a voice like a silver trumpet.

I have never heard such passion in my life. I began to watch presently,
almost mechanically, the little group beneath the _ombrellino_, in white
and gold, and the movements of the monstrance blessing the sick; but
again and again my eyes wandered back to the little figure in the midst,
and I cried out with the crowd, sentence after sentence, following that
passionate voice:

"_Seigneur, nous vous adorons!_"

"_Seigneur,_" came the huge response, "_nous vous adorons!_"

"_Seigneur, nous vous aimons!_" cried the priest.

"_Seigneur, nous vous aimons!_" answered the people.

"_Sauvez-nous, Jesus; nous perissons!_"

"_Sauvez-nous, Jesus; nous perissons!_"

"_Jesus, Fils de Marie, ayez pitie de nous!_"

"_Jesus, Fils de Marie, ayez pitie de nous!_"

Then with a surge rose up the plainsong melody.

"_Parce, Domine!_" sang the people. "_Parce populo tuo! Ne in aeternum
irascaris nobis._"

Again:

"_Gloria Patri et Filio et Spiritui Sancto._"

"_Sicut erat in principio et nunc et semper, et in saecula saeculorum.
Amen._"

Then again the single voice and the multitudinous answer:

"_Vous etes la Resurrection et la Vie!_"

And then an adjuration to her whom He gave to be our Mother.

"_Mere du Sauveur, priez pour nous!_"

"_Salut des Infirmes, priez pour nous!_"

Then once more the singing; then the cry, more touching than all:

"_Seigneur, guerissez nos malades!_"

"_Seigneur, guerissez nos malades!_"

Then the kindling shout that brought the blood to ten thousand faces:

"_Hosanna! Hosanna au Fils de David!_" (I shook to hear it).

"_Hosanna!_" cried the priest, rising from his knees with arms flung
wide.

"_Hosanna!_" roared the people, swift as an echo.

"_Hosanna! Hosanna!_" crashed out again and again, like great
artillery.

Yet there was no movement among those piteous prostrate lines. The
Bishop, the _ombrellino_ over him, passed on slowly round the circle;
and the people cried to Him whom he bore, as they cried two thousand
years ago on the road to the city of David. Surely He will be pitiful
upon this day--the Jubilee Year of His Mother's graciousness, the octave
of her assumption to sit with Him on His throne!

"_Mere du Sauveur, priez pour nous!_"

"_Jesus, vous etes mon Seigneur et mon Dieu!_"

Yet there was no movement.

If ever "suggestion" could work a miracle, it must work it now. "We
expect the miracles during the procession to-morrow and on Sunday," a
priest had said to me on the previous day. And there I stood, one of a
hundred thousand, confident in expectation, thrilled by that voice,
nothing doubting or fearing; there were the sick beneath me, answering
weakly and wildly to the crying of the priest; and yet there was no
movement, no sudden leap of a sick man from his bed as Jesus went by, no
vibrating scream of joy--"_Je suis gueri! Je suis gueri!_"--no
tumultuous rush to the place, and the roar of the _Magnificat_, as we
had been led to expect.

The end was coming near now. The monstrance had reached the image once
again, and was advancing down the middle. The voice of the priest grew
more passionate still, as he tossed his arms and cried for mercy

"_Jesus, ayez pitie de nous!--ayez pitie[Transcriber's Note: original
had "pitie"] de nous!_"

And the people, frantic with ardour and desire, answered him in a voice
of thunder:

"_Ayez pitie de nous!--ayez pitie de nous!_"

And now up the steps came the grave group to where Jesus would at least
bless His own, though He would not heal them; and the priest in the
midst, with one last cry, gave glory to Him who must be served through
whatever misery:

"_Hosanna! Hosanna au Fils de David!_"

Surely that must touch the Sacred Heart! Will not His Mother say one
word?

"_Hosanna! Hosanna au Fils de David!_"

"_Hosanna!_" cried the priest.

"_Hosanna!_" cried the people.

"_Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna!..._"

One articulate roar of disappointed praise, and then--_Tantum ergo
Sacramentum!_ rose in its solemnity.

When Benediction was over, I went back to the Bureau; but there was
little to be seen there. No, there were no miracles to-day, I was
told--or hardly one. Perhaps one in the morning. It was not known.

Several Bishops were there again, listening to the talk of the doctors,
and the description of certain cases on previous days. Pere Salvator,
the Capuchin, was there again; as also the tall bearded Assumptionist
Father of whom I have spoken. But there was not a great deal of interest
