structure denoting the degree and beneath it are connected by a line
(No. 63) as in the preceding degree, and are a mere repetition to denote
the course of conduct to be pursued by the Mid[-e]/. The points (Nos.
64, 65, 66, and 67), at the termini of the shorter lines, also refer to
the feasts and lectures to be given in case of need.

To continue the informant's tradition:

  When the Otter had passed around the interior of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n
  four times, he seated himself in the west and faced the degree post,
  when Mi/nab[-o]/zho again shot into his body the m[-i]/gis, which gave
  him renewed life. Then the Otter was told to take a "sweat bath" once
  each day for four successive days, so as to prepare for the next
  degree. (This number is indicated at the rounded spots at Nos. 68, 69,
  70, and 71.)

  The third degree of the Mid[-e]/wiwin (No. 72) is guarded during the
  day by two Mid[-e]/ spirits (Nos. 73, 74) near the eastern entrance,
  and by the Makwa/ Man/id[-o] within the inclosure (Nos. 75 and 76),
  and at night by eighteen Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o]s (Nos. 77 to 94), placed
  there by Ki/tshi Man/id[-o]. When the Otter approached the entrance
  (No. 95) he was again arrested in his progress by two evil man/id[-o]s
  (Nos. 96 and 97), who opposed his admission, but Mi/nib[-o]/zho
  overcame them and the Otter entered. Just inside of the door, and on
  each side, the Otter saw a post (Nos. 98 and 99), and at the western
  door or exit two corresponding posts (Nos. 100 and 101). These
  symbolized the four legs of the Makwa/ Man/id[-o], or Bear Spirit, who
  is the guardian by day and the owner of the third degree. The Otter
  then observed the sacred stone (No. 102) and the two heaps of sacred
  objects (Nos. 103 and 104) which Mi/nab[-o]/zho had deposited, and
  three degree posts (Nos. 105, 106, and 107), the first of which (No.
  105) was a plain cedar post with the bark upon it, but sharpened at
  the top; the second (No. 106), a red post with a green band round the
  top and one about the middle, as in the second degree; and the third a
  cross (No. 107) painted red, each of the tips painted green. [The
  vertical line No. 108 was said to have no relation to anything
  connected with the tradition.] After the Otter had observed the
  interior of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n he again made four circuits, after
  which he took his station in the west, where he seated himself, facing
  the sacred degree posts. Then Mi/nab[-o]/zho, for the third time, shot
  into his body the m[-i]/gis, thus adding to the powers which he
  already possessed, after which he was to prepare for the fourth degree
  of the Mid[-e]/wiwin.

Other objects appearing upon the chart were subsequently explained as
follows:

  The four trees (Nos. 109, 110, 111, and 112), one of which is planted
  at each of the four corners of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, are usually
  cedar, though pine may be taken as a substitute when the former can
  not be had. The repetition of the circles Nos. 113, 114, and 115 and
  connecting line No. 116, with the short lines at Nos. 117, 118, 119,
  and 120, have the same signification as in the preceding two degrees.

  After the Otter had received the third degree he prepared himself for
  the fourth, and highest, by taking a steam bath once a day for four
  successive days (Nos. 121, 122, 123, and 124). Then, as he proceeded
  toward the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n he came to a wig/iwam made of brush (No.
  179), which was the nest of Makwa/ Man/id[-o], the Bear Spirit, who
  guarded the four doors of the sacred structure.

The four rows of spots have reference to the four entrances of the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n of the fourth degree. The signification of the spots
near the larger circle, just beneath the "Bear's nest" could not be
explained by Sikas/sig[)e], but the row of spots (No. 117) along the
horizontal line leading to the entrance of the inclosure were
denominated steps, or stages of progress, equal to as many days--one
spot denoting one day--which must elapse before the Otter was permitted
to view the entrance.

  [Illustration: Fig. 4.--Peep-hole post.]

  When the Otter approached the fourth degree (No. 118) he came to a
  short post (No. 119) in which there was a small aperture. The post was
  painted green on the side from which he approached and red upon the
  side toward the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n [see Fig. 4.] But before he was
  permitted to look through it he rested and invoked the favor of
  Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], that the evil man/id[-o]s might be expelled from
  his path. Then, when the Otter looked through the post, he saw that
  the interior of the inclosure was filled with Mid[-e]/ Man/idos, ready
  to receive him and to attend during his initiation. The two Mid[-e]/
  Man/idos at the outside of the eastern entrance (Nos. 120 and 121)
  compelled the evil man/id[-o]s (Nos. 122 and 123) to depart and permit
  the Otter to enter at the door (No. 124). Then the Otter beheld the
  sacred stone (No. 125) and the five heaps of sacred objects which
  Minab[-o]/zho had deposited (Nos. 126, 127, 128, 129, and 130) near
  the four degree posts (Nos. 131, 132, 133, and 134). According to
  their importance, the first was painted red, with a green band about
  the top; the second was painted red, with two green bands, one at the
  top and another at the middle; the third consisted of a cross painted
  red, with the tips of the arms and the top of the post painted green;
  while the fourth was a square post, the side toward the east being
  painted white, that toward the south green, that toward the west red,
  and that toward the north black.

  The two sets of sticks (Nos. 135 and 136) near the eastern and western
  doors represent the legs of Makwa/ Man/id[-o], the Bear Spirit. When
  the Otter had observed all these things he passed round the interior
  of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n four times, after which he seated himself in
  the west, facing the degree posts, when Mi/nab[-o]/zho approached him
  and for the fourth time shot into his body the sacred m[-i]/gis, which
  gave him life that will endure always. Then Mi/nab[-o]/zho said to the
  Otter, "This degree belongs to Ki/tshi Man/ido, the Great Spirit (Nos.
  137 and 138), who will always be present when you give the sacred rite
  to any of your people." At night the Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o]s (Nos. 139 to
  162) will guard the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, as they are sent by Ki/tshi
  Man/ido to do so. The Bear's nest (Nos. 163 and 164) just beyond the
  northern and southern doors (Nos. 165 and 166) of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n
  are the places where Makwa/ Man/id[-o] takes his station when guarding
  the doors.

  Then the Otter made a wig/iwam and offered four prayers (Nos. 167,
  168, 169, and 170) for the rites of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, which Ki/tshi
  Man/id[-o] had given him.

  [Illustration: Plate VII.
  Ojibwa Facial Decoration.]

The following supplemental explanations were added by Sikas/sig[)e],
viz: The four vertical lines at the outer angles of the lodge structure
(Nos. 171, 172, 173, and 174), and four similar ones on the inner
corners (Nos. 175, 176, 177, and 178), represent eight cedar trees
planted there by the Mid[-e]/ at the time of preparing the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n for the reception of candidates. The circles Nos. 179,
180, and 181, and the connecting line, are a reproduction of similar
ones shown in the three preceding degrees, and signify the course of a
Mid[-e]'s life--that it should be without fault and in strict accordance
with the teachings of the Mid[-e]/wiwin. The short lines, terminating in
circles Nos. 182, 183, 184, and 185, allude to temptations which beset
the Mid[-e]'s path, and he shall, when so tempted, offer at these points
feasts and lectures, or, in other words, "professions of faith." The
three lines Nos. 186, 187, and 188, consisting of four spots each, which
radiate from the larger circle at No. 179 and that before mentioned at
No. 116, symbolize the four bear nests and their respective approaches,
which are supposed to be placed opposite the four doors of the fourth
degree; and it is obligatory, therefore, for a candidate to enter these
four doors on hands and knees when appearing for his initiation and
before he finally waits to receive the concluding portion of the
ceremony.

  [Illustration: Fig. 5.--Migration of [^A]n['i]shin[^a]/beg.]

The illustration presented in Fig. 5 is a reduced copy of a drawing made
by Sikas/sig[)e] to represent the migration of the Otter toward the west
after he had received the rite of the Mid[-e]/wiwin. No. 1 refers to the
circle upon the large chart on Pl. III in A, No. 1, and signifies the
earth's surface as before described. No. 2 in Fig. 5 is a line
separating the history of the Mid[-e]/wiwin from that of the migration
as follows: When the Otter had offered four prayers, as above mentioned,
which fact is referred to by the spot No. 3, he disappeared beneath the
surface of the water and went toward the west, whither the
Ani/shin[^a]/b[-e]g followed him, and located at Ottawa Island (No. 4).
Here they erected the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n and lived for many years. Then
the Otter again disappeared beneath the water, and in a short time
reappeared at A/wiat/ang (No. 5), when the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n was again
erected and the sacred rites conducted in accordance with the teachings
of Mi/nab[-o]/zho. Thus was an interrupted migration continued, the
several resting places being given below in their proper order, at each
of which the rites of the Mid[-e]/wiwin were conducted in all their
purity. The next place to locate at was Mi/shenama/kinagung-- Mackinaw
(No. 6); then Ne/mikung (No. 7); Kiwe/winang/ (No. 8); B[^a]wating--
Sault Ste. Marie (No. 9); Tshiwi/towi/ (No. 10); Nega/wadzh[)e]/[)u]--
Sand Mountain (No. 11), northern shore of Lake Superior; Mi/nisa/w[)i]k
[Mi/nisa/bikk[)a]ng]-- Island of rocks (No. 12);
Kawa/sitsh[)i][)u]wongk-- Foaming rapids (No. 13); Mush/kisi/wi
[Mash/kisi/bi]-- Bad River (No. 14); Shagaw[^a]mikongk--
Long-sand-bar-beneath-the-surface (No. 15); Wikwe/d[^a][n]wongg[^a][n]--
Sandy Bay (No. 16); Ne[^a]/shiwikongk-- Cliff Point (No. 17);
Net[^a][n]/waya[n]/sink-- Little point-of-sand-bar (No. 18);
A[n]/nibi[n]s-- Little elm tree (No. 19); Wikup/bi[n]mi[n]sh-literally,
Little-island-basswood (No. 20); Makubi[n]/mi[n]sh-- Bear Island (No.
21); Sha/geski/ke/dawan/ga (No. 22); Ni/wigwas/sikongk-- The place where
bark is peeled (No. 23); Ta/pakwe/[)i]kak [Sa/apakwe/shkwaokongk]--
The-place-where-lodge-bark-is-obtained (No. 24); Ne/uwesak/kudeze/bi
[Ne/wisaku/desi/bi[n]]-- Point-deadwood-timber river (No. 25);
A[n]nibi/kanzi/bi [modern name, [^A]sh/kiba/gisi/bi], given respectively
as Fish spawn River and Green leaf River (No. 26).

This last-named locality is said to be Sandy Lake, Minnesota, where the
Otter appeared for the last time, and where the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n was
finally located. From La Pointe, as well as from Sandy Lake, the Ojibwa
claim to have dispersed in bands over various portions of the territory,
as well as into Wisconsin, which final separation into distinct bodies
has been the chief cause of the gradual changes found to exist in the
ceremonies of the Mid[-e]/wiwin.

According to Sikas/sig[)e], the above account of the initiation of the
Otter, by Mi/nabo/zho, was adopted as the course of initiation by the
Mid[-e]/ priests of the Mille Lacs Society, when he himself received the
first degree, 1830. At that time a specific method of facial decoration
was pursued by the priests of the respective degrees (Pl. VI), each
adopting that pertaining to the highest degree to which he was entitled,
viz:

_First degree._--A broad band of green across the forehead and a narrow
stripe of vermilion across the face, just below the eyes.

_Second degree._--A narrow stripe of vermilion across the temples, the
eyelids, and the root of the nose, a short distance above which is a
similar stripe of green, then another of vermilion, and above this again
one of green.

_Third degree._--Red and white spots are daubed all over the face, the
spots being as large as can be made by the finger tips in applying the
colors.

_Fourth degree._--Two forms of decoration were admissible; for the
first, the face was painted with vermilion, with a stripe of green
extending diagonally across it from the upper part of the left temporal
region to the lower part of the right cheek; for the second, the face
was painted red with two short, horizontal parallel bars of green across
the forehead. Either of these was also employed as a sign of mourning by
one whose son has been intended for the priesthood of the Mid[-e]/wiwin,
but special reference to this will be given in connection with the
ceremony of the Dzhibai/ Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n, or Ghost Society.

On Pl. VIII is presented a reduced copy of the Mid[-e]/ chart made by
Ojibwa, a Mid[-e]/ priest of the fourth degree and formerly a member of
the society of the Sandy Lake band of the Mississippi Ojibwa. The
illustration is copied from his own chart which he received in 1833 in
imitation of that owned by his father, Me/toshi/k[-o][n]sh; and this
last had been received from Lake Superior, presumably La Pointe, many
years before.

The illustration of the four degrees are here represented in profile,
and shows higher artistic skill than the preceding copies from Red Lake,
and Mille Lacs.

The information given by Ojibwa, regarding the characters is as follows:

  When Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] had decided to give to the Ani/shin[^a]/b[-e]g
  the rites of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, he took his Mid[-e]/ drum and sang,
  calling upon the other Man/id[-o]s to join him and to hear what he was
  going to do. No. 1 represents the abode in the sky of Ki/tshi
  Man/id[-o], No. 2, indicating the god as he sits drumming, No. 3. the
  small spots surrounding the drum denoting the m[-i]/gis with which
  everything about him is covered. The Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o]s came to him
  in his Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n (No. 4), eleven of which appear upon the
  inside of that structure, while the ten--all but himself--upon the
  outside (Nos. 5 to 14) are represented as descending to the earth,
  charged with the means of conferring upon the Ani/shin[^a]b[-e]/g the
  sacred rite. In the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n (No. 4) is shown also the sacred
  post (No. 15) upon which is perched K[)o]-ko/k[)o]-[-o]--the Owl (No.
  16). The line traversing the structure, from side to side, represents
  the trail leading through it, while the two rings (Nos. 17 and 18)
  upon the right side of the post indicate respectively the spot where
  the presents are deposited and the sacred stone--this according to
  modern practices.

  When an Indian is prepared to receive the rights of initiation he
  prepares a wig/iwam (No. 19) in which he takes a steam bath once each
  day for four successive days. The four baths and four days are
  indicated by the number of spots at the floor of the lodge,
  representing stones. The instructors, employed by him, and the
  officiating priests of the society are present, one of which (No. 20)
  may be observed upon the left of the wig/iwam in the act of making an
  offering of smoke, while the one to the right (No. 21) is drumming and
  singing. The four officiating priests are visible to either side of
  the candidate within the structure. The wig/iwams (Nos. 22, 23, 24,
  and 25) designate the village habitations.

  In the evening of the day preceding the initiation, the candidate (No.
  26) visits his instructor (No. 27) to receive from him final
  directions as to the part to be enacted upon the following day. The
  candidate is shown in the act of carrying with him his pipe, the
  offering of tobacco being the most acceptable of all gifts. His
  relatives follow and carry the goods and other presents, some of which
  are suspended from the branches of the Mid[-e]/ tree (No. 28) near the
  entrance of the first degree structure. The instructor's wig/iwam is
  shown at No. 29, the two dark circular spots upon the floor showing
  two of the seats, occupied by instructor and pupil. The figure No. 27
  has his left arm elevated, denoting that his conversation pertains to
  Ki/tshi Man/id[-o], while in his right hand he holds his Mid[-e]/
  drum. Upon the following morning the Mid[-e]/ priests, with the
  candidate in advance (No. 30), approach and enter the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n
  and the initiation begins. No. 31 is the place of the sacred drum and
  those who are detailed to employ the drum and rattles, while No. 32
  indicates the officiating priests; No. 33 is the degree post,
  surmounted by K[)o]-ko/-k[)o]-[-o]/, the Owl (No. 34). The post is
  painted with vermilion, with small white spots all over its surface,
  emblematic of the m[-i]/gis shell. The line (No. 35) extending along
  the upper portion of the inclosure represents the pole from which are
  suspended the robes, blankets, kettles, etc., which constitute the fee
  paid to the society for admission.

  This degree is presided over and guarded by the Panther Man/id[-o].

  When the candidate has been able to procure enough gifts to present to
  the society for the second degree, he takes his drum and offers chants
  (No. 35) to Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] for success. Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] himself
  is the guardian of the second degree and his footprints are shown in
  No. 36. No. 37 represents the second degree inclosure, and contains
  two sacred posts (Nos. 38 and 39), the first of which is the same as
  that of the first degree, the second being painted with white clay,
  bearing two bands of vermilion, one about the top and one near the
  middle. A small branch near the top is used, after the ceremony is
  over, to hang the tobacco pouch on. No. 40 represents the musicians
  and attendants; No. 41 the candidate upon his knees; while Nos. 42,
  43, 44, and 45 pictures the officiating priests who surround him. The
  horizontal pole (No. 46) has presents of robes, blankets, and kettles
  suspended from it.

  When a candidate is prepared to advance to the third degree (No. 47)
  he personates Makwa/ Man/id[-o], who is the guardian of this degree,
  and whose tracks (No. 48) are visible. The assistants are visible upon
  the interior, drumming and dancing. There are three sacred posts, the
  first (No. 49) is black, and upon this is placed
  K[)o]-ko/-k[)o]-[-o]/--the Owl; the second (No. 50) is painted with
  white clay and has upon the top the effigy of an owl; while the third
  (No. 51) is painted with vermilion, bearing upon the summit the effigy
  of an Indian. Small wooden effigies of the human figure are used by
  the Mid[-e]/ in their tests of the proof of the genuineness and
  sacredness of their religion, which tests will be alluded to under
  another caption. The horizontal rod (No. 52), extending from one end
  of the structure to the other, has suspended from it the blankets and
  other gifts.

  The guardian of the fourth degree is Maka/no--the Turtle--as he
  appears (No. 53) facing the entrance of the fourth degree (No. 54).
  Four sacred posts are planted in the fourth degree; the first (No.
  55), being painted white upon the upper half and green upon the lower;
  the second (No. 56) similar; the third (No. 57) painted red, with a
  black spiral line extending from the top to the bottom, and upon which
  is placed K[)o]-ko/-k[)o]-[-o]/--the Owl; and the fourth (No. 58),
  a cross, the arms and part of the trunk of which is white, with red
  spots--to designate the sacred m[-i]/gis--the lower half of the trunk
  cut square, the face toward the east painted red, the south green, the
  west white, and the north black. The spot (No. 59) at the base of the
  cross signifies the place of the sacred stone, while the human figures
  (No. 60) designate the participants, some of whom are seated near the
  wall of the inclosure, whilst others are represented as beating the
  drum. Upon the horizontal pole (No. 61) are shown the blankets
  constituting gifts to the society.

  [Illustration: Plate VIII.
  Ojibwa's Record.]

The several specific methods of facial decoration employed (Pl. VII),
according to Ojibwa's statement, are as follows:

_First degree._--One stripe of vermilion across the face, from near the
ears across the tip of the nose.

_Second degree._--One stripe as above, and another across the eyelids,
temples, and the root of the nose.

_Third degree._--The upper half of the face is painted green and the
lower half red.

_Fourth degree._--The forehead and left side of the face, from the outer
canthus of the eye downward, is painted green; four spots of vermilion
are made with the tip of the finger upon the forehead and four upon the
green surface of the left cheek. In addition to this, the plumes of the
golden eagle, painted red, are worn upon the head and down the back.
This form of decoration is not absolutely necessary, as the expense of
the "war bonnet" places it beyond the reach of the greater number of
persons.

Before proceeding further with the explanation of the Mide/ records it
may be of interest to quote the traditions relative to the migration of
the Ani/shin[^a]/b[-e]g, as obtained by Mr. Warren previous to 1853. In
his reference to observing the rites of initiation he heard one of the
officiating priests deliver "a loud and spirited harangue," of which the
following words[12] caught his attention:

  "Our forefathers were living on the great salt water toward the rising
  sun, the great Megis (seashell) showed itself above the surface of the
  great water and the rays of the sun for a long time period were
  reflected from its glossy back. It gave warmth and light to the
  An-ish-in-aub-ag (red race). All at once it sank into the deep, and
  for a time our ancestors were not blessed with its light. It rose to
  the surface and appeared again on the great river which drains the
  waters of the Great Lakes, and again for a long time it gave life to
  our forefathers and reflected back the rays of the sun. Again it
  disappeared from sight and it rose not till it appeared to the eyes of
  the An-ish-in-aub-ag on the shores of the first great lake. Again it
  sank from sight, and death daily visited the wigiwams of our
  forefathers till it showed its back and reflected the rays of the sun
  once more at Bow-e-ting (Sault Ste. Marie). Here it remained for a
  long time, but once more, and for the last time, it disappeared, and
  the An-ish-in-aub-ag was left in darkness and misery, till it floated
  and once more showed its bright back at Mo-ning-wun-a-kaun-ing (La
  Pointe Island), where it has ever since reflected back the rays of the
  sun and blessed our ancestors with life, light, and wisdom. Its rays
  reach the remotest village of the widespread Ojibways." As the old man
  delivered this talk he continued to display the shell, which he
  represented as an emblem of the great megis of which he was speaking.

  A few days after, anxious to learn the true meaning of this allegory,
  *  *  *  I requested him to explain to me the meaning of his Me-da-we
  harangue.

  After filling his pipe and smoking of the tobacco I had presented he
  proceeded to give me the desired information, as follows:

  "My grandson," said he, "the megis I spoke of means the Me-da-we
  religion. Our forefathers, many string of lives ago, lived on the
  shores of the great salt water in the east. Here, while they were
  suffering the ravages of sickness and death, the Great Spirit, at the
  intercession of Man-a-bo-sho, the great common uncle of the
  An-ish-in-aub-ag, granted them this rite, wherewith life is restored
  and prolonged. Our forefathers moved from the shores of the great
  water and proceeded westward.

  "The Me-da-we lodge was pulled down, and it was not again erected till
  our forefathers again took a stand on the shores of the great river
  where Mo-ne-aung (Montreal) now stands.

  "In the course of time this town was again deserted, and our
  forefathers, still proceeding westward, lit not their fires till they
  reached the shores of Lake Huron, where again the rites of the
  Me-da-we were practiced.

  "Again these rites were forgotten, and the Me-da-we lodge was not
  built till the Ojibways found themselves congregated at Bow-e-ting
  (outlet of Lake Superior), where it remained for many winters. Still
  the Ojibways moved westward, and for the last time the Me-da-we lodge
  was erected on the island of La Pointe, and here, long before the pale
  face appeared among them, it was practiced in its purest and most
  original form. Many of our fathers lived the full term of life granted
  to mankind by the Great Spirit, and the forms of many old people were
  mingled with each rising generation. This, my grandson, is the meaning
  of the words you did not understand; they have been repeated to us by
  our fathers for many generations."

    [Footnote 12: Op. cit., p. 78 et seq.]
