There is a great charm in the difference between the heated air in which
we fight our battles even for goodness, and the still atmosphere which
environs these quiet lives: we come back to them from the struggle, and
find that while they too are full of all fine aspiration for right, and
thrill with a divine indignation against wrong, their aspiration is
without restlessness, their indignation has no root of bitterness in it;
they are not unduly elated by successes which have turned our heads, nor
daunted by failures which have utterly cast us down; their faith is, as
ours should be, far more in God than in any of His human instruments.
Their characteristic excellences answer in many respects to our
weaknesses, and we admire and love them all the more: we cannot wait,
and their existence is one long patience: the noise and the light of
publicity are our life, and God has hidden them in His pavilion from the
strife of tongues: we argue, and wrangle, and fight, while they but love
and pray: health and energy are the very conditions of our activity, and
their life is rooted in weakness and in pain: we converse continually
with men, and it is a familiar thing with them to be alone with God. And
so it often happens that the chamber of long and disabling sickness, or
the sofa from which the invalid rarely moves, is the fountain of the
finest influence, and the centre of the noblest activities. For there
the charities of life may be all astir, and the quick affections thence
make their far journeys of sympathy; thither may come the workers, now
for the refreshment of peace, now for the balm of consolation, now,
again, for the inspiration of a purer dutifulness; while over all
constantly broods the presence of God, who gives and who denies the
power of active service; who bids this child toil and struggle, while
from that He asks only that she should "stand and wait." So in the
weakness of one many are made strong; and the activities of earth are
bathed and freshened in the airs of heaven.

Such lives are rarely counted happy; the world pities, while it admires
them; and there is often a note of commiseration even upon the lips of
those who know them best. I cannot think that it ought to be so; that it
is so, arises from the fact, that when we speak of happiness, we use the
word in some shallow and conventional sense which does not answer to our
best and deepest knowledge. For although one who lives so narrowed a
life as I have described, and, like a caged lark, praises God in clear
strains and out of a full heart, might well desire, were such a thing
yet possible, a restored activity and an enlarged power of service, it
would almost always be for others' sake rather than her own; not that
she might multiply occasions of pleasure, but that she might extend the
ministry of love. The truth is, that such an one has penetrated far more
deeply than most into the true secret of human happiness; learning that,
so far as external things go, it stands much more in the limitation than
in the satisfaction of desire; and that for the things within, to lie
close to God, and to be able to do and bear all His will with a complete
and ready assent, is the single sufficient source of a Peace which the
world can neither give nor take away. And then there is a grace of
character which is one of the rarest gifts of healthy, active life; but
which, wherever it shews itself, is almost always a plant of God's own
rearing and tending,--I mean a willingness to live or die, as He
pleases; and a genuine conviction, that whatever He pleases in this
respect is wisest, kindest, best. How little do we feel this, my
brethren, we who come here for an hour's repose from the world's
turmoil! Our life's work, we think, is half undone; our best hopes have
not yet reached fruition; our vital capacity is still unexhausted; a
thousand interests claim us. If God called us now, we should obey the
call with sorrowful reluctance, and innumerable backward glances to the
work and love in which our hearts are centred. Not so with those who
have long dwelt in the silence and the seclusion which lie between life
and death. It is the counterpoise of their suffering and the reward of
their patience, that to them there is no terror, but a great
deliverance, in God's last message. It opens the door of the
prison-house, and sets the captive free. It is the summons to exchange
pain for peace, and enforced quietness for the vigour and the joy of
service. The God who has straitened them so long is He who now sets
their lives in a large place; and from the twilight of faith they pass
into the noon of sight. Amen.



