corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
everlasting life." Labour for a sure grounded hope, a just hope in the
mercy of God for pardon and salvation; then you must know a work of
Christ upon you, and the power of the Spirit of Christ within you,
subduing your will to a holy subjection to the Divine will; that you may
say with the Apostle; "I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live,
yet not I, but Christ liveth in me; and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave
himself for me." Then the call to judgment will be joyful to you; for
you shall then be justified and acquitted before the whole world, at
that great and general judgment, and have an abundant entrance into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, and it shall
be well with you for ever. Now, "say to the righteous, it shall be well
with him;" not that it doth so appear at present; for through many
tribulations we must expect to enter into the kingdom of heaven; And
many are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lord will deliver them
out of them all. So that "if in this life only (saith the apostle) we
have hope, we are of all men most miserable". Yet "say to the righteous,
it shall be well with him;" Whatsoever their trials, troubles, and
tribulations are, the Lord will deliver them in the best time; they have
heaven in their eye and they look to the recompense of reward. Now what
hast thou in thine eye? Is it the high calling in Christ? Is this the
mark thou aimest at, and which thou hast in view? Is this the port and
haven, that thou art sailing to, "looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith who for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross, despising the shame?" Heb. xii 2. The apostle, after he had
been speaking of the suffering and martyrdom of those great saints, of
whom the world was not worthy; Heb. xi. How that "through faith they
subdued kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, stopt the
mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the
sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and
turned to flight the armies of the Aliens; of women, that received their
dead to life again, and others were tortured, not accepting of
deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection." Then he
comes to speak of the sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, and bids us
"Look unto him." Heb. xii. 1, 2, 3. Wherefore, "seeing we are compassed
about with so great a cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight,
and the sin that doth so easily beset us; and let us run with patience
the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our faith: Who for the joy that was set before him, endured
the cross and despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the throne of God: For consider him that endured such contradiction of
sinners against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your minds."
Blessed are they that can endure all these things, shame, reproach,
contumely, and disdain, persecutions and afflictions that attend the
testimony of Jesus! Blessed are they that can endure the cross, and
despise the shame! It is an internal cross, which thou must endure for
Christ, or thy own heart will reprove thee, check thee and condemn thee
for it: But if thou comest to know a being crucified with Christ, thou
shalt reign with him, and be raised up to eternal glory with him. Unless
thou knowest a dying to the world, and a being crucified with Christ,
thou canst not have a well grounded hope of everlasting happiness.

Therefore now, friends, examine yourselves about your title to heaven.
It is the wisdom and practice of the world, to examine their titles and
settlements, and to see, they be sure, and firm, and stable beforehand:
So we should make sure for heaven and eternal glory, and of "an house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens," before this earthly
tabernacle be dissolved; then for us to live will be Christ, and to die
will be eternal gain. Blessed are they that bear record of the Word of
God, and of the testimony of Jesus, that bear his name, and testify and
join with him against the spirit of the world, and the prince of the
power of the air. It is within that thou must join with Christ's
appearance, that so thou mayest be christianized, and thy mind made
truly christian: Thou must be purified in thy spirit, and baptized with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire, and know the powerful operation of the
Lord: They that have not experience of the new birth, they cannot enter
into the kingdom of God.

O my friends, set before you the example of Christ, who was holy,
harmless, and undefiled; his life was glorious in holiness: And as it
becomes you, so it highly concerns you, to be holy in all manner of
conversation. For if you imitate not the life of Christ, you cannot be
saved by his death: He came into the world, to redeem you from all
iniquity, and to save you from sin and hell; Labour to answer the
dignity of your high and holy calling, with a conversation becoming the
gospel of Christ: For you are called to glory and virtue. Whatsoever
troubles, temptations and tribulations may attend you in your pilgrimage
here below, if you be faithful and sincere, you will have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ. In all your labours and travels on this
earth, you may look up with joy for you have a serene heaven over your
heads; let Christ be precious to you; open the door of your hearts to
him, who is the King of glory: He is oppressed in the hearts of the
unclean, but he is exalted and lifted up in the hearts of the faithful:
Blessed are they that set him upon his throne in their hearts! O learn
