is not a mere machine to reproduce the messages of Gabriel. There is a
lower form of Wahi Zahir, which is called Isharat-ul-Malak (literally,
"sign of the Angel.") This expresses what Muhammad meant when he said: "The
Holy Ghost has entered into my heart." In other words, he received the
inspiration through {38} Gabriel, but not by word of mouth. This form of
inspiration is higher than that possessed by saints, and is usually applied
to the inspiration of the Traditions. This is denied by some, who say that
except when delivering the Quran Muhammad spoke by Ilham and not by Wahi.
The practical belief is, however, that the Traditions were Wahi
inspiration, and thus they come to be as authoritative as the Quran.
Sharastani speaks of "the signs (sayings) of the Prophet which have the
marks of Wahi."[41] This opinion is said by some Muslim theologians to be
supported by the first verse of the fifty-third Sura, entitled the Star.
"By the Star when it setteth; your companion Muhammad _erreth not_, nor is
he _led astray_, neither doth he _speak of his own will_. It is none other
than a revelation which hath been revealed to him." In any case the
inspiration of Muhammad is something quite different from the Christian
idea of inspiration, which is to Musalmans a very imperfect mode of
transmitting a revelation of God's will.

That there should be a human as well as a divine side to inspiration is an
idea not only foreign, but absolutely repugnant to Muhammadans. The Quran
is not a book of principles. It is a book of directions. The Quran
describes the revelation given to Moses thus:--"We wrote for him upon the
tables a monition concerning every matter and said: 'Receive them thyself
with steadfastness, and command thy people to receive them for the
observance of its most goodly precepts.'" (Sura vii. 142). It is such an
inspiration as this the Quran claims for itself. Muhammad's idea was that
it should be a complete and final code of directions in every matter for
all mankind. It is not the word of a prophet enlightened by God. It
proceeds immediately from God, and the word 'say' or 'speak' precedes, or
is understood to precede, every sentence. This to a Muslim is the highest
form of inspiration; this alone stamps a book as {39} divine. It is
acknowledged that the Injil--the Gospel--was given by Jesus; but as that,
too, according to Muslim belief, was brought down from heaven by the angel
Gabriel during the month of Ramazan, it is now asserted that it has been
lost, and that the four Gospels of the New Testament are simply Traditions
collected by the writers whose names they bear. Their value is, therefore,
that of the second foundation of the Islamic system.

The question next arises as to the exact way in which Gabriel made known
his message to Muhammad. The Mudarij-un-Nabuwat, a standard theological
work, gives some details on this point.[42] Though the Quran is all of God,
both as to matter and form, yet it was not all made known to the Prophet in
one and the same manner. The following are some of the modes:--

1. It is recorded on the authority of 'Ayesha, one of Muhammad's wives,
that a brightness like the brightness of the morning came upon the Prophet.
According to some commentators this brightness remained six months. In some
mysterious way Gabriel, through this brightness or vision, made known the
will of God.

2. Gabriel appeared in the form of Dahiah, one of the Companions of the
Prophet, renowned for his beauty and gracefulness. A learned dispute has
arisen with regard to the abode of the soul of Gabriel when he assumed the
bodily form of Dahiah. At times, the angelic nature of Gabriel overcame
Muhammad, who was then translated to the world of angels. This always
happened when the revelation was one of bad news, such as denunciations or
predictions of woe. At other times, when the message brought by Gabriel was
one of consolation and comfort, the human nature of the Prophet overcame
the angelic nature of the angel, who, in such case, having assumed a human
form, proceeded to deliver the message. {40}

3. The Prophet heard at times the noise of the tinkling of a bell. To him
alone was known the meaning of the sound. He alone could distinguish in,
and through it, the words which Gabriel wished him to understand. The
effect of this mode of Wahi was more marvellous than that of any of the
other ways. When his ear caught the sound his whole frame became agitated.
On the coldest day, the perspiration, like beads of silver, would roll down
his face. The glorious brightness of his countenance gave place to a
ghastly hue, whilst the way in which he bent down his head showed the
intensity of the emotion through which he was passing. If riding, the camel
on which he sat would fall to the ground. The Prophet one day, when
reclining with his head in the lap of Zeid, heard the well known sound:
Zeid, too, knew that something unusual was happening, for so heavy became
the head of Muhammad that it was with the greatest difficulty he could
support the weight.

4. At the time of the Mi'raj, or night ascent into heaven, God spoke to the
Prophet without the intervention of an angel. It is a disputed point
whether the face of the Lord was veiled or not.

5. God sometimes appeared in a dream, and placing his hands on the
Prophet's shoulders made known his will.

6. Twice, angels having each six hundred wings, appeared and brought the
message from God.

7. Gabriel, though not appearing in bodily form, so inspired the heart of
the Prophet that the words he uttered under its influence were the words of
God. This is technically called Ilka, and is by some supposed to be the
degree of inspiration to which the Traditions belong.

Above all, the Prophet was not allowed to remain in any error; if, by any
chance, he had made a wrong deduction from any previous revelation, another
was always sent to rectify it. This idea has been worked up to a science of
abrogation, according to which some verses of the Quran abrogate others.
Muhammad found it necessary to shift {41} his stand-point more than once,
and thus it became necessary to annul earlier portions of his revelation.

Thus in various ways was the revelation made known to Muhammad. At first
there seems to have been a season of doubt (Ante p. 3), the dread lest
after all it might be a mockery. But as years rolled on confidence in
himself and in his mission came. At times, too, there is a joyousness in
his utterances as he swears by heaven and earth, by God and man; but more
often the visions were weird and terrible. Tradition says:--"He roared like
a camel, the sound as of bells well-nigh rent his heart in pieces." Some
strange power moved him, his fear was uncontrollable. For twenty years or
more the revelations came, a direction on things of heaven and of earth, to
the Prophet as the spiritual guide of all men,[43] to the Warrior-Chief, as
the founder of political unity among the Arab tribes.

A Muhammadan student, after passing through a course of instruction in
grammar, rhetoric, logic, law, and dogmatics, at length reaches the stage
when he is permitted to enter upon the study of "'Ilm-i-usul," or the
exegesis of the Quran, and the inspired sayings of the Prophet. This done,
he can henceforth read the approved commentaries in order to learn what the
Fathers of Islam have to say. This science in one way fits him to be a
commentator, for the work of a Muslim divine now is, not to bring things
"new and old" out of the sacred book, but to hand down to others the things
old. There is no indwelling spirit in the Church of Islam which can reveal
to the devout mind new views of truth, or lead the pious scholar on to
deeper and more profound knowledge.

The greatest proficient in theology is the man who can repeat the Quran by
heart, who knows also and can reproduce at will what the early commentators
have said, who can remember, and quote in the most apposite manner, the
{42} Prophet's sayings preserved in the Traditions handed down by the
Companions, their followers, and their followers' followers, who can point
out a flaw in the Isnad (_i.e._ chain of narrators) of a Tradition quoted
by an opponent, or maintain, by repeating the long list of names, the
authority of the Isnad of the Tradition he quotes himself. A good memory,
not critical acumen, is the great desideratum in a Muslim theologian. The
chief qualification of a Hafiz, a man who can repeat the whole Quran by
heart, is not that he shall understand its meaning, but that he shall be
able to pronounce each word correctly. By men who are not Arabs by birth,
this is only to be attained after years of practice from childhood. The
Sunnis say that no Shia'h can ever become a Hafiz, from which fact they
draw the conclusion that the Shia'hs are heretics. In the early days of
Islam, the great authorities on the question of the correct pronunciation
of the Quran were the Khalifs Abu Bakr, Omar, Osman, and 'Ali, and ten of
the Companions, who learned from the Prophet himself the exact way in which
Gabriel had spoken. The Arabic of heaven was the Arabic of Islam. The
effort, however, to preserve one uniform method of repeating the Quran
failed. Men of other lands could not acquire the pure intonation of Mecca,
and so no less than seven different ways of reading the sacred book became
current. Here was a great difficulty, but it proved surmountable. Abu Ibn
Kab, one of the Companions, had become so famous as a reader that the
Prophet himself said: "read the Quran under Abu Ibn Kab." These men
remembered that Abu Ibn Kab had stated, that one day when scandalized at
man after man who entered the mosque repeating the Quran in different ways,
he spoke to Muhammad about it. His Highness said: "O Abu Ibn Kab!
intelligence was sent to me to read the Quran in one dialect, and I was
attentive to the Court of God, and said: 'make easy the reading of the
Quran to my sects.' These instructions were sent to me a second time
saying: 'read the {43} Quran in two dialects.' Then I turned myself to the
Court of God saying: 'make easy the reading of the Quran to my sects.' Then
a voice was sent to me the third time saying: 'read the Quran in seven
dialects.'"

This removed all difficulty, and the foresight displayed by the Prophet in
thus obtaining a divine sanction for the various ways of reading was looked
upon as a proof of his inspiration. Thus arose the "haft qira,at," or seven
readings of the Quran, now recognised.

In the Quran compiled by the order of the Khalif Osman there were no
vowel-points, but when men of other countries embraced Islam they found
great difficulty in mastering Arabic. Khalid bin Ahmad, a great grammarian,
then invented the short vowels and other diacritical marks. The seven
famous "Readers" whose names have been given to the various modes of
reading, are Imam Nafi of Madina, Imam Ibn-i-Kasir of Mecca, Imam Abu 'Umr
of Basra, Imam Hamza of Kufa, Imam Ibn 'Amir of Syria, Imam 'Asim of Kufa,
Imam Kisae of Kufa.[44] These learned men affixed different vowel-points in
many places in the Quran, and thus slight differences of meaning arose. In
India the "qira,at--reading,--of Imam 'Asim is followed by both Sunnis and
Shia'hs. There are three readings of lesser note allowable when reading the
Quran privately, but not when reading any part in a liturgical service.
During the month of Ramazan the Quran is repeated every night in the
mosque, it being so arranged that one-thirtieth part shall be recited each
night. The Imam of the mosque, or public Reader, (Qari) who commences
according to one of the seven recognised readings (qira,at), must keep to
the same all the month. As he has to recite without a book this involves a
great exercise of the memory. A good Hafiz will know the whole seven
varieties. The various readings thus introduced, though {44} unimportant in
their nature,[45] amount to about five hundred in number. The following are
a few illustrations. In the second Sura Abu 'Umr reads: "Nor shall ye be
questioned concerning that which _they_ have done;" but 'Asim reads: "That
which _ye_ have done." This is caused by putting two dots above the line
instead of below it. Again 'Asim reads: "_Enter ye_ the gates of hell"
(Sura xxxix. 73), but Nafi reads: "_Ye will be made to enter_ hell,"--that
is, by a slight change the passive is substituted for the active voice.
These are fair samples of the rest. No doctrine, so far as I know, is
touched, but the way in which Tradition records the Prophet's anticipation
of the difficulty is instructive to the student of Islam. At times, too,
fierce disputes have arisen between the followers of the seven famous
Readers whose names I have given above. In the year 935 A.H., Ibn Shanabud,
a resident of Baghdad, ventured to introduce some different readings in his
recital of the Quran. The people of Baghdad, not knowing these, were
furious, and the Khalif was compelled to cast the offender into prison. A
Council of divines was called together, before whom the unhappy Ibn
Shanabud was produced. For a while he maintained the correctness of his
"readings," but after being whipped seven times he said: "I renounce my
manner of reading, and in future I shall follow no other than that of the
manuscript drawn up by the Khalif Osman, and that which is generally
received."[46]

Closely connected with this subject is the history of the rise of the
science of grammar. As Islam spread, it became necessary to expound the
Quran to persons unacquainted with Arabic. The science of grammar then
became an important branch of study, and the collection of Traditions a
necessary duty. The Faithful were for a long time in {45} doubt as to the
lawfulness of applying the laws of grammar to so sacred a book. There was
no command in the book itself to do so, nor had the Prophet given any
directions on this point. It was then neither "farz" nor "sunnat," that is,
neither a command based on the Quran nor one based on any saying or act of
the Prophet. The Traditions, however, solve the difficulty.

Al Mamun, the distinguished though heretical Khalif of Baghdad, was a
patron of Al Farra, the chief of grammarians. A distinguished pupil of his,
Abu'l 'Abbas Thalub, on his death-bed expressed his belief in the fact that
the Quranists, the Traditionists, and others, had gained their heavenly
reward, but he had been only a grammarian, and grammar after all was, in
connection with the Quran, a science of doubtful legality. The friend to
whom he told his doubts and fears went home and saw a vision. It is
recorded that he had a vision in his sleep that very night, in which he saw
the blessed Prophet, who said to him: "Give my greeting to Abu'l 'Abbas
Thalub, and say, 'thou art master of the superior science.'" The Prophet
had now spoken, and henceforth grammar became a lawful study in Islam.
Muslims now quote the Quran as a perfect model of style; it may be well to
remember that the rules have been made for it, and that, therefore, it is
but natural that it should be perfect according to the present canons of
Arabic grammar.[47]

The question of the interpretation of the text speedily became a very
important branch of the "'Ilm-i-usul." It is said that the Quran was
brought from Paradise by Gabriel to Muhammad as occasion required. The
Prophet was reproached for not having a complete revelation, and {46}
answered the reproach by the following verse, sent for the purpose. "The
infidels say, 'unless the Quran be sent down to him all at once'--but in
this way we establish thy heart in it, _in parcels have we parcelled it out
to thee_" (Sura xxv. 34). The revelation thus given is entirely objective;
it came to the ear of the Prophet through the teaching of Gabriel. "Yet it
is a glorious Quran, _written on the preserved Table_." (Sura lxxxv. 22).
Gabriel addresses the Prophet thus: "When we have _recited_ it then follow
thou the _recital_." (Sura lxxv. 18). The external mode in which it came is
referred to in the verse: "We have _sent down_ to thee an Arabic Quran."
(Sura xx. 112). The fragmentary way in which the Quran was given[48] was
not without its difficulties. Some passages contradicted others, some were
difficult to understand. To the Prophet alone was the solution known. The
knowledge he communicated to his immediate followers, the Companions, as
they are called, thus: "To thee have we sent down this book of monitions,
that _thou mayest make clear to men_ what hath been sent down to them."
(Sura xvi. 46).

Ibn Khaldoun says: "The Prophet unfolded the meaning, distinguished between
abrogated and abrogating verses, {47} and communicated this knowledge to
his Companions. It was from his mouth that they knew the meaning of the
verses and the circumstances which led to each distinct revelation being
made."[49] The Companions thus instructed became perfectly familiar with
the whole revelation. This knowledge they handed down by word of mouth to
their followers, the Taba'in, who in their turn passed it on to their
followers the Taba-i-Taba'in. The art of writing then became common, and
the business of the commentator henceforth was to collect together the
sayings of the Companions thus handed down. Criticism of a passage in the
Quran was not his duty, criticism of a comment made on it by a Companion
was beyond his province: the first was too sacred to be touched, the second
must be accepted if only the chain of narrators of the statement were
perfect. Thus early in the history of Islam were the principles of exegesis
fixed and settled. Every word, every sentence, has now its place and class.
The commentator has now only to reproduce what was written before,[50]
though he may in elucidation of the point, bring forth some Tradition
hitherto unnoticed, which would, however, be a difficult thing to do. It
will thus be seen that anything like the work of a Christian commentator,
with all its fresh life and new ideas, is not to be had in Islam. The
perfection of its exegesis is its dogmatic and antique nature--

 "While as the world rolls on from age to age,
  And realms of thought expand,
  The letter stands without expanse or range,
  Stiff as a dead man's hand."

The technical terms which the student must know, and {48} the definitions
of which he must understand, are those which relate to the nature of the
words, the sentences, the use of the words of the Quran, and the deduction
of arguments from passages in the book.

I. The words of the Quran are divided into four classes.

1. _Khass_, or special words. These are sub-divided into three classes.
First, words which relate to genus, _e.g._ mankind. Secondly, words which
relate to species, _e.g._ a man, which refers to men as distinguished from
women. Thirdly, words which relate to special individuality, _e.g._ Zeid,
which is the name of a special individual.

2. _'Amm_, or common or collective names, such as "people."

3. _Mushtarik_, or words which have several significations, as the Arabic
word "'ain," which may mean an eye, a fountain, or the sun. Again, the word
"Sulat," if connected with God, may mean mercy, as "Sulat Ullah," the mercy
of God; if with man, it may mean either "namaz," a stated liturgical
service, or "du'a," prayer in its ordinary sense, _e.g._ Sulat-ul-Istisqa
(prayer in time of drought) is du'a, not namaz.

4. _Muawwal_, words which have several significations, all of which are
possible, and so a special explanation is required. For example, Sura
cviii. 2, reads thus in Sale's translation. "Wherefore pray unto the Lord
and _slay_ (the victims)." The word translated "slay" is in Arabic "nahr,"
which has many meanings. The followers of the great Legist Abu Hanifa
render it, "sacrifice," and add the words (the "victims"). The followers of
Ibn Shafa'i say it means "placing the hands on the breast in prayer."

This illustrates the difference between Mushtarik and Muawwal. In the
former, only one meaning is allowable, and that meaning the context
settles; in the latter both meanings are allowable and both right.

These divisions of words having been well mastered and the power of
defining any word in the Quran gained, the {49} student passes on to
consider the nature of the sentences. These are divided into two great
classes,--the "Obvious," and the "Hidden."

This division is referred to in the following passage of the Quran. "He it
is who hath sent down to thee the book. Some of its signs are of themselves
_perspicuous_; these are the basis (literally "mother") of the book, and
others are _figurative_. But they whose hearts are given to err follow its
figures, craving discord, craving an interpretation; yet none know its
interpretation, but God.[51] And the stable in knowledge say: 'We believe
in it, it is all from God.'" (Sura iii. 3).

This has given rise to the division of the whole book into literal and
allegorical statements. In order to explain these correctly the commentator
must know (1) the reason why, (2) the place where, (3) the time when, the
particular passage he is expounding was revealed; he must know whether it
abrogates or is abrogated, whether it is in its proper order and place or
not; whether it contains its meaning within itself or needs the light which
the context throws upon it; he must know all the Traditions which bear upon
it, and the authority for each such Tradition. This effectually confines
the order of commentators in the strict sense of the word to the
Companions, and supplies the reason why commentators since then simply
reproduce their opinions.[52] But to return from this digression. Sentences
are Zahir--"Obvious," or Khafi--"Hidden." Obvious sentences are divided
