
[Footnote 35: "The severity and injustice of the Cureish, overshooting
the mark, aroused personal and family sympathies; unbelievers sought to
avert or to mitigate the sufferings of the followers of the Prophet; and
in so doing they were sometimes themselves gained over to his side." The
Life of Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, Second Edition, page 68.]

[Footnote 36: Among them were the representatives of the following
tribes or clans of the Koreish, the Hashimites, Omiyyiads, Bani Abd
Shams, Bani Asad, Bani Abd bin Kosayy, Bani Abd-ud-Dar, Bani Zohra, Bani
Taym bin Morra, the Mukwhumites, the Jomahites, and the Bani Sahm.
_Vide_ Sprenger, page 190, Allahabad, 1851.]

[Footnote 37: _Vide_ Hishamee, page 259. An allusion to these converts
may be found in Sura V, verses 85 and 86, if it does not refer to those
of Najran.]

[Footnote 38: He preached to the following tribes among others:--Bani
Aamr bin Sasaa, Bani Moharib, Bani Hafasa (or Khafasa), Bani Fezara,
Bani Ghassan, Bani Kalb, Bani Haris, Bani Kab, Bani Ozra, Bani Murra,
Bani Hanifa, Bani Suleim, Bani Abs, Bani Nazr, Bani Bakka, Bani Kinda,
and Bani Khozaimah.]

[Footnote 39: "There is something lofty and heroic in this journey of
Mahomet to Tayif; a solitary man, despised and rejected by his own
people, going boldly forth in the name of God,--like Jonah to
Nineveh--and summoning an idolatrous city to repentance and to the
support of his mission. It sheds a strong light on the intensity of his
own belief in the divine origin of his calling."--The Life of Mahomet,
by Sir W. Muir, Vol. II, page 207.]

[Footnote 40: The Arabs also had a similar clan named Bani Shaitan, a
clan of the Hinzala tribe, the descendants of Tamim, through Zeid Monat
of the Moaddite stock. The Bani Shaitan (the children of Satan) dwelt
near Kufa.--_Vide_ Qalqashandi's Dictionary of Arab Tribes.]

[Footnote 41: Sura XLVI, verses 28, 29. These people were from Nisibin
and Nineveh in Mesopotamia. They were Chaldeans, soothsayers, and
cabalists. In the book of Daniel the Chaldeans are classed with
magicians and astronomers, and evidently form a sort of the priest class
who have a peculiar "tongue" and "learning" (Dan. I. 4). In Arabic,
persons of similar professions were called _Kahins_. Some of this class
of people pretended to receive intelligence of what was to come to pass
from certain satans or demons, whom they alleged to hear what passed in
the heavens. Others pretended to control the stars by enchanting them.
They produced eclipses of the sun and moon by their alleged efficiency
in their own enchantments. They practised astrology as well as astronomy
and fortune-telling.

It appears that the Chaldeans (Kaldai or Kaldi) were in the earliest
times merely one out of the many Cushite tribes inhabiting the great
alluvial plain known afterwards as Chaldea or Babylonia. In process of
time as the Kaldi grew in power, their name prevailed over that of the
other tribes inhabiting the country; and by the era of the Jewish
captivity it had begun to be used generally for all the inhabitants of
Babylonia. It had thus come by this time to have two senses, both
ethnic: in the one, it was the special appellative of a particular race
to whom it had belonged from the remotest times; in the other, it
designated the nation at large in which the race was predominant.
Afterwards it was transferred from an ethnic to a mere restricted sense,
from the name of a people to that of a priest caste or sect of
philosophers. The Kaldi proper belonged to the Cushite race. While both
in Assyria and in Babylonia, the sernitic type of speech prevailed for
special purposes, the ancient Cushite dialect was purely reserved for
scientific and religious literature. This is no doubt the "learning" and
the "tongue" to which reference is made in the Bible (Dan. I. 4). It
became gradually inaccessible to the great mass of people who had
emigrated by means, chiefly, of Assyrian influence. But it was the
Chaldean learning in the old Chaldean or Cushite language. Hence all who
studied it, whatever their origin or race, were, on account of their
knowledge, termed Chaldeans. In this sense Daniel himself, "the master
of Chaldeans" (Dan. V. 11.), would, no doubt, have been reckoned among
them, and so we find Seleucas, a Greek, called a Chaldean by Strabo
(XVI. 1, Sec. 6). The Chaldeans were really a learned class, who by their
acquaintance with the language of science became its depositaries. They
were priests, magicians or astronomers, as their preference for one or
other of those occupations inclined them; and in the last of these three
capacities they probably effected discoveries of great importance. The
Chaldeans, it would appear, congregated into bodies forming what we may
perhaps call universities, and they all engaged together in it for their
progress. They probably mixed up to some extent astrology with their
astronomy, even in the earlier times, but they certainly made great
advance in astronomical science to which their serene sky and
transparent atmosphere specially invited them. In later times they seem
certainly to have degenerated into mere fortune-tellers (_vide_ Smith's
Dict. of the Bible, Art. _Chaldeans_).

In their practice of astromancy or enchanting the stars, and in
pretending to overhear what passed in the heavens, they, the Jinns, used
to sit on the tops of lofty mansions at night-time for hours offering
sacrifices to the stars and enchanting them. In their peculiar tongue
and learning they called this practice "stealing a hearing" and "sitting
for listening" (Suras XV, verse 17, and LXXII, verses 8, 9).

Now at the time of Mohammad's assuming the Prophet's office there had
been an unusually grand display of numerous falling stars, which at
certain periods are known to be specially abundant. At the same time
there were good many comets visible in different parts of heavens, which
certainly might have smitten with terror these Jinns, _i.e._, the
astromancers and soothsayers. There was one comet visible in 602 A.D.,
and other two appeared in 605 A.D. In 607 A.D. two more comets were
visible; another one appeared in 608 A.D. Each of the years 614 and 615
had one comet. There were also comets visible in 617 A.D. (_vide_
Chambers's Descriptive Astronomy). These comets are most probably
noticed in the contemporary record (_i.e._ the Koran). A comet is called
_Tariq_, or "night comer," in Sura LXXXVI, verse 1; and described as the
star of piercing radiance. (_Annajmus Saqib. Ibid_ 3.)

The _Kahins_ were very much alarmed at the stupendous phenomena of the
falling stars and the comets; and had stopped their soothsaying and
divinations. Whenever they used to sit on their places of listening,
enchanting, and divination during night-time, looking at the heavens,
their eyes met with showers of shooting stars and brilliant comets which
bewildered them very much. It is said that the first whose attention was
attracted to the unusual shooting stars was a clan of the Sakeefites of
Us-Tayif (Ibn Hisham, page 131). These Jinns, when they were converted
to Islam at Nakhla near Tayif, expressed their bewilderment from the
unusual shower of falling stars and the appearance of numerous comets in
their peculiar language:--

"The heaven did we essay but found it filled with mighty garrison and of
darting flames."

"We sat on some of the seats to listen, but whoever now listeneth
findeth a darting flame in ambush for him."

"We know not whether evil be meant for them that are on earth, or
whether their Lord meaneth true guidance for them."--Sura LXXII, verses
8-10.

So the pretenders of hearing the discourses of heavenly bodies being
quite harassed by the extraordinary showers of the falling stars, and
the appearances of numerous comets, had stopped their divination. This
was taken notice of in the Koran:--

"They overhear not exalted chiefs, and they are darted from every side."

"Driven off and consigned to a lasting torment; while if one steal by
stealth then a glistering flame pursueth him."--Sura XXXVII, verses
8-10.

"Save such as steal a hearing, and him do visible flames pursue."--Sura
XV, verse 18.

"The satans were not sent down with this _Koran_. It beseemed them not,
and they had not the power. For they are far removed from the
hearing."--Sura XXVI, verses 210-212.

As an instance of terror and bewilderment caused by meteors and shooting
stars among credulous people, I will quote the following anecdote:

About the middle of the tenth century an epidemic terror of the end of
the world had spread over Christendom. The scene of the last judgment
was expected to be in Jerusalem.

In the year 999 the number of pilgrims proceeding eastwards, to await
the coming of the Lord in that city, was so great that they were
compared to a desolating army. During the thousandth year the number of
pilgrims increased. Every phenomenon of nature filled them with terror.
A thunderstorm sent them all upon their knees. Every meteor in the sky
seen at Jerusalem brought the whole Christian population into the
streets to weep and pray. The pilgrims on the road were in the same
alarm. Every shooting star furnished occasion for a sermon, in which the
sublimity of the approaching judgment was the principal topic (_vide_
Extraordinary Popular Delusions by Charles Mackay, LL.D., London, pp.
222 and 223).

It was a conceit or imposture of the _Kahins_ to pretend that their
demons had access to the outskirts of the heavens, and by assiduous
eavesdropping secured some of the secrets of the upper world and
communicated the same to the soothsayers or diviners upon earth. The
Jews had a similar notion of the demons (schedim), learning the secrets
of the future by listening behind the veil (pargod). The Koran falsified
them in their assertions. It says that the heavens (or the stars) are
safe and protected against the eavesdropping (or enchantments) of the
soothsayers.

"We have set the signs of Zodiac in the heavens, and we have decked them
forth for the bewilders."

"And we guard them from every stoned satan."--Sura XV, verses 16, 17.

"Verily we have adorned the lower heaven with the adornment of the
stars;"

"And we have guarded them against every rebellious satan."--Sura XXXVII,
verses 6, 7.

"... And we have furnished the lower heaven with lights and have
protected it...."--Sura XLI, verse 11.

The Koran further says that the soothsayers impart to their votaries or
to those who go to consult them what they have heard from other people
and are liars:--

"They impart what they have heard, but most of them are liars."--Sura
XXVI, verse 223.

It is nowhere said in the Koran that the stars are darted or hurled at
the Satans. Sura LXVII, verse 5, literally means, "of a surety we have
decked the lower heaven with lights and have made them to be (means of)
'_Rojum_' conjectures to the (or for the) devils, _i.e._ the
astrologer." The primary meaning of _Rajm_ is a thing that is thrown or
cast like a stone: pl. '_Rojum_,' but it generally means speaking of
that which is hidden, or conjecturing or speaking by conjecture, as in
Sura XVIII, verse 21. In Sura XIX, verse 47, the word "_La-arjomannaka_"
has been explained both ways, meaning (1) "I will assuredly cast stones
at thee," and (2) "I will assuredly say of thee, (though) speaking of
that which is hidden (from me) or unknown (by me), what thou dislikest
or hatest." _Vide_ Lane's Arabic-English Lexicon, page 1048.]


[Sidenote: Rapid stride of Islam at Medina.]

20. Next year twelve new converts were made from persons who had come to
see the Prophet from Medina. They returned as missionaries of Islam, and
Islam spread rapidly in Medina from house to house and from tribe to
tribe. The Jews looked on in amazement at the people whom they had in
vain endeavoured from generations to convince of the errors of
polytheism, and to dissuade from the abominations of their idolatry,
suddenly of their own accord casting away idols and professing belief in
the one True God.[42] Thus speedily without let or hindrance, force or
compulsion, did Islam take firm root at Medina and attain to a full and
mature growth. There remained not a single house among the Aws and
Khazraj tribes[43] of Medina in which there were not believing men and
women, excepting the branch of the Aws Allah, who were not converts till
after the siege of Medina. At this time there were many Moslems in
Mecca, Medina, and Abyssinia, and not a single one of them could be said
to have been converted to Islam by compulsion: on the contrary, they
were used to be forced to renounce Islam.

[Footnote 42: "After five centuries of Christian evangelization, we can
point to but a sprinkling here and there of Christian converts;--the
Bani Harith of Najran: the Bani Hanifa of Yemama; some of the Bani Tay
at Tayma, and hardly any more. Judaism, vastly more powerful, had
exhibited a spasmodic effort of proselytizm under Dzu Nowas; but, as an
active and converting agent the Jewish faith was no longer
operative."--Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. I, page ccxxxix.]

[Footnote 43: The Aws or Khazraj were two branches of the Azdite tribes
of Yemen from the Kahlanite stock. After their emigration to the North
they separated themselves from the Ghassinides and returned to Medina,
where they settled.]


[Sidenote: The increasing number of Moslem converts at Mecca after the
Hegira.]

21. When the Moslems were obliged to emigrate from Mecca under the
severe Koreishite persecutions, all the followers of the Prophet with
the exception of those detained in confinement or unable to escape from
slavery had emigrated with their families to Medina. But there were many
new converts at Mecca since the expulsion of the Moslems. Those unable
to fly from Mecca in the teeth of the oppressions of the wrathful
Koreish (Sura IV., 77, 79, 100) were increasing. They appealed for
deliverance and aid, while the Moslem pilgrims were near Mecca at
Hodeibia, six years after the Hegira, and an allusion is made to the
great number of the Meccan converts, living at Mecca during that time in
Sura XLVIII, 25.


[Sidenote: Disturbed state of the public peace among the tribes
surrounding Medina. Internecine wars an obstacle to the propagation of
Islam.]

22. Irrespective of the wars prosecuted by the Koreish from the South
against Mohammad at Medina, and the constant danger of inroad and attack
upon Medina from the neighbouring tribes--a great obstacle in the
propagation of Islam which could only be successfully accomplished in a
state of peace and tranquility of both parties,--the most important and
great tribes in the North and Centre of Arabia were at war against each
other during the life of Mohammad, either before his mission from 570 to
610 A.D. or during his public mission from 610 to 632 A.D. The
disastrous internecine wars were kept up for scores of years and the
evils necessarily inflicted in their progress were not confined to the
belligerents only. It required years to remove the evils of war and to
efface the traces of misery and sorrow the wars had brought.[44]

[Footnote 44: The same remarks apply to the wars fought during
Mohammad's lifetime but before his public mission.]


23. Here I will give a brief sketch of the internecine wars which took
place among the various Arab tribes during the time of Mohammad.

*Wars during Mohammad's Lifetime, between the Arabian Tribes in the North
and Centre of Arabia.*

_Before his mission_, 570-610, A.D.

(1.) The battle of Rahrahan between Bani Aamir bin Saasaa and Bani Tamim
in Najd, 578, A.D.

(2.) The Bani Abs on the side of Bani Aamir and Bani Zobian on the side
of Tamim, 579, A.D., at _Sheb Jabala_.

(3.) Sacrilegious war at Tayif called Harb fi-jar, 580-590, A.D.

(4.) Several battles between Bani Bakr and Tamim in 604, A.D. and the
following years.

_During his mission._

(A)--_While at Mecca, 610-622, A.D._

(1.) The war of Dahis between Bani Abs and Zobian, the branches of
Ghatafan in Central Arabia; lasted forty years, 568 to 609, A.D.

(2.) The battle of Zu-kar between the Bani Bakr and the Persians in the
Kingdom of Hira, 611, A.D.

(3.) The Bani Kinda and Bani Haris attacked Bath Tamim when they had
retired to Kulab in the confines of Yemen and repulsed them.

(4.) The Bani Aws and Khazraj of Medina were at war. The battle of Boas
was fought in 615, A.D. The Bani Aws were assisted by two tribes of
Ghassan, by Mozeima and the Jewish tribes Nazeer and Koreiza. The Bani
Khazraj were supported by Joheina, Ashja and the Jews of Kainuka.

(B)--_While at Medina_, 622 to 632, _A.D._

(1.) The standing warfare between the Bani Hawazin and the Bani Abs,
Zobian, and Ashja of Ghatafan was kept up by assassinations and petty
engagements till they become converts to Islam.

(2.) The Koreish fought two battles of Badr and Ohad against the Moslems
at Medina in 624 and 625, A.D., respectively.

(3.) Several clans of the great Ghatafan family (the Bani Murra, Ashja
and Fezara) the Bani Suleim and Sad, a branch of Hawazin, and Bani Asad
from Najd Bedouin tribes, and Bani Koreiza the Jews, had besieged Medina
in 627, A.D., in confederation with the Koreish.

(4.) Bani Tamim and Bani Bakr renewed their hostilities, and from 615 to
630, A.D., several battles occurred between them. The last battle was
that of Shaitain in 630, A.D.

In this year, after the battle, both the tribes were converted to
Islam.

(5.) The Bani Ghaus and Jadila branches of Bani Tay in the north of
Medina warred against each other. The war of Fasad continued twenty-five
years till they embraced Islam in 632, A.D.


[Sidenote: Spread of Islam in the surrounding tribes at Medina after the
Hegira I-VI.]

24. During the six eventful years of Mohammad's sojourn at Medina, from
the Hegira to the truce of Hodeibia, where he was every year attacked or
threatened by other hostile Arab tribes, acting always in self-defence,
he had converted several members or almost entire tribes residing round
Medina.

Among them were the following:--

     1. The Bani Aslam.[45]
     2. Joheina.[46]
     3. Mozeina.[47]
     4. Ghifar.[48]
     5. Saad-bin-Bakr.[49]
     6. Bani Ashja.[50]

We never find a single instance even in the _Maghazis_ (accounts of the
campaigns of Mohammad, however untrustworthy they be) of Mohammad's
converting any person, families, or branches of tribes by the scimitar
in one hand and the Koran in the other.

[Footnote 45: The Bani Aslam tribe settled north of Medina in the valley
of Wady-al-Koraa. They were a branch of the Kozaaite tribes descended
from Himyar.]

[Footnote 46: Joheina were a branch of Kozaa, the descendants of Himyar.
This tribe inhabited in the vicinity of Yenbo, north of Medina.]

[Footnote 47: Mozeina were a tribe of the Moaddite stock of Mecca. They
inhabited in Najd, north-east of Medina.]

[Footnote 48: Ghifar were sons of Moleil-bin-Zamra, the descendants of
Kinana, one of the Moaddite tribes.]

[Footnote 49: Saad-bin-Bakr were a branch of Hawazin. Mohammad had been
nursed among them.]

[Footnote 50: The Bani Ashja were a branch of the Ghatafan of the Meccan
stock of the Moaddites. The Bani Ashja appear all to have been hostile
to Mohammad. They fought against the Prophet at the siege of Medina with
four hundred warriors in their contingent. Sir W. Muir says, "The Bani
Ashja, who had joined in the siege of Medina, gave in their adhesion
shortly after the massacre of the Coreitza; they told Mahomet that they
were so pressed by his warring against them, that they could stand out
no longer.--K. Wackidi, page 60." Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, 107,
_footnote_. This story is altogether false. We never hear of Mohammad
warring against Bani Ashja; on the contrary, they had themselves invaded
Medina.]


[Sidenote: Mecca a barrier against the conversion of the southern
tribes.]

25. Up to this time, notwithstanding the persecutions, exiles and wars
against Islam, it had spread by the mere force of persuasion among the
Meccans, some of whom had emigrated to Abyssinia and most to Medina, the
whole of the influential tribes of Aws and Khazraj at Medina, as well as
among the Jews there, and among some of the tribes in the north, and
east of Medina and the centre of Arabia. But as Mecca in the south had
declared war against Islam, most of the Arab tribes connected somehow
with the Meccans, and those inhabiting the southern and south-eastern
parts of Arabia, to whom Mecca served geographically as a barrier,
watched the proceedings of the war and the fate of Islam, and had no
opportunity of coming to Medina to embrace Islam, nor of having friendly
intercourse with the Moslems, nor of receiving Mohammadan missionaries
in the face of the wars waged by the Koreish who were looked upon as the
guardians of the Kaaba, the spiritual or religious centre of the
idolatrous Arabs. At the end of the last or the fifth year many Bedouin
tribes, among whom might be counted the Bani Ashja, Murra, Fezara,
Suleim, Sad-bin-Bakr and Bani Asad, had furnished several thousand Arabs
to the Koreish for the siege of Medina. Only when the aggressions of the
Koreish against the Moslems were suspended that the warring tribes and
those of the Central, Southern and Eastern Arabia could think of what
they had heard of the reasonable preaching of Islam against their
idolatry and superstitions.


[Sidenote: Tribal conversions in the sixth year.]

26. Since the truce of Hodeibia at the end of the sixth year after the
Hegira Mecca was opened for intercourse, where there were some more and
fresh conversions. The Bani Khozaa, descendants of Azd, were converted
to Islam at the truce of Hodeibia. At the pilgrimage in the following
year some influential men of Mecca adopted Islam. The movement was not
confined to these leading men, but was wide and general. In the seventh
year the following tribes were converted to Islam and their deputations
joined Mohammad at Khyber:

     1. Bani Ashar.[51]
     2. Khushain.[52]
     3. Dous.[53]

[Sidenote: Conversions among several other tribes of the North and
North-east in A.H., 8.]

During the same year Mohammad converted several other tribes in the
north and north-east of Arabia. Among them were--

     1. Bani Abs.
     2. Zobian.
     3. Murra.
     4. Fezara.[54]
     5. Suleim.[55]
     6. Ozra.
     7. Bali.
