
    (  humble, lowly ( attitude with regard  )  Distrust
    (                ( to the past           )  of Self.
    (
    (  penitent      ( attitude with regard  )  Shame for
    (                ( to the present        )  sin.
    (
    (  obedient      ( attitude with regard  )  Resolution
    (                ( to the future         )  to leave
    (                                        )  the sin.

{35}

2. _Confession_.

  Parallel.  _erred_ and _strayed_.

  Progressive.

    ( _device_ . . . . . . . . . . an act of the mind.
    ( _desire_ . . . . . . . . . . an act of the heart.

    ( _left undone_  . . . . . . . Omission.
    ( _done_ (wrongly) . . . . . . Commission.

    Cf. _sins, negligences and ignorances_ Litany.

    ( _spare_  . . . . . . . . . . with regard to the past.
    ( _restore_  . . . . . . . . .  "     "    "  the future.

    ( _godly_  . . . . . . . . . . duty to God.
    ( _righteous_  . . . . . . . .  "   "  man.
    ( _sober_  . . . . . . . . . .  "   "  self.

3. _Absolution_.

  Parallel.  _declare_ and _pronounce_.
             _truly_ (with truth), _unfeignedly_ (without pretence).

  Progressive.

    ( _death_  . . . . . . . . . . Life is something more than
    ( _turn and live_  . . . . . . the absence of death.

    ( _power_  . .  The Priest . . may  pronounce.
    ( _commandment_            . . must     "

    ( _Absolution_ . . . . . . . . unloosing.
    ( _Remission_  . . . . . . . . putting away.

    ( _pardoneth_  . . . . . . . . (Fr. _pardonner_) God forgiveth.
    ( _absolveth_  . . . . . . . . (Lat. _absolvo_) God looseth the
                                     sinner.

    ( _repent_ . . . . . . . . . . looking at Self.
    ( _believe_  . . . . . . . . .    "    "  God.

{36}

    ( _pure_ . . . . . . . . . . . absence of evil.
    ( _holy_ . . . . . . . . . . . presence of good.

    ( _repentance_ . . . . . that our present lives may
    (                                 please God.
    ( _God's Holy Spirit_     "   our remaining lives
    (                             may please Him.

It will be clear that if we keep from sin repentance is more intimately
connected with our present lives than with the future.  Yet both
repentance and the gift of the Holy Spirit are required for life now
and hereafter.



[1] S. Basil, _ad Clerum Neoc. Ep._ 63, Tom. 2, 843 D, quoted by
Wheatley, says that "the primitive Christians in all Churches,
immediately upon their entering into the House of Prayer, made a
confession of their sins to God with much sorrow and concern and tears,
every man pronouncing his own confession with his own mouth."

So Ezra (ix. 5, 6, &c.) and Daniel (ix. 1-19) approached God with
Confession.

[2] The Pie.  Three explanations are offered of this word.  (1)
_pi_=the first letter of the word _pinax_ _a chart_, i.e. the Table of
Lessons, &c.  (2) Pie,--as in magpie, piebald,--from the two colours of
the page.  (3) Litera picata--the pitch-coloured letter--which began
each several order in the rules.

The title of the Sarum Breviary makes Pie equivalent to Breviary or
Portiforium.  The most attractive derivation is that which associates
it with the Greek word for a chart or map.






{37}

CHAPTER V.

PRAISE.

I. The Psalms.

Every part of the Praise portion of the Service has a
Praise-Termination.  We have already seen that the "intention" of the
Lord's Prayer is marked for praise by a Termination, viz. _for thine is
the kingdom, the power and the glory for ever and ever_.

This praise-termination belongs to the Lord's Prayer, and is not used
for anything else.  In like manner, other forms of praise have their
own terminations.  Thus Psalms and Lessons are used for praise and have
praise-terminations.

When a Psalm is used for praise, its termination is _Glory be to the
father_, &c.

When a Lesson is used for praise, its termination is a Canticle--i.e.
one of the Bible songs of praise (from the Latin _canticulum_, a little
song, a sonnet).

When the Creed is used for praise, since nothing can be added to the
facts of God's Being and Work except the will to recite them devoutly,
its praise-termination is _Amen_.

{38}

The first Lord's Prayer.

The Lord's Prayer may be regarded as a brief summary of the acts of
worship which come after it.  Much care is required in order to use its
familiar words with due devotion.  When it is used, as here, for
Praise, the following may be taken as examples of the thoughts which
should accompany its several phrases.

    Our Father,                       God is Love.
  Which art in heaven,                God is a spirit.
  Hallowed be Thy Name,               God's Holiness.
  Thy Kingdom come,                   God's Power.
  Thy Will be done,                   God's Perfectness.
  In earth as it is in heaven,        Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
                                        God Almighty.
  Give us this day our daily          Every good gift is from
    bread,                              above.
  Forgive us our trespasses,          The mercy of the Lord
                                        is from everlasting to
                                        everlasting.
  Lead us not into temptation,        Thou art about my path
                                        and about my bed.
  Deliver us from evil,               With power He commandeth
                                        the unclean spirits, &c.


The Ladder of Praise.

The various parts of the Praise portion of the Service are not
repetitions of the same ideas.  We {39} have first, in the Psalms, the
simpler thoughts about God.  The First Lesson, taken from the Old
Testament, advances to higher or more complex thoughts in Praise of
Him.  The next stage is reached in the Second Lesson; and the Apostles'
Creed crowns the whole.  Thus a _Ladder_ of praise is made whereby we
climb up to the thought of God in His Perfect Being, which is the very
essence of Real Worship.

The first steps in this ladder are made by the use of the Book of
Psalms, which is divided into sections for these daily Services, and so
arranged that they supply different Psalms for 30 mornings and 30
evenings.  If there are 31 days in the month, those for the 30th day
are repeated on the 31st: in February, the (29th and) 30th are omitted.

There are many words which originally meant a Song, but in course of
time have come to mean a special kind of song, or the music which
belongs to a song.  Thus _Cantus_, a song, gives us _Chant_, the music
of a psalm verse; and _Canticle_, a psalm after a Lesson.  _psalmos_, a
song, gives us _psalm_, a hymn, but not metrical, _hymnos_, a song,
gives us _hymn_, a song in metre.


Versicles and Psalms.

Before the Psalms begin there is an injunction to praise the Lord
exchanged between the Minister and the People.  Four other Versicles
and Gloria Patri are interposed after the Lord's Prayer--all in the
form of Verse and Respond.

{40} Ps. li. 15 is the Psalmist's grateful cry when his sin was
forgiven and his praises began to break forth.

Ps. lxx. 1 supplies the second couplet.

The _Gloria Patri_ follows these Psalm verses.

The Venite exultemus Domino, briefly called _Venite_, is the 95th
Psalm.  The Rubric provides that it is to be said every day, but not
twice on the 19th day[1].  It is the first of the Morning Psalms, and
formerly was sung with an Anthem (see Chapter XIII.) which was known as
the Invitatory, and varied with the Season.

Antiphonal, i.e. alternate, singing dates from the services described
in 1 Chronicles vi. 31-33, 39, 44, from which it appears that there
were three choirs of singers--one in the centre, and one on either
hand.  Thus the interchange of replies from either side and a chorus of
all the voices were provided, 1 Chron. xvi. 7-9 makes it clear that the
Psalms were sung, as indeed the word Psalm (from Gr. _psallo_, I sing)
implies.  See also Neh. xii. 24.

The Authorised Version (A.V.) of the Bible is a translation made at the
beginning of James I.'s reign, after the Hampton Court Conference (Jan.
1604).  It was published in 1611 with a title-page stating that it was
"appointed to be read in churches."  There is, however, no evidence of
any formal adoption of it until the statement made in the Preface of
the {41} Prayer Book (1662) that "such portions of Holy Scripture as
are inserted into the Liturgy," "in the Epistles and Gospels
especially, and in sundry other places . . . are now ordered to be read
according to the last Translation."  It is evident that this "last
Translation" is the Version of 1611: for the Epistles and Gospels are
quoted from it in the Prayer Book of 1662.  The Translation of 1611,
then, is that from which are to be taken "such portions of Holy
Scripture as are inserted into the Liturgy."  This appears to be the
_general_ rule of the Prayer Book of 1662.  But that Prayer Book gives
authority to various exceptions.  The most notable of these is the
provision, in a footnote to _The order how the Psalter is appointed to
be read_, "that the Psalter followeth the division of the Hebrews and
the translation of the great English Bible, set forth and used in the
time of King Henry the Eighth and Edward the Sixth."

If it be asked why the words of the Psalms should be sung as in the
Great Bible when other translations have superseded it for Lessons,
there is an easy answer.  Books were not cheap or common in the 16th
and 17th centuries.  Many people had sung them so often as to know them
by heart.  A comparison of the Bible and Prayer Book translations will
show that there was no large gain to be set against the loss of
congregational worship which must have resulted from changes.  The
Bishops' Bible supplanted the Great Bible in 1568, and the Authorised
Version was made in 1611.  Both in 1604 and in 1662 the Revisers
decided to retain the Version of 1539-40 (the Great Bible) so far as
the Psalms and Canticles {42} were sung in the Churches.  This is
plainly not an oversight in 1662, for the Revisers altered the words of
the note in the Preface, without changing the sense.


Psalms in Daily Services.

The Preface, "Concerning the Service of the Church," states that "the
ancient Fathers have divided the Psalms into seven portions, whereof
every one was called a Nocturn," and that "the same was . . . ordained
. . . of a good purpose and for a great advancement of godliness"; but
"of late time a few of them have been daily said and the rest utterly
omitted."  A writer of the ninth century says that S. Jerome, at the
bidding of the Pope on the request of Theodosius, arranged the Psalms
for the Services of day and night in order to avoid the confusion
arising from variety of uses[2].  S. Ambrose was a contemporary of S.
Jerome but died more than 20 years before him.  There are considerable
differences between the plan which S. Ambrose gave to his diocese of
Milan, and the plan which we may believe was generally given at the
same time to the Churches of the rest of Western Europe.  But they are
similar in many respects.  In both, a division was made between the
first 109 psalms,--which were mainly allotted to the night services,
i.e. to those which were afterwards called Mattins,--and the rest which
were mainly allotted to the Evening Service (Vespers).  We suppose that
the division, mentioned in the {43} Preface, "into seven portions"
refers to those 109 Psalms.

Of these 109, 18 were used at other Services, leaving 91 for Mattins,
viz. 19 on Sunday and 12 each for the week days.  The Ambrosian
arrangement of them was for a fortnight.

The Greek Church divides the whole Book into 20 portions and takes
them, two portions at Mattins and one at Vespers, beginning on Saturday
night, omitting Sunday Vespers, and taking, on Friday, the 19th, 20th
and 18th portions.

Thus we see that a weekly singing of the Book of Psalms is derived from
a very ancient time, when the division of the Eastern and Western
Churches of Europe had not occurred.

The Sarum order, which we suppose was that which is referred to in the
Preface as having been "corrupted" by omissions, had the 109 Psalms
allotted to Mattins, as above described.  For Vespers, there were five
each day from cx.-cxlvii., omitting the 118th and 119th, 134th, 143rd
and, as explained below[3], reckoning the 147th as two.  All these were
taken in order as they stand in the Bible.  Those which were left out
were allotted to other Services, as, for instance, iv. to Compline,
lxiii. to Lauds, &c., &c.  Psalm cxix. was to be said through every
day, 32 verses at Prime, and 48 verses each, at Terce, Sext and None.

{44}

Lauds was the great Praise Service of the day, and had a very beautiful
arrangement of its Psalms which always ended with one of the O.T. hymns
followed by Psalms cxlviii.-cl.  The O.T. hymns on the seven days of
the week were _Benedicite_: Isaiah xii.: Isaiah xxxviii. 10-20: 1 Sam.
ii. 1-10: Exodus xv. 1-19: Hab. iii.: Deut. xxxii. 1-43.

The beauty of many of these arrangements is undeniable: but they were
rather intricate; and in practice they broke down.

Our revisers retained the underlying principles.  By spreading the
course over 30 days they made it possible to use it all.  They retained
the 95th Psalm as the first Psalm of every day; and also the principle
of having two daily Services at which Psalms occupied an important
place.

There are Special Psalms for six days in the year--the four great
Festivals, Christmas, Easter, Ascension, and Whitsun Day, and the two
great prayer-days, Ash-Wednesday and Good Friday.  The Preface explains
that these Special Psalms are to be sung instead of the ordinary Psalms
on those days; and authorises the use of Special Psalms approved by the
Ordinary on other days.

In using the Book of Psalms as a book of worship we must remember what
was said of the _Intention_ of our minds in respect to parts of the
Services.  There are many Psalms which supply us with the best Prayers
in trouble, penitence or any anxiety.  But when using them in these
Services our Intention is not Prayer but Praise, and the thought of God
must inspire our devotions.

{45}

It will often help us if we remember that God's Righteousness is
infinite, as well as His Mercy.  It is impossible for man in his
present state to reconcile perfect Righteousness and perfect Mercy: for
Righteousness will have nothing to do with sin, while Mercy forgives
it.  These two characteristics of God are revealed to us through Christ
in Whom Righteousness and Peace are united; cf. Ps. lxxxv.

The Psalms, composed by various people at different times, very
frequently are the utterances of men in trouble: and they often sketch
the thoughts or actions of the Ideal Man, in one or other of the four
characters which answer to God's Righteousness and God's Mercy.  For,
in response to God's Righteousness, man must be (1) perfectly
_penitent_, and (2) in imitation of God, must _detest sin_: in
imitation of God, (3) he must be perfectly _forgiving_, and in response
to God's mercy, (4) he must have _trust and peace_.  The Psalmists
