an acknowledgment that in their considering themselves mean they see
the foundation of their dignity?  So it is that in the enumeration of
the different parts of a carriage we do not come on what makes it
answer the ends of a carriage.  They do not wish to show themselves
elegant-looking as jade, but (prefer) to be coarse-looking as an
(ordinary) stone.


40.

1.

   The movement of the Tao
     By contraries proceeds;
   And weakness marks the course
     Of Tao's mighty deeds.

2. All things under heaven sprang from It as existing (and named);
that existence sprang from It as non-existent (and not named).


41. 1. Scholars of the highest class, when they hear about the Tao,
earnestly carry it into practice.  Scholars of the middle class, when
they have heard about it, seem now to keep it and now to lose it.
Scholars of the lowest class, when they have heard about it, laugh
greatly at it.  If it were not (thus) laughed at, it would not be fit
to be the Tao.

2. Therefore the sentence-makers have thus expressed themselves:--

  'The Tao, when brightest seen, seems light to lack;
   Who progress in it makes, seems drawing back;
   Its even way is like a rugged track.
   Its highest virtue from the vale doth rise;
   Its greatest beauty seems to offend the eyes;
   And he has most whose lot the least supplies.
   Its firmest virtue seems but poor and low;
   Its solid truth seems change to undergo;
   Its largest square doth yet no corner show
   A vessel great, it is the slowest made;
   Loud is its sound, but never word it said;
   A semblance great, the shadow of a shade.'

3. The Tao is hidden, and has no name; but it is the Tao which is
skilful at imparting (to all things what they need) and making them
complete.


42. 1. The Tao produced One; One produced Two; Two produced Three;
Three produced All things.  All things leave behind them the Obscurity
(out of which they have come), and go forward to embrace the
Brightness (into which they have emerged), while they are harmonised
by the Breath of Vacancy.

2. What men dislike is to be orphans, to have little virtue, to be as
carriages without naves; and yet these are the designations which
kings and princes use for themselves.  So it is that some things are
increased by being diminished, and others are diminished by being
increased.

3. What other men (thus) teach, I also teach.  The violent and strong
do not die their natural death.  I will make this the basis of my
teaching.


43. 1. The softest thing in the world dashes against and overcomes the
hardest; that which has no (substantial) existence enters where there
is no crevice.  I know hereby what advantage belongs to doing nothing
(with a purpose).

2. There are few in the world who attain to the teaching without
words, and the advantage arising from non-action.


44.

1.

   Or fame or life,
     Which do you hold more dear?
   Or life or wealth,
     To which would you adhere?
   Keep life and lose those other things;
   Keep them and lose your life:--which brings
     Sorrow and pain more near?

2.

   Thus we may see,
     Who cleaves to fame
     Rejects what is more great;
   Who loves large stores
     Gives up the richer state.

3.

   Who is content
   Needs fear no shame.
   Who knows to stop
   Incurs no blame.
   From danger free
   Long live shall he.


45.

1.

   Who thinks his great achievements poor
   Shall find his vigour long endure.
   Of greatest fulness, deemed a void,
   Exhaustion ne'er shall stem the tide.
   Do thou what's straight still crooked deem;
   Thy greatest art still stupid seem,
   And eloquence a stammering scream.

2. Constant action overcomes cold; being still overcomes heat.  Purity
and stillness give the correct law to all under heaven.


46. 1. When the Tao prevails in the world, they send back their swift
horses to (draw) the dung-carts.  When the Tao is disregarded in the
world, the war-horses breed in the border lands.

2. There is no guilt greater than to sanction ambition; no calamity
greater than to be discontented with one's lot; no fault greater than
the wish to be getting.  Therefore the sufficiency of contentment is
an enduring and unchanging sufficiency.


47. 1. Without going outside his door, one understands (all that takes
place) under the sky; without looking out from his window, one sees
the Tao of Heaven.  The farther that one goes out (from himself), the
less he knows.

2. Therefore the sages got their knowledge without travelling; gave
their (right) names to things without seeing them; and accomplished
their ends without any purpose of doing so.


48. 1. He who devotes himself to learning (seeks) from day to day to
increase (his knowledge); he who devotes himself to the Tao (seeks)
from day to day to diminish (his doing).

2. He diminishes it and again diminishes it, till he arrives at doing
nothing (on purpose).  Having arrived at this point of non-action,
there is nothing which he does not do.

3. He who gets as his own all under heaven does so by giving himself
no trouble (with that end).  If one take trouble (with that end), he
is not equal to getting as his own all under heaven.


49. 1. The sage has no invariable mind of his own; he makes the mind
of the people his mind.

2. To those who are good (to me), I am good; and to those who are not
good (to me), I am also good;--and thus (all) get to be good.  To
those who are sincere (with me), I am sincere; and to those who are
not sincere (with me), I am also sincere;--and thus (all) get to be
sincere.

3. The sage has in the world an appearance of indecision, and keeps
his mind in a state of indifference to all.  The people all keep their
eyes and ears directed to him, and he deals with them all as his
children.


50. 1. Men come forth and live; they enter (again) and die.

2. Of every ten three are ministers of life (to themselves); and three
are ministers of death.

3. There are also three in every ten whose aim is to live, but whose
movements tend to the land (or place) of death.  And for what reason?
Because of their excessive endeavours to perpetuate life.

4. But I have heard that he who is skilful in managing the life
entrusted to him for a time travels on the land without having to shun
rhinoceros or tiger, and enters a host without having to avoid buff
coat or sharp weapon.  The rhinoceros finds no place in him into which
to thrust its horn, nor the tiger a place in which to fix its claws,
nor the weapon a place to admit its point.  And for what reason?
Because there is in him no place of death.
