blind but he seeth this clearly; except perchance there be any that
cannot discern the children of the world from the children of light?  The
children of the world conceive and bring forth more prudently; and things
conceived and brought forth they nourish and conserve with much more
policy than do the children of light.  Which thing is as sorrowful to be
said, as it seemeth absurd to be heard.  When ye hear the children of the
world, you understand the world as a father.  For the world is father of
many children, not by the first creation and work, but by imitation of
love.  He is not only a father, but also the son of another father.  If
ye know once his father, by and by ye shall know his children.  For he
that hath the devil to his father, must needs have devilish children.  The
devil is not only taken for father, but also for prince of the world,
that is, of worldly folk.  It is either all one thing, or else not much
different, to say, children of the world, and children of the devil;
according to that that Christ said to the Jews, "Ye are of your father
the devil:" where as undoubtedly he spake to children of this world.  Now
seeing the devil is both author and ruler of the darkness, in the which
the children of this world walk, or, to say better, wander; they mortally
hate both the light, and also the children of light.  And hereof it
cometh, that the children of light never, or very seldom, lack
persecution in this world, unto which the children of the world, that is,
of the devil, bringeth them.  And there is no man but he seeth, that
these use much more policy in procuring the hurt and damage of the good,
than those in defending themselves.  Therefore, brethren, gather you the
disposition and study of the children by the disposition and study of the
fathers.  Ye know this is a proverb much used: "An evil crow, an evil
egg."  Then the children of this world that are known to have so evil a
father, the world, so evil a grandfather, the devil, cannot choose but be
evil.  Surely the first head of their ancestry was the deceitful serpent
the devil, a monster monstrous above all monsters.  I cannot wholly
express him, I wot not what to call him, but a certain thing altogether
made of the hatred of God, of mistrust in God, of lyings, deceits,
perjuries, discords, manslaughters; and, to say at one word, a thing
concrete, heaped up and made of all kind of mischief.  But what the devil
mean I to go about to describe particularly the devil's nature, when no
reason, no power of man's mind can comprehend it?  This alonely I can say
grossly, and as in a sum, of the which all we (our hurt is the more) have
experience, the devil to be a stinking sentine of all vices; a foul
filthy channel of all mischiefs; and that this world, his son, even a
child meet to have such a parent, is not much unlike his father.

Then, this devil being such one as can never be unlike himself; lo, of
Envy, his well-beloved Leman, he begat the World, and after left it with
Discord at nurse; which World, after that it came to man's state, had of
many concubines many sons.  He was so fecund a father, and had gotten so
many children of Lady Pride, Dame Gluttony, Mistress Avarice, Lady
Lechery, and of Dame Subtlety, that now hard and scant ye may find any
corner, any kind of life, where many of his children be not.  In court,
in cowls, in cloisters, in rochets, be they never so white; yea, where
shall ye not find them?  Howbeit, they that be secular and laymen, are
not by and by children of the world; nor they children of light, that are
called spiritual, and of the clergy.  No, no; as ye may find among the
laity many children of light, so among the clergy, (how much soever we
arrogate these holy titles unto us, and think them only attributed to us,
_Vos estis lux mundi, peculium Christi, &c_.  "Ye are the light of the
world, the chosen people of Christ, a kingly priesthood, an holy nation,
and such other,") ye shall find many children of the world; because in
all places the world getteth many children.  Among the lay people the
world ceaseth not to bring to pass, that as they be called wordly, so
they are wordly indeed; driven headlong by worldly desires: insomuch that
they may right well seem to have taken as well the manners as the name of
their father.  In the clergy, the world also hath learned a way to make
of men spiritual, worldlings; yea, and there also to form worldly
children, where with great pretence of holiness, and crafty colour of
religion, they utterly desire to hide and cloak the name of the world, as
though they were ashamed of their father; which do execrate and detest
the world (being nevertheless their father) in words and outward signs,
but in heart and work they coll and kiss him, and in all their lives
declare themselves to be his babes; insomuch that in all worldly points
they far pass and surmount those that they call seculars, laymen, men of
the world.  The child so diligently followeth the steps of his father, is
never destitute of the aid of his grandfather.  These be our holy holy
men, that say they are dead to the world, when no men be more lively in
worldly things than some of them be.  But let them be in profession and
name most farthest from the world, most alienate from it; yea, so far,
that they may seem to have no occupying, no kindred, no affinity, nothing
to do with it: yet in their life and deeds they shew themselves no
bastards, but right begotten children of the world; as that which the
world long sithens had by his dear wife Dame Hypocrisy, and since hath
brought them up and multiplied to more than a good many; increased them
too much, albeit they swear by all he-saints and she-saints too, that
they know not their father, nor mother, neither the world, nor hypocrisy;
as indeed they can semble and dissemble all things; which thing they
might learn wonderful well of their parents.  I speak not of all
religious men, but of those that the world hath fast knit at his girdle,
even in the midst of their religion, that is, of many and more than many.
For I fear, lest in all orders of men the better, I must say the greater
part of them be out of order, and children of the world.  Many of these
might seem ingrate and unkind children, that will no better acknowledge
and recognise their parents in words and outward pretence, but abrenounce
and cast them off, as though they hated them as dogs and serpents.
Howbeit they, in this wise, are most grateful to their parents, because
they be most like them, so lively representing them in countenance and
conditions, that their parents seem in them to be young again, forasmuch
as they ever say one thing and think another.  They shew themselves to be
as sober, as temperate, as Curius the Roman was, and live every day as
though all their life were a shroving time.  They be like their parents,
I say, inasmuch as they, in following them, seem and make men believe
they hate them.  Thus grandfather Devil, father World, and mother
Hypocrisy, have brought them up.  Thus good obedient sons have borne away
their parents' commandments; neither these be solitary, how religious,
how mocking, how monking, I would say, soever they be.

O ye will lay this to my charge, that _monachus_ and _solitarius_
signifieth all one.  I grant this to be so, yet these be so solitary that
they be not alone, but accompanied with great flocks of fraternities.  And
I marvel if there be not a great sort of bishops and prelates, that are
brethren germain unto these; and as a great sort, so even as right born,
and world's children by as good title as they.  But because I cannot
speak of all, when I say prelates, I understand bishops, abbots, priors,
archdeacons, deans, and other of such sort, that are now called to this
convocation, as I see, to entreat here of nothing but of such matters as
both appertain to the glory of Christ, and to the wealth of the people of
England.  Which thing I pray God they do as earnestly as they ought to
do.  But it is to be feared lest, as light hath many her children here,
so the world hath sent some of his whelps hither; amongst the which I
know there can be no concord nor unity, albeit they be in one place, in
one congregation.  I know there can be no agreement between these two, as
long as they have minds so unlike, and so contrary affections, judgments
so utterly diverse in all points.  But if the children of this world be
either more in number, or more prudent than the children of light, what
then availeth us to have this convocation?  Had it not been better we had
not been called together at all?  For as the children of this world be
evil, so they breed and bring forth things evil; and yet there be more of
them in all places, or at the least they be more politic than the
children of light in their generation.  And here I speak of the
generation whereby they do engender, and not of that whereby they are
engendered, because it should be too long to entreat how the children of
light are engendered, and how they come in at the door; and how the
children of the world be engendered, and come in another way.  Howbeit, I
think all you that be here were not engendered after one generation,
neither that ye all came by your promotions after one manner: God grant
that ye, engendered worldly, do not engender worldly: and as now I much
pass not how ye were engendered, or by what means ye were promoted to
those dignities that ye now occupy, so it be honest, good and profitable,
that ye in this your consultation shall do and engender.

The end of your convocation shall shew what ye have done; the fruit that
shall come of your consultation shall shew what generation ye be of.  For
what have ye done hitherto, I pray you, these seven years and more?  What
have ye engendered?  What have ye brought forth?  What fruit is come of
your long and great assembly?  What one thing that the people of England
hath been the better of a hair; or you yourselves, either more accepted
before God, or better discharged toward the people committed unto your
cure?  For that the people is better learned and taught now, than they
were in time past, to whether of these ought we to attribute it, to your
industry, or to the providence of God, and the foreseeing of the king's
grace!  Ought we to thank you, or the king's highness?  Whether stirred
other first, you the king, that he might preach, or he you by his
letters, that ye should preach oftener?  Is it unknown, think you, how
both ye and your curates were, in [a] manner, by violence enforced to let
books to be made, not by you, but by profane and lay persons; to let
them, I say, be sold abroad, and read for the instruction of the people?
I am bold with you, but I speak Latin and not English, to the clergy, not
to the laity; I speak to you being present, and not behind your backs.
God is my witness, I speak whatsoever is spoken of the good-will that I
bear you; God is my witness, which knoweth my heart, and compelleth me to
say that I say.

Now, I pray you in God's name, what did you, so great fathers, so many,
so long a season, so oft assembled together?  What went you about?  What
would ye have brought to pass?  Two things taken away--the one, that ye
(which I heard) burned a dead man; the other, that ye (which I felt) went
about to burn one being alive: him, because he did, I cannot tell how, in
his testament withstand your profit; in other points, as I have heard, a
very good man; reported to be of an honest life while he lived, full of
good works, good both to the clergy, and also to the laity: this other,
which truly never hurt any of you, ye would have raked in the coals,
because he would not subscribe to certain articles that took away the
supremacy of the king:--take away these two noble acts, and there is
nothing else left that ye went about, that I know, saving that I now
remember, that somewhat ye attempted against Erasmus, albeit as yet
nothing is come to light.  Ye have oft sat in consultation, but what have
ye done?  Ye have had many things in deliberation, but what one is put
forth, whereby either Christ is more glorified, or else Christ's people
made more holy I appeal to your own conscience.  How chanced this?  How
came it thus?  Because there were no children of light, no children of
God amongst you, which, setting the world at nought, would study to
illustrate the glory of God, and thereby shew themselves children of
light?  I think not so, certainly I think not so.  God forbid, that all
you, which were gathered together under the pretence of light, should be
children of the world!  Then why happened this?  Why, I pray you?
Perchance, either because the children of the world were more in number
in this your congregation, as it oft happeneth, or at the least of more
policy than the children of light in their generation: whereby it might
very soon be brought to pass, that these were much more stronger in
gendering the evil than these in producing the good.  The children of
light have policy, but it is like the policy of the serpent, and is
joined with doveish simplicity.  They engender nothing but simply,
faithfully, and plainly, even so doing all that they do.  And therefore
they may with more facility be cumbered in their engendering, and be the
more ready to take injuries.  But the children of this world have worldly
policy, foxly craft, lion-like cruelty, power to do hurt, more than
either _aspis_ or _basiliscus_, engendering and doing all things
fraudulently, deceitfully, guilefully: which as Nimrods and such sturdy
and stout hunters, being full of simulation and dissimulation before the
Lord, deceive the children of light, and cumber them easily.  Hunters go
not forth in every man's sight, but do their affairs closely, and with
use of guile and deceit wax every day more craftier than other.

The children of this world be like crafty hunters; they be misnamed
children of light, forasmuch as they so hate light, and so study to do
the works of darkness.  If they were the children of light, they would
not love darkness.  It is no marvel that they go about to keep other in
darkness, seeing they be in darkness, from top to toe overwhelmed with
darkness, darker than is the darkness of hell.  Wherefore it is well done
in all orders of men, but especial in the order of prelates, to put a
difference between children of light and children of the world, because
great deceit ariseth in taking the one for the other.  Great imposture
cometh, when they that the common people take for the light, go about to
take the sun and the light out of the world.  But these be easily known,
both by the diversity of minds, and also their armours.  For whereas the
children of light are thus minded, that they seek their adversaries'
health, wealth, and profit, with loss of their own commodities, and
ofttimes with jeopardy of their life; the children of the world,
contrariwise, have such stomachs, that they will sooner see them dead
that doth them good, than sustain any loss of temporal things.  The
armour of the children of light are, first, the word of God, which they
ever set forth, and with all diligence put it abroad, that, as much as in
them lieth, it may bring forth fruit: after this, patience and prayer,
with the which in all adversities the Lord comforteth them.  Other things
they commit to God, unto whom they leave all revengement.  The armour of
the children of the world are, sometime frauds and deceits, sometime lies
and money: by the first they make their dreams, their traditions; by the
second they stablish and confirm their dreams, be they never so absurd,
never so against scripture, honesty, or reason.  And if any man resist
them, even with these weapons they procure to slay him.  Thus they bought
Christ's death, the very light itself, and obscured him after his death:
thus they buy every day the children of light, and obscure them, and
shall so do, until the world be at an end.  So that it may be ever true,
that Christ said: "The children of the world be wiser, &c."

These worldlings pull down the lively faith, and full confidence that men
have in Christ, and set up another faith, another confidence, of their
own making: the children of light contrary.  These worldlings set little
by such works as God hath prepared for our salvation, but they extol
traditions and works of their own invention: the children of light
contrary.  The worldlings, if they spy profit, gains, or lucre in any
thing, be it never such a trifle, be it never so pernicious, they preach
it to the people (if they preach at any time), and these things they
defend with tooth and nail.  They can scarce disallow the abuses of
these, albeit they be intolerable, lest in disallowing the abuse they
lose part of their profit.  The children of the light contrary, put all
things in their degree, best highest, next next, the worst lowest.  They
extol things necessary, Christian, and commanded of God.  They pull down
will-works feigned by men, and put them in their place.  The abuses of
all things they earnestly rebuke.  But yet these things be so done on
both parties, and so they both do gender, that the children of the world
shew themselves wiser than the children of light, and that frauds and
deceits, lies and money, seem evermore to have the upper hand.  I hold my
peace; I will not say how fat feasts, and jolly banquets, be jolly
instruments to set forth worldly matters withal.  Neither the children of
the world be only wiser than the children of light, but are also some of
them among themselves much wiser than the other in their generation.  For
albeit, as touching the end, the generation of them all is one; yet in
this same generation some of them have more craftily engendered than the
other of their fellows.

For what a thing was that, that once every hundred year was brought forth
in Rome of the children of this world, and with how much policy it was
made, ye heard at Paul's Cross in the beginning of the last parliament:
how some brought forth canonizations, some expectations, some pluralities
and unions, some tot-quots and dispensations, some pardons, and these of
wonderful variety, some stationaries, some jubilaries, some pocularies
for drinkers, some manuaries for handlers of relicks, some pedaries for
pilgrims, some oscularies for kissers; some of them engendered one, some
other such fetures, and every one in that he was delivered of, was
excellent politic, wise; yea, so wise, that with their wisdom they had
almost made all the world fools.

But yet they that begot and brought forth that our old ancient purgatory
pick-purse; that that was swaged and cooled with a Franciscan's cowl, put
upon a dead man's back, to the fourth part of his sins; that that was
utterly to be spoiled, and of none other but of our most prudent lord
Pope, and of him as oft as him listed; that satisfactory, that missal,
that scalary: they, I say, that were the wise fathers and genitors of
this purgatory, were in my mind the wisest of all their generation, and
so far pass the children of light, and also the rest of their company,
that they both are but fools, if ye compare them with these.  It was a
pleasant fiction, and from the beginning so profitable to the feigners of
it, that almost, I dare boldly say, there hath been no emperor that hath
gotten more by taxes and tallages of them that were alive, than these,
the very and right-begotten sons of the world, got by dead men's tributes
and gifts.  If there be some in England, that would this sweeting of the
world to be with no less policy kept still than it was born and brought
forth in Rome, who then can accuse Christ of lying?  No, no; as it hath
been ever true, so it shall be, that the children of the world be much
wiser, not only in making their things, but also in conserving them.  I
wot not what it is, but somewhat it is I wot, that some men be so loth to
see the abuse of this monster, purgatory, which abuse is more than
abominable: as who should say, there is none abuse in it, or else as
though there can be none in it.  They may seem heartily to love the old
thing, that thus earnestly endeavour them to restore him his old name.
They would not set an hair by the name, but for the thing.  They be not
so ignorant (no, they be crafty), but that they know if the name come
again, the thing will come after.  Thereby it ariseth, that some men make
their cracks, that they, maugre all men's heads, have found purgatory.  I
cannot tell what is found.  This, to pray for dead folks, this is not
found, for it was never lost.  How can that be found that was not lost?  O
subtle finders, that can find things, if God will, ere they be lost!  For
that cowlish deliverance, their scalary losings, their papal spoliations,
and other such their figments, they cannot find.  No, these be so lost,
as they themselves grant, that though they seek them never so diligently,
yet they shall not find them, except perchance they hope to see them come
in again with their names; and that then money-gathering may return
again, and deceit walk about the country, and so stablish their kingdom
in all kingdoms.  But to what end this chiding between the children of
the world and the children of light will come, only he knoweth that once
shall judge them both.

Now, to make haste and to come somewhat nigher the end.  Go ye to, good
brethren and fathers, for the love of God, go ye to; and seeing we are
here assembled, let us do something whereby we may be known to be the
children of light.  Let us do somewhat, lest we, which hitherto have been
judged children of the world, seem even still to be so.  All men call us
prelates: then, seeing we be in council, let us so order ourselves, that
we be prelates in honour and dignity; so we may be prelates in holiness,
benevolence, diligence, and sincerity.  All men know that we be here
gathered, and with most fervent desire they anheale, breathe, and gape
for the fruit of our convocation: as our acts shall be, so they shall
name us: so that now it lieth in us, whether we will be called children
of the world, or children of light.

Wherefore lift up your heads, brethren, and look about with your eyes,
spy what things are to be reformed in the church of England.  Is it so
hard, is it so great a matter for you to see many abuses in the clergy,
many in the laity?  What is done in the Arches?  Nothing to be amended?
What do they there?  Do they evermore rid the people's business and
matters, or cumber and ruffle them?  Do they evermore correct vice, or
else defend it, sometime being well corrected in other places?  How many
sentences be given there in time, as they ought to be?  If men say truth,
how many without bribes?  Or if all things be well done there, what do
men in bishops' Consistories?  Shall you often see the punishments
assigned by the laws executed, or else money-redemptions used in their
stead?  How think you by the ceremonies that are in England, oft times,
with no little offence of weak consciences, contemned; more oftener with
superstition so defiled, and so depraved, that you may doubt whether it
were better some of them to tarry still, or utterly to take them away?
Have not our forefathers complained of the ceremonies, of the
superstition, and estimation of them?

Do ye see nothing in our holidays? of the which very few were made at the
first, and they to set forth goodness, virtue, and honesty: but sithens,
in some places, there is neither mean nor measure in making new holidays,
as who should say, this one thing is serving of God, to make this law,
that no man may work.  But what doth the people on these holidays?  Do
they give themselves to godliness, or else ungodliness?  See ye nothing,
brethren?  If you see not, yet God seeth.  God seeth all the whole
holidays to be spent miserably in drunkenness, in glossing, in strife, in
