i.e., that space has boundaries; that duration has limits; that
absolute Truth is less than the sum of existence. In the definition
herein set forth you have all that is; and if in any definition of
Truth there is failure to include the sum of existences by so much
would the definition be defective and fail of its aim to define Truth.
As to relative Truth--every individual man's Truth--that is each
individual man's knowledge of so much of the sum of existences as he
can make his own, as already pointed out.

One other reflection on this definition. Note the words in it:
"Knowledge of things * * * as they are to come." This presents a view
of Truth seldom if ever met with. It gives the idea of movement. Truth
is not a stagnant pool, but a living fountain; not a Dead Sea without
tides or currents; on the contrary it is an ocean, immeasurably great,
vast, co-extensive with the Universe--it is the Universe--
bright-heaving, boundless, endless and sublime! Moving in majestic
currents, uplifted by tides in ceaseless ebb and flow; variant but
orderly; taking on new forms from ever-changing combinations; new
adjustments; new relations--multiplying itself in ten thousand times
ten thousand ways; ever reflecting the intelligence of the Infinite;
and declaring alike in its whispers and in its thunders, the hived
wisdom of the ages--of God!


AS TO THINGS--EXISTENCES: We are next to consider the universe in
which men, angels, archangels and Gods--Intelligences all--live.

"There are many kingdoms * * * and there is no space in the which
there is no kingdom; and there is no kingdom in the which there is no
space."

This was said by Joseph Smith in 1832. The context of the passage
makes it clear that "kingdoms" here are not groups of men or nations
over which a monarch reigns; but substance, matter, worlds and systems
of worlds, under the dominion of law, and Intelligences. It is the
doctrine of the eternal and everywhere existence of matter and space.
It is a description of the universe as far as it is describable. But
let us think of the passage a moment; for it requires thought to
rightly apprehend it.

This "space"--what is meant by it? I ask you what is between the two
walls of this hall, and you would rightly answer space, extension. But
what is on the outside of each wall--space; neither wall is the end of
space, then. Let us look higher. What is between us and the sun?
Space--extension. How much of it? Our astronomers say 92,000,000
miles. What is on the other side of the sun in a direct line from us?
Space. How much, 92,000,000 miles? Yes, and if 92,000,000 miles were
multiplied by 92,000,000 the product would not indicate all the space
in a direct line from us on the opposite side of the sun. Beyond the
point so obtained space would still extend. But one wearies of these
units of measure; take a ray of light. In the single batting of a
bird's wing light will pass eight times round the earth, that is it
will pass over a distance of 198,000 miles! There are fixed
stars--suns--so distant from us, the astronomers say, that it requires
hundreds of thousands and even millions of years for a ray of light to
reach us from those distant suns! Take one of those distant suns and
think upon it in respect of space, just as we did a moment ago in
regard to what is between our earth and the sun and beyond the sun, in
a direct line from us, and you get the same results. There is no means
by which the limitless may be measured. Whatever the length of your
measuring wand it is still inadequate. By no measurement, by no
conception, may one reach the "outside curtains" beyond which space
does not extend. And so as to time, duration. What was before today?
Yesterday. And what will be after today? Tomorrow. Take a century, or,
better yet, a millennium, a period of 1,000 years--why not take
1,000,000 years as a period with which to measure duration? It will
answer just as well as our "day" of a moment ago. What preceded our
present period of 1,000,000 years? A previous 1,000,000 of such years.
And what will follow the present period of 1,000,000 years? Another
such period. So you may continue, make your period of measurement what
length of years or centuries or millenniums you please, the result
will always be the same. It is again the attempt to measure the
limitless, to encompass that which is infinite. The sum of all our
thought on this head is well stated by Ernest Haeckel in one of his
latest works, the very last but one, I believe, the publication of
which falls within the present decade:

a. "The extent of the universe is infinite and unbounded; it is empty
in no part, but everywhere filled with substance."

b. "The duration of the world is equally infinite and unbounded; it
has no beginning and no end; it is eternity."

Such may be said to be the settled and universal conviction of science
now; but it was far from such conviction in 1832 when Joseph Smith
said the same in the passage--"There are many kingdoms; * * * and
there is no space in the which there is no kingdom; and there is no
kingdom in the which there is no space."


THE REIGN OF LAW: "There are many kingdoms * * * and to every kingdom
is given a law; and to every law there are certain bounds also, and
conditions. All beings who abide not in those conditions (i. e., abide
within the law) are not justified."

This was said in 1832. The passage proclaims the reign of law
throughout this infinite universe--through all space, through all
time; in all kingdoms; but implies the possibility of departure from
law. But "to every law there are certain bounds also and conditions!"
A bold conception this; especially three-quarters of a century ago;
yet it is approved by man's experience. The power of ocean currents
and the winds to carry with them objects in the direction of their
movement is overcome by another force or law--the power of steam; the
force of gravitation, by the levitating power of gas; the natural
tendency of water to seek its level, by the levitating power of heat
and the absorbing power of the atmosphere, are hurriedly chosen
examples. But this same idea of law itself having metes and bounds, or
"law itself being subject to law," Henry Drummond, one of the
recognized great thinkers of the nineteenth century, more than half a
century after our Prophet, declared to be "One of the most striking
generalizations of recent science." And John Fiske said, "In order to
be always sure that we are generalizing correctly, we must make the
generalizing process itself a subject of generalization." Which is but
a recognition of Drummond's idea that "laws have their law;" and
Joseph Smith's "To every law there are certain bounds also and
conditions." Already I have noted in the passage the implied
possibility of the infraction of law; and the idea of law itself
implies the possibility of disorder, which must result from an
infraction, that is, a departure from, or violation of, law. But our
Prophet said: "That which is governed by law is also preserved by law,
and perfected and sanctified by the same. That which breaketh a law,
and abideth not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and
willeth to abide in sin, and altogether abideth in sin, cannot be
sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice, nor judgment." From all
which one is to conclude that evil is subject to law as well as good,
that is, it cannot remain evil and yet produce the effects of good.
Our Prophet teaches, then, that through all eternity the infinite
universe has been, and is, and will be, subject to law; but that "to
every law there are certain bounds also and conditions."


CHANGE AND ITS TENDENCY: As to movement and change in this infinite
universe, our Prophet represents God as saying:

"Worlds without number have I created. * * * Behold, there are many
worlds that have passed away by the word of my power, and there are
many that now stand, and innumerable are they to man. * * * The
heavens, they are many, and they cannot be numbered unto man; * * *
and as one earth shall pass away, and the heavens thereof, even so
shall another come, and there is no end to my works, neither to my
words."

This passage implies constant movement in this infinite universe. The
statement, "As one earth shall pass away and the heavens thereof, even
so shall another come," corresponds somewhat to the modern scientist's
notion of "evolution and devolution." Also with his statement that
"Substance is everywhere and always in uninterrupted movement and
transformation; nowhere is there perfect repose and rigidity; yet the
infinite quantity of matter and of eternally changing force remains
constant." And now I must ask you to accept a somewhat hurriedly
stated conclusion as to the effect of these changes going on in the
universe, gathered, indeed, from the teaching of our Prophet, but
without specific quotation, namely, that the tendency of this movement
in the universe, the organization and then the disintegration of
worlds and world-systems is in the direction of the development of,
and for the increase of the power and glory of truly immortal
Intelligences. This conclusion is required by the philosophy of Joseph
Smith.


THE EXISTENCE OF GOOD AND EVIL: Respecting Good and Evil, our Prophet
taught: "There must needs be an opposition in all things. If it were
not so, righteousness could not be brought to pass; nor wickedness,
nor holiness, nor misery; neither good nor bad, therefore, all things
must needs be [in the absence of these opposite existences] a compound
in one."

It will require but little reflection to establish the truth of this
doctrine. Good implies its opposite, evil. Law, which carries with it
the idea of order, implies disorder, and takes measures against it. We
become conscious of the truth of the doctrine here announced at every
turn. In the astronomic order it is seen in the centripetal and
centrifugal forces--the holding together and the flying apart forces.
In chemistry it is manifest in the composing and decomposing forces;
in positive and negative electricity. It is seen in light and
darkness; heat, cold; movement, repose; joy, sorrow; pleasure, pain;
and so following. Our Prophet's teaching on this line runs to the
extent that existence itself is made to depend upon it, this antinomy
of things. Listen:

    "And if ye shall say there is no law, ye shall also say there is
    no sin. If ye shall say there is no sin, ye shall also say there
    is no righteousness. And if there is no righteousness there is no
    happiness. And if there is no righteousness nor happiness, there
    is no punishment nor misery. And if these things are not, there is
    no God. And if there is no God, we are not, neither the earth; for
    there could have been no creation of things; neither to act, nor
    to be acted upon."

Have you ever thought what a dreadful world this would be without this
duality--the opposite existences here contended for? Imagine all
things in the world to be white! No contrasts in coloring! Universal
insanity must result. The "dread of sinking into naught" is matched by
the dread of having things resolved into a "compound of one." The
absence of this necessary "opposition in all things" is well put, by a
very recent philosophical writer, in these terms:

    "Evil exists in the balance of natural forces. * * * It is also
    the background of good, the incentive to good, and the trial of
    good, without which good could not be. As the virtue of courage
    could not exist without the evil of danger, and as the virtue of
    sympathy could not exist without the evil of suffering, so no
    other virtue could exist without its corresponding evil. In a
    world without evil--if such a world be really conceivable, all men
    would have perfect health, perfect intelligence, and perfect
    morals. No one could gain or impart information, each one's cup of
    knowledge being full. The temperature would stand forever at 70
    degrees, both heat and cold [in excess] being evil. There could be
    no progress, since progress is the overcoming of evil. A world
    without evil would be as toil without exertion, as light without
    darkness, as a battle with no antagonist. It would be a world
