742.]

    We continued our journey, both by night and by day; and after
    suffering much fatigue and hunger, I arrived in Quincy, Illinois
    (Monday, April 22nd) amidst the congratulations of my friends and
    the embraces of my family, whom I found as well as could be
    expected, considering what they had been called on to endure.[A]

[Footnote A: Hist. Joseph Smith, _Mill. Star_ Vol. XVII, p.148.]

Hence if the "prophecy and blessing" on the head of "young Joseph"
took place after Mr. Wight and the prophet Joseph got out of prison,
it must have taken place in Illinois and not in Liberty jail,
Missouri, as related in the second statement with such detail of
circumstance. This contradiction in the testimony of Mr. Wight, taken
in connection with the fact that at the time of making it, viz, in
1855, he had lost his honor, was an apostate, neither being true to
the church of Christ led by his fellow apostles nor true to the son of
the prophet whom he claimed to know had been set apart to succeed to
the Presidency of the church--these considerations, I say, render the
testimony of Lyman Wight worthless.

Furthermore, Caleb Baldwin and Alexander McRae were fellow-prisoners
of Joseph and Hyrum Smith as well as Lyman Wight. They all occupied
the same prison-cell--how is it, if the ordination of "young Joseph"
to succeed his father took place in Liberty Jail, that these men knew
nothing of it; for that they knew nothing of it is evident from their
silence. Surely such a thing could not occur in Liberty jail without
their knowing it. And had it occurred it is a matter that would have
been well remembered and frequently spoken of as one of the notable
incidents of their Liberty-prison life. But not one word have either
Caleb Baldwin or Alexander McRae left on record that such a notable
thing ever took place; neither has Lyman Wight in any way that carries
even so much as a poor shadow of conviction with it.

_(2) Mr. Smith further claims that he was called to be President of
the church through his father by revelation in 1841_.

The revelation referred to was given the 19th of January, 1841. The
passage in it supposed to sustain the claim of appointment of "young
Joseph" to be the President of the church is the following:

    And now I say unto you, as pertaining to my boarding house which I
    have commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, let it
    be built unto my name, and let my name be named upon it, and let
    my servant Joseph, and his house have place therein, from
    generation to generation; for this anointing have I put upon his
    head, that his blessing shall also be put upon the head of his
    posterity after him, and as I said unto Abraham concerning the
    kindreds of the earth, even so I say unto my servant Joseph, in
    thee and in thy seed shall the kindred of the earth be blessed.
    Therefore let my servant Joseph and his seed after him have place
    in that house, from generation to generation, for ever and for
    ever, saith the Lord.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov., sec. xxiv, 56-59.]

This is not difficult to comprehend as it stands thus in the Doctrine
and Covenants unmarred. It is simply this: a commandment was given to
build the Nauvoo House, a tavern, for the boarding and lodging of
strangers. Joseph Smith and his family were also to have a home
therein; for he was commanded to put stock in the house, and as a
matter of fact did put considerable stock into it; and his family
after him, from generation to generation, was to have that inheritance
in the house. It was to be theirs because the prophet Joseph had
purchased the stock which secured to him, and his posterity after him,
the right of a home within it. The passage does not in any manner
refer to succession in the Presidency of the church. What it does
refer to is clearly seen in the commencement of the paragraph--"And
now I say unto you, _as pertaining to my boarding house, which I have
commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, etc._" That is
the subject of the passage, not the priesthood, nor the succession of
the prophet Joseph's son to his father's position as President of the
church. How absurd the argument that because a man's posterity are to
inherit his stock in a hotel, or succeed to the right of living in it
as a return for having paid a large sum towards the construction of
it, that therefore we must conclude that it means, too, that a man's
posterity or at least the "head" of it--the eldest son--must also
inherit the father's priesthood and calling as President of the
church! Yet this is the construction Josephites put upon this passage.
To do it, however, they are under the necessity of reading into the
revelation something which the Lord never put there. In evidence of
which, and also as an illustration of Josephite methods, I reproduce
the passage as they print it in their controversial writings, with
this exception that I write the lines which they insert in brackets in
_italics_ also, that they may the more readily be observed:

    And now I say unto you as pertaining to my boarding house which I
    have commanded you to build for the boarding of strangers, let it
    be built unto my name, and let my name be named upon it, and let
    my servant Joseph Smith and his house have place therein from
    generation to generation; for this anointing [_appointment and
    consecration to be prophet and president of the church_] have I
    put upon his head, that his blessings [_to these offices and
    callings_] shall also be put upon the head of his posterity after
    him, and as I said unto Abraham, concerning the kindreds of the
    earth, even so I say unto my servant Joseph, in thee and in thy
    seed shall the kindred of the earth be blessed. Therefore [_for
    that reason_] let my servant Joseph and his seed after him, have
    place in that house from generation to generation, forever and
    forever saith the Lord.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 338.]

Of this it is only necessary to say that a cause which requires such a
wresting of the word of God to wring a promise out of it that the
eldest son of the prophet would succeed to the office of the President
of the church after the death of his father--a cause which requires
such a reading as is here thrust into the revelation in brackets, is
desperate indeed!

_(3) Mr. Smith claims that he was called through his father to be
President of the church by a formal anointing in a council at Nauvoo,
in 1844_.

In support of this claim Josephites quote only the testimony of Mr.
James Whitehead, who resides at Lamoni, Iowa, and who is said to have
been one of the secretaries of Joseph the prophet. It is said of him
rather than by him, that for the past twenty and more years he has

    Testified publicly that he personally knew that Joseph the seer,
    in the presence of a number of the ministry, in Nauvoo, anointed
    and set apart his son Joseph to be his successor in the prophetic
    office and Presidency of the church, and that soon after the seer
    announced publicly from the stand, on a Sunday, that his son
    Joseph would be his successor.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

In _The Successor_, already several times quoted, it is said that Mr.
Whitehead testifies that Bishop Newel K. Whitney was present and held
the horn of oil on the occasion of this anointing. He asserts that
George J. Adams was also present; and Emma, wife of the prophet, is
represented as having said:--

    She well remembers the time, and, though not present, she heard
    her husband say that young Joseph was set apart to be his
    successor. She also says that after young Joseph was anointed and
    set apart, George J. Adams came down to her room greatly elated
    with what had transpired, saying that they now knew who would be
    the successor of Joseph; that it was young Joseph, for his father
    had just set him apart to that office and calling.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Successor_, p. 8.]

I would have more respect for this evidence if, instead of being the
alleged statements of these several parties, it had been the very
statements themselves--the statements of Mr. Whitehead and of Emma
Smith, instead of a report of what they said by some Josephite writer.
So far as Mr. George J. Adams is concerned he must very soon have
forgotten his elation at finding out who the true successor of the
prophet was; for he afterwards became a follower of Mr. Strang, and
the very man who crowned him "king" at Beaver Island.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXV, p. 718.]

Of this alleged anointing in 1844, when Mr. Smith was a lad twelve
years of age, he himself can only say:

    Before the death of my father and uncle Hyrum, I was blessed by
    the first, in the presence of quite a number of then prominent
    Elders in the Church, this blessing being confirmed just prior to
    the tragedy at Carthage.

This is the only personal statement of his that I have ever seen in
all the writings of the Josephites in regard to his ordination and
blessing by his father, and it appears that he has no recollection of
the nature of this "blessing;" if he was anointed and blessed to be
the future prophet and President of the church, he evidently has no
recollection of it, though he was of an age when such a circumstance
would make a deep impression on the mind and would never have left him
in the doubt he confesses to, respecting his connection with the work
of his father to which for many years, in his youth, he exhibited
almost complete indifference.[A]

[Footnote A: See his autobiography published in Josephite edition of
the Life of Joseph the Prophet, from p. 743-801.]

Of the alleged statement of Emma Smith, that she well remembers,
though not present, the circumstance of the anointing in 1844--the
elation of George J. Adams on learning who the successor of Joseph the
prophet was to be, he coming immediately to her room after the
ceremony of anointing to tell her the glad news; and also about well
remembering her husband say that "young Joseph" was anointed and set
apart to be his successor--of all this, I say, it is somewhat strange
that Mrs. Emma Smith did not "well remember" it during the years of
doubt through which "her son" passed, respecting his connection with
the work of his father. How is it that she did not then come to his
assistance by reminding him--since he had forgotten it, if he ever
knew it--that he had been anointed and set apart to be the successor
of his father,--both her husband and George J. Adams having told her
so! Especially is her silence astonishing on the occasion of the visit
of Messrs. Briggs and Gurley in 1856 to "young Joseph," when those
gentlemen almost, as we have seen, commanded him to become the
President of their organization. One of the interviews between these
gentlemen and Mr. Smith was conducted in the home of Mrs. Emma Smith,
they being introduced at that time both to her and her husband, Mr.
Bidamon. It was on that very occasion, too, that Mr. Smith gave these
gentlemen the answer that he would not go with them to be their
leader, and he plodded on four years longer, in doubt as to what his
future connection would be with the church. Instinctively one exclaims
why did not his mother at that crisis come to the rescue, and say:
Why, my son, you are yet to become the prophet and President of the
church, founded under God, by your father. I well remember, though not
present, the occasion on which you were anointed and set apart to that
position by your father. Both your father and George J. Adams told me
of it--the day you were blessed, don't you remember it? Instead of
this we see her absolutely silent!

It is claimed, however, that at the Amboy conference in 1860, she
endorsed her son as President of the church.

    She publicly bore a faithful testimony to the work begun through
    her martyred husband, and said the present occasion was one she
    had looked for for the last sixteen years. Said she knew such a
    time must come, but had not known until a short time before that
    it was so near at hand.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Successor_, p. 14.]

And this is the best she could do! Much stress is laid upon Mrs. Emma
Smith being spoken of in one of the revelations in the Doctrine and
Covenants as an "elect lady,"[A] and since the "elect"[B] cannot be
deceived, her endorsement of her son, and her rejection of all others,
is taken as

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. sec. xxv.]

[Footnote B: Matt. xxiv, 24.]

    Conclusive testimony that young Joseph is his father's
    successor![A]

[Footnote A: _The Successor_, p. 15.]

But would not the "testimony" have been more "conclusive," if on that
occasion she had given a personal statement that her son had been
anointed and set apart in 1844, by his father; and though not present,
she knew it upon the statement of both her husband and George J.
Adams? Was not the occasion worthy of such a statement? Would it not
have been opportune? Would it not have been at least more conclusive
than the argument based on Mrs. Emma Smith being an "elect lady," and
her endorsement of "young Joseph?"

I now proceed to examine the testimony given in a general way, that
is, without reference to special occasions on which Mr. Smith was
called or anointed to be his father's successor, as prophet and
President of the church; but which represents the general idea that he
was to succeed to these positions.

    Charles Derry, whose word will not be questioned by those who know
    him, says that William Clayton, of Salt Lake City, told him at the
    time they were laboring together in England, that he knew it was
    for "little Joseph" to lead the church.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saint's Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

Yet William Clayton, a man of unyielding determination and probity of
character, continued a member of the church of Christ, led to Utah by
President Brigham Young and his fellow apostles, giving to it and its
leaders his unqualified support! To accept the statement of Charles
Derry is to make the best part of William Clayton's life a lie--those
who knew him, at least, will refuse to do that. I put the character of
William Clayton and the fact of his allegiance to the church of Christ
under the Presidency of Brigham Young, against the statement of
Charles Derry.

    W. W. Phelps wrote to Alpheus Cutler in 1847, that church affairs
    were in a bad condition, and that he did not look for a change for
    the better until the Lord should send "young Joseph" to lead the
    church.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

This is a case similar to the one which precedes it--Mr. Phelps gave
his allegiance to the church of Christ in Utah up to the time of his
death, and the fact of his allegiance is put against the statement he
is said to have made in a letter to Alpheus Cutler--mark you, we have
not the letter, nor even a quotation from it. It is the life and
character of W. W. Phelps against the alleged statement of Mr. Cutler.

    P. P. Pratt said to D. S. Mills, now of Santa Ana, California, and
    to others when they were going from Utah to California, that the
    church would never be fully and properly organized till young
    Joseph was called to lead it.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

This testimony is on a par with the two quotations which precede it.
The statement attributed to Elder Pratt is contradicted by the facts
of his life and allegiance to the church of Christ led to Utah by
President Brigham Young.

    Sister Lucy Smith, the mother of Joseph the seer, used to tell the
    saints who called on her that young Joseph would yet lead the
    church, for he had been appointed by his father.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

To controvert this testimony it is only necessary to refer to the
"visions?" of Lucy Smith published in this work, where she attempts to
sustain the claims of her son William to be the President of the
church; and wherein she says:

    The Presidency of the Church belongs to William, _he being the
    last of the heads of the Church, according to the lineage_, he
    having inherited it from the family from before the foundation of
    the world.[A]

[Footnote A: See pp. 19-21.]

Bishop Geo. Miller in a letter to the _Northern Islander_, in 1855, is
represented as saying:

    From hints and inuendoes that I heard frequently, I was induced to
    believe that Joseph had designated his son to succeed him in the
    prophetic office, and on this belief I rested. . . . . I had
    frequent attempts at conversation with Brigham Young and H. C.
    Kimball, in regard to Joseph's leaving one to succeed him in the
    prophetic office, and in all my attempts to ascertain the desired
    truth as to that personage, I was invariably met with the inuendo,
    "stop" or "hush Brother Miller, let there be nothing said in
    regard to that matter, or we will have little Joseph killed as his
    father was;" inferring indirectly that Joseph Smith had appointed
    his son Joseph to succeed him in the prophetic office.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

If Bishop Miller had any testimony of any weight that Mr. Smith, the
son of the prophet, had been appointed to succeed to the position of
prophet and President of the church, will those who rely on his
statements explain how it is that with such testimony in his
possession he ran off after other leaders? First following Mr. Lyman
Wight to Texas, and after quarrelling with him joining Mr. Strang in
Michigan. Bishop Miller, like Lyman Wight, lost his honor, he was
neither true to the church of Christ led by the Twelve after the
martyrdom of the prophet Joseph, nor true to Mr. Wight, nor "young
Joseph." He became a restless man after his apostasy, unstable as
water. There is nothing either in the nature of his testimony or the
character of the man after his apostasy which gives any influence to
his statement.

    This is to certify to all concerned, that we, the undersigned,
    heard Brigham Young, in Salt Lake City, in 1854, and in Brigham
    City, Utah, about 1859, when he was speaking in public meeting
    concerning young Joseph Smith, son of Joseph the seer, say that
    there was no man in the church more willing and ready than he to
    give the Presidency of the church to young Joseph, when the latter
    would come and claim it.
                                       LOUIS GAULTER,
                                       HARRIET E. GAULTER.[A]

    LAMONI, Iowa, May 26, 1892.

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

In line with this is the following:

    Brigham Young, at the April conference in 1854, said that young
    Joseph was the man to lead the church, and that were it not for
    his mother's influence, he would have been in Utah long before;
    but he would come, and he would to God he was then in Utah to take
    the burden off his shoulders; he would receive him with open
    arms.[A]

[Footnote A: Ibid, p. 339.]

I have carefully examined the minutes of the April conference of 1854,
and also all the discourses published that President Brigham Young
delivered at that conference; and neither in the minutes or in the
discourses can I find anything which justifies the above statement in
regard to what President Young said at that conference. I take it
therefore that the assertion is based upon the statement of Louis and
Harriet Gaulter which precede it. If there is anything in the
discourses of President Brigham Young, or the minutes of any of the
conferences of the church which would bear out the case of the
"Reorganized church," the writers thereof would be at great pains to
publish it. The fact that they do not publish the words of President
Young, but the words of others who claim to have heard him say that
"young Joseph" was the man to lead the church, is pretty fair evidence
that they can find nothing directly upon the point at issue in
President Young's own words.

    The late Arthur Millikin, who resided at Colchester, Illinois,
    brother-in-law to the martyr, said in a letter to young Joseph in
    1868, Brigham Young said in a council, at our house in Nauvoo,
    shortly after your father's death, that neither Rigdon, himself,
    nor any other man but "young Joseph" could lead this people, when
    he comes of age, and no person can take it from him, and that to
    talk about it in public would endanger the boy's life.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

Amos B. Moore, of Lamoni, Iowa, is represented as saying:

    I heard Brigham Young say from the public stand, in Nauvoo, soon
    after the death of Joseph the Seer, that he and the Saints knew
    "Little Joseph" would stand in his father's place and lead the
    Church, but it would not do to teach it then, for their enemies
    would kill him as they did his father.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saint's Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 339.]

Is it worth while to stop to point out the inconsistencies of this
testimony? What Bishop Miller represents as having been conveyed to
him in private conversation (himself at the time a trusted leader,)
only in the most vague manner--by "hints and inuendoes;" and to Mr.
Millikin in the privacy of a confidential council of the priesthood,
with the caution that nothing must be said about it least the boy's
life be put in jeopardy thereby--what was conveyed to these parties in
secret, Mr. Moore represents Brigham Young as teaching from the public
stand! Yet so far recognizing the danger of having it taught as to say
it must not be mentioned least their enemies kill the boy as they had
his father--yet Brigham Young teaching it the while in the most public
manner! I will not here write an apostrophe to consistency. I will
merely put Brigham Young's reputation for common sense and discretion
against the testimony of Mr. Moore.

This is the Josephite case on the matter of Mr. Smith being appointed
by his father to the position of prophet and President of the church.
I have given all the testimony they have been able to rake together,
and have quoted it as they give it in their own works, not a word
changed, not a witness of theirs overlooked, so far as they have
published their statements. And now that this testimony is before the
reader, I ask him: What is its value? Look it over, there is not a
direct statement at first hand in it, except, perhaps, in the case of
Mr. Wight, and in his testimony, as presented by the Josephites
themselves, there is such conflict as to time and place as to render
it worthless. Not even Mr. Smith, the claimant himself, makes a direct
averment that he was ordained by his father to succeed him as prophet
and President of the church. The best he can do is to say that he was
blessed by his father in the year 1844, in the presence of quite a
number of then prominent elders in the church; but as to the nature of
that blessing he is silent. The testimony the Reorganized church
depends on is hear-say testimony only, and that of a very questionable
character--of the nature of old wives' fables, and the assertions of
apostates!

Following the several testimonies relied upon by Josephites to sustain
their claims that "young Joseph" was appointed by his father to
succeed to the Presidency, I have made such remarks as point out the
worthlessness of each statement, I now wish to call attention to
considerations which destroy the whole theory:

First, the silence of Sidney Rigdon in respect to "young Joseph," when
he was putting forth his claims to be the "Guardian of the church," to
build it up to Joseph the martyr. Had the idea prevailed at Nauvoo, as
Josephites claim, that the son of the martyred prophet was to succeed
his father as President of the church, what an opportunity for Sidney
Rigdon, when putting forth his claims to be the "Guardian of the
church!" How greatly would it have strengthened his position, if he
could in truth have said: I claim the right to be the Guardian of the
church until "young Joseph," whom our late prophet anointed and
ordained to succeed him, shall have arrived at a suitable age to take
his place. There would have been some significance to the phrase,
"Guardian of the church," if Sidney Rigdon could have assumed this
position. But he did not assume it, and the fair inference is that the
reason why he did not assume it is because there was no idea prevalent
at Nauvoo that "young Joseph" would succeed to his father's place.

Second, the silence of William Smith in respect to "young Joseph" in
his controversy with the Twelve in respect to leadership. Had any idea
prevailed at Nauvoo that "young Joseph" was to succeed to the
Presidency of the church, this man, his uncle, would have known it;
and would have strengthened his own claims at that time to the right
of leadership, by proclaiming himself, as he did afterwards, in 1850,
the natural guardian of the one who had been anointed and ordained to
succeed to the office of President. But this he did not do. On the
contrary, he claimed the place for himself by virtue of being the
_brother_ of the prophet. When he failed to secure the position of
leadership for himself, he followed the leadership of James J. Strang
instead of supporting the claims of "young Joseph." Not until 1850 did
he begin to proclaim the right of "young Joseph" to be the President
of the church; and then not by any virtue of appointment from his
father, but by right of lineage; and with this movement on his part
originates the claims of Mr. Smith to the Presidency.

Third, Mr. Edward Tullidge, in his life of Joseph the prophet--the
Josephite edition--quotes the prophet Joseph as saying:

    "I told Stephen Markham," says Joseph, "that if I and Hyrum were
    ever taken again, we should [would?] be massacred, or I was not a
    Prophet of God. _I want Hyrum to live to lead the Church, but he
