Christians deserved indeed the most exemplary punishments, but the
public abhorrence was changed into commiseration, from the opinion
that those unhappy wretches were sacrificed, not so much to the public
welfare as to the cruelty of a jealous tyrant."--(Tacitus, Annals,
Book 15, ch. 44.)

10. There is some disagreement among historians as to whether the
Neronian persecution is to be regarded as a local infliction,
practically confined to the city of Rome, or as general throughout the
provinces.--(See Note 3, end of chapter.) The consensus of opinion
favors the belief that the provinces followed the example of the
metropolis, and that the persecution was common throughout the Church.

11. This, the first persecution by Roman edict, practically ended with
the death of the tyrant Nero, A. D. 68. According to tradition handed
down from the early Christian writers, the Apostles Paul and Peter
suffered martyrdom at Rome, the former by beheading, the latter by
crucifixion, during this persecution; and it is further stated that
Peter's wife was put to death shortly before her husband; but the
tradition is neither confirmed nor disproved by authentic record.

12. _Persecution under Domitian_. The second officially appointed
persecution under Roman authority began 93 or 94 A. D. in the reign of
Domitian. Both Christians and Jews came under this prince's
displeasure, because they refused to reverence the statues he had
erected as objects of adoration. A further cause for his special
animosity against Christians, as affirmed by early writers, is as
follows. The emperor was persuaded that he was in danger of losing his
throne, in view of a reputed prediction that from the family to which
Jesus belonged there would arise one who would weaken if not overthrow
the power of Rome. With this as his ostensible excuse, this wicked
ruler waged terrible destruction on an innocent people. Happily, the
persecution thus started was of but few years duration. Mosheim and
others aver that the end of the persecution was caused by the
emperor's untimely death; though Eusebius, who wrote in the fourth
century, quotes an earlier writer as declaring that Domitian had the
living descendants of the Savior's family brought before him, and that
after questioning them he became convinced that he was in no danger
from them; and thereupon dismissed them with contempt and ordered the
persecution to cease. It is believed that while the edict of Domitian
was in force the Apostle John suffered banishment to the isle of
Patmos.

13. _Persecution under Trajan_. What is known in ecclesiastical
history as the third persecution of the Christian Church took place in
the reign of Trajan, who occupied the imperial throne from 98 to 117
A. D. He was and is regarded as one of the best of the Roman emperors,
yet he sanctioned violent persecution of the Christians owing to their
"inflexible obstinacy" in refusing to sacrifice to Roman gods. History
has preserved to us a very important letter asking instructions from
the emperor, by the younger Pliny, who was governor of Pontus, and the
emperor's reply thereto. This correspondence is instructive as showing
the extent to which Christianity had spread at that time, and the way
in which believers were treated by the officers of the state.

14. Pliny inquired of the emperor as to the policy to be pursued in
dealing with the Christians within his jurisdiction. Were young and
old, tender and robust, to be treated alike, or should punishment be
graded? Should opportunity be given the accused to recant, or was the
fact that they had once professed Christianity to be considered an
unpardonable offense? Were those convicted as Christians to be
punished for their religion alone, or only for specific offenses
resulting from their membership in the Christian Church? After
propounding such queries the governor proceeded to report to the
emperor what he had done in the absence of definite instructions. In
reply the emperor directed that the Christians were not to be hunted
nor sought after vindictively, but if accused and brought before the
judgment seat, and if then they refused to denounce their faith, they
were to be put to death.--(See Note 4, end of chapter.)

15. _Persecution under Marcus Aurelius_. Marcus Aurelius reigned from
161 to 180 A. D. He was noted as one who sought the greatest good of
his people; yet under his government the Christians suffered added
cruelties. Persecution was most severe in Gaul (now France.) Among
those who met the martyr's fate at that time, were Polycarp, bishop of
Smyrna, and Justin Martyr, known in history as the philosopher. With
reference to the seeming anomaly that even the best of rulers
permitted and even prosecuted vigorous opposition to Christian
devotees, as exemplified by the acts of this emperor, a modern writer
has said: "It should be noted that the persecution of the Christians
under the pagan emperors sprung from political rather than religious
motives, and that is why we find the names of the best emperors, as
well as those of the worst, in the list of persecutors. It was
believed that the welfare of the state was bound up with the careful
performance of the rites of the national worship; and hence, while the
Roman rulers were usually very tolerant allowing all forms of worship
among their subjects, still they required that men of every faith
should at least recognize the Roman gods, and burn incense before
their statues. This the Christians steadily refused to do. Their
neglect of the service of the temple, it was believed, angered the
gods, and endangered the safety of the state, bringing upon it
drought, pestilence, and every disaster. This was the main reason of
their persecution by the pagan emperors."--(General History by P. V.
N. Myers, edition of 1889, p. 322.)

16. _Later Persecutions_. With occasional periods of partial
cessation, the Christian believers continued to suffer at the hands of
heathen opponents throughout the second and third centuries. A violent
persecution marked the reign of Severus (193-211 A. D.) in the first
decade of the third century; another characterized the reign of
Maximin (235-238 A. D.) A period of unusual severity in persecution
and suffering befell the Christians during the short reign of Decius
known also as Decius Trajan (219-251 A. D.) The persecution under
Decius is designated in ecclesiastical history as the seventh
persecution of the Christian Church. Others followed in rapid
succession. Some of these periods of specific oppression we pass over
and come to the consideration of the

17. _Diocletian Persecution_, which is spoken of as the tenth, and
happily the last. Diocletian reigned from 284 to 305 A. D. At first he
was very tolerant toward Christian belief and practice; indeed it is
of record that his wife and daughter were Christians, though "in some
sense, secretly." Later, however, he turned against the Church and
undertook to bring about a total suppression of the Christian
religion. To this end he ordered a general destruction of Christian
books, and decreed the penalty of death against all who kept such
works in their possession.

18. Fire broke out twice in the royal palace at Nicomedia, and on each
occasion the incendiary act was charged against the Christians with
terrible results. Four separate edicts, each surpassing in vehemence
the earlier decrees, were issued against the believers; and for a
period of ten years they were the victims of unrestrained rapine,
spoliation and torture. At the end of the decade of terror the Church
was in a scattered and seemingly in a hopeless condition. Sacred
records had been burnt; places of worship had been razed to the
ground; thousands of Christians had been put to death; and every
possible effort had been made to destroy the Church and abolish
Christianity from the earth. Descriptions of the horrible extremes to
which brutality was carried are sickening to the soul. A single
example must suffice. Eusebius, referring to the persecutions in
Egypt, says: "And such too was the severity of the struggle which was
endured by the Egyptians, who wrestled gloriously for the faith at
Tyre. Thousands, both men, and women and children, despising the
present life for the sake of our Savior's doctrine, submitted to death
in various shapes. Some, after being tortured with scrappings and the
rack, and the most dreadful scourgings, and other innumerable agonies
which one might shudder to hear, were finally committed to the flames;
and some plunged and drowned in the sea, others voluntarily offering
their own heads to their executioners, others dying in the midst of
their torments, some wasted away by famine, and others again fixed to
the cross. Some, indeed, were executed as malefactors usually were;
others, more cruelly, were nailed with the head downwards, and kept
alive until they were destroyed by starving on the cross
itself."--(Eusebius, "Eccl. Hist.," Book 8, ch. 8.)

19. A modern writer, whose tendency ever was to minimize the extent of
Christian persecution, is Edward Gibbon. His account of the conditions
prevailing during this period of Diocletian outrage is as follows:
"The magistrates were commanded to employ every method of severity
which might reclaim them from their odious superstition, and oblige
them to return to the established worship of the gods. This rigorous
order was extended, by a subsequent edict, to the whole body of
Christians, who were exposed to a violent and general persecution.
Instead of those salutary restraints which had required the direct and
solemn testimony of an accuser, it became the duty as well as the
interest of the imperial officers to discover, to pursue, and to
torment the most obnoxious among the faithful. Heavy penalties were
denounced against all who should presume to save a proscribed sectary
from the just indignation of the gods and of the emperors."--(Gibbon,
"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," ch. XVI.)

20. So general was the Diocletian persecution, and so destructive its
effect, that at its cessation the Christian Church was thought to be
forever extinct. Monuments were raised to commemorate the emperor's
zeal as a persecutor, notably two pillars erected in Spain. On one of
them is an inscription extolling the mighty Diocletian "_For having
extinguished the name of Christians who brought the Republic to
ruin_." A second pillar commemorates the reign of Diocletian, and
honors the imperator "_for having everywhere abolished the
superstition of Christ; for having extended the worship of the gods_."
A medal struck in honor of Diocletian bears the inscription "_The name
of Christian being extinguished_."--(Milner, "Church History," Cent.
IV, ch. 1:38.) To the fallacy of these assumptions subsequent events
testify.

21. The Diocletian oppression was the last of the great persecutions
brought by pagan Rome against Christianity as a whole. A stupendous
change, amounting to a revolution, now appears in the affairs of the
Church. Constantine, known in history as Constantine the Great, became
emperor of Rome A. D. 306, and reigned 31 years. Early in his reign he
espoused the hitherto unpopular cause of the Christians, and took the
Church under official protection. A legend gained currency that the
emperor's conversion was due to a supernatural manifestation, whereby
he saw a luminous cross appear in the heavens with the inscription,
"By this sign, conquer." The genuineness of this alleged manifestation
is doubtful, and the evidence of history is against it. The incident
is here mentioned to show the means devised to make Christianity
popular at the time.

22. It is held by many judicious historians that Constantine's
so-called conversion was rather a matter of policy than a sincere
acceptance of the truth of Christianity. The emperor himself remained
a catechumen, that is, an unbaptized believer, until shortly before
his death, when he became a member by baptism. But, whatever his
motives may have been, he made Christianity the religion of state,
issuing an official decree to this effect in 313. "He made the cross
the royal standard; and the Roman legions now for the first time
marched beneath the emblem of Christianity." (Myers.)

23. Immediately following the change there was a great competition for
church preferment. The office of a bishop came to be more highly
esteemed than the rank of a general. The emperor himself was the real
head of the Church. It became unpopular and decidedly disadvantageous
in a material sense to be known as a non-Christian. Pagan temples were
transformed into churches, and heathen idols were demolished. We read
that twelve thousand men and a proportionate number of women and
children were baptized into the Church of Rome alone within a single
year. Constantine removed the capital of the empire from Rome to
Byzantium, which city he re-named after himself, Constantinople. This,
the present capital of Turkey, became headquarters of the state
Church.

24. How empty and vain appears the Diocletian boast that Christianity
was forever extinguished! Yet how different was the Church under the
patronage of Constantine from the Church as established by Christ and
as built up by His apostles! The Church had already become apostate as
judged by the standard of its original constitution.


NOTES.

1. _Cause of Pagan Opposition to Christianity_. "The whole body of
Christians unanimously refused to hold any communion with the gods of
Rome, of the empire, and of mankind. It was in vain that the oppressed
believer asserted the inalienable rights of conscience and private
judgment. Though his situation might excite the pity, his arguments
could never reach the understanding, either of the philosophic or of
the believing part of the pagan world. To their apprehensions, it was
no less a matter of surprise that any individuals should entertain
scruples against complying with the established mode of worship, than
if they had conceived a sudden abhorrence to the manners, the dress,
or the language of their native country. The surprise of the pagans
was soon succeeded by resentment; and the most pious of men were
exposed to the unjust but dangerous imputation of impiety. Malice and
prejudice concurred in representing the Christians as a society of
atheists, who, by the most daring attack on the religious constitution
of the empire, had merited the severest animadversion of the civil
magistrate. They had separated themselves (they gloried in the
confession) from every mode of superstition which was received in any
part of the globe by the various temper of polytheism; but it was not
altogether so evident what deity or what form of worship they had
substituted to the gods and temples of antiquity. The pure and sublime
idea which they entertained of the Supreme Being escaped the gross
conception of the pagan multitude, who were at a loss to discover a
spiritual and solitary God, that was neither represented under any
corporeal figures or visible symbol, nor was adored with the
accustomed pomp of libations and festivals, of altars and sacrifices."
(Gibbon, "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," chap. XVI.)

2. _As to the Number of Persecutions by the Romans_. "The Romans are
said to have pursued the Christians with the utmost violence in ten
persecutions, but this number is not verified by the ancient history
of the church. For if, by these persecutions, such only are meant as
were singularly severe and universal throughout the empire, then it is
certain that these amount not to the number above mentioned. And, if
we take the provincial and less remarkable persecutions into the
account, they far exceed it. In the fifth century, certain Christians
(were) led by some passages of the holy scriptures and by one
especially in the Revelations (Rev. 17:14), to imagine that the church
was to suffer ten calamities of a most grievous nature. To this
notion, therefore, they endeavored, though not all in the same way, to
accommodate the language of history, even against the testimony of
those ancient records, from whence alone history can speak with
authority." (Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical History," Cent. I, Part I; ch.
5:4.)

Speaking on the same subject, Gibbon says: "As often as any occasional
severities were exercised in the different parts of the empire, the
primitive Christians lamented and perhaps magnified their own
sufferings; but the celebrated number of ten persecutions has been
determined by the ecclesiastical writers of the fifth century, who
possessed a more distinct view of the prosperous or adverse fortunes
of the church from the age of Nero to that of Diocletian. The
ingenious parallels of the ten plagues of Egypt and of the ten horns
of the Apocalypse first suggested this calculation of their minds; and
in their application of the faith of prophecy to the truth of history
they were careful to select those reigns which were indeed the most
hostile to the Christian cause." (Gibbon, "Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire," ch. XVI.)

3. _Extent of the Neronian Persecution_. "Learned men are not entirely
agreed concerning the extent of this persecution under Nero. Some
confine it to the city of Rome, while others represent it as having
raged throughout the whole empire. The latter opinion, which is also
the most ancient, is undoubtedly to be preferred; as it is certain
that the laws enacted against the Christians were enacted against the
whole body, and not against particular churches, and were consequently
in force in the remotest provinces." (Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical
History," Cent. I. Part I, 5:14.)

4. _Correspondence Between Pliny and Trajan_. The inquiry of the
younger Pliny, governor of Pontus, addressed to Trajan, emperor of
Rome, and the imperial reply thereto, are of such interest as to be
worthy of reproduction in full. The version here given is that of
Milner as appears in his "History of the Church of Christ," edition of
1810, Cent. II, ch. 1.

"_Pliny to Trajan, Emperor_:

"Health.--It is my usual custom, Sir, to refer all things, of which I
harbor any doubts, to you. For who can better direct my judgment in
its hesitation, or instruct my understanding in its ignorance? I never
had the fortune to be present at any examination of Christians, before
I came into this province. I am therefore at a loss to determine what
is the usual object either of inquiry or of punishment, and to what
length either of them is to be carried. It has also been with me a
question very problematical,--whether any distinction should be made
between the young and the old, the tender and the robust;--whether any
room should be given for repentance, or the guilt of Christianity once
incurred is not to be expiated by the most unequivocal retraction;--
whether the name itself, abstracted from any flagitiousness of
conduct, or the crimes connected with the name, be the object of
punishment. In the meantime, this has been my method, with respect to
those who were brought before me as Christians. I asked them whether
they were Christians: if they pleaded guilty, I interrogated then
twice afresh with a menace of capital punishment. In case of obstinate
perseverance I ordered them to be executed. For of this I had no
doubt, whatever was the nature of their religion, that a sudden and
obstinate inflexibility called for the vengeance of the magistrate.
Some were infected with the same madness, whom, on account of their
privilege of citizenship, I reserved to be sent to Rome, to be
referred to your tribunal. In the course of this business,
informations pouring in, as is usual when they are encouraged, more
cases occurred. An anonymous libel was exhibited, with a catalogue of
names of persons, who yet declared that they were not Christians then,
nor ever had been; and they repeated after me an invocation of the
gods and of your image, which, for this purpose, I had ordered to be
brought with the images of the deities. They performed sacred rites
with wine and frankincense, and execrated Christ,--none of which
things I am told a real Christian can ever be compelled to do. On this
account I dismissed them. Others named by an informer, first affirmed,
and then denied the charge of Christianity; declaring that they had
been Christians, but had ceased to be so some three years ago, others
even longer, some even twenty years ago. All of them worshiped your
image, and the statues of the gods, and also execrated Christ. And
this was the account which they gave of the nature of the religion
they had once professed, whether it deserves the name of crime or
error,--namely--that they were accustomed on a stated day to meet
before daylight, and to repeat among themselves a hymn to Christ as to
a god, and to bind themselves by an oath, with an obligation of not
committing any wickedness;--but on the contrary, of abstaining from
thefts, robberies, and adulteries;--also of not violating their
promise or denying a pledge;--after which it was their custom to
separate, and to meet again at a promiscuous harmless meal, from which
last practice they however desisted, after the publication of my
edict, in which, agreeably to your order, I forbade any societies of
that sort. On which account I judged it the more necessary to inquire,
by torture, from two females, who were said to be deaconesses, what is
the real truth. But nothing could I collect except a depraved and
excessive superstition. Deferring, therefore, any further
investigation, I determined to consult you. For the number of culprits
is so great as to call for serious consultation. Many persons are
informed against of every age and of both sexes; and more still will
be in the same situation. The contagion of the superstition hath
spread not only through cities, but even villages and the country. Not
that I think it impossible to check and correct it. The success of my
endeavors hitherto forbids such desponding thoughts; for the temples,
almost once desolate, begin to be frequented, and the sacred
solemnities, which had long been intermitted, are now attended afresh;
and the sacrificial victims are now sold everywhere, which once could
scarcely find a purchaser. Whence I conclude that many might be
reclaimed were the hope of impunity, on repentance, absolutely
confirmed."

The emperor's reply follows:

"_Trajan to Pliny_:

"You have done perfectly right, my dear Pliny, in the inquiry which
you have made concerning Christians. For truly no one general rule can
be laid down, which will apply itself to all cases. These people must
not be sought after. If they are brought before you and convicted, let
them be capitally punished, yet with this restriction, that if any one
renounce Christianity, and evidence his sincerity by supplicating our
gods, however suspected he may be for the past, he shall obtain pardon
for the future, on his repentance. But anonymous libels in no case
ought to be attended to; for the precedent would be of the worst sort,
and perfectly incongruous to the maxims of my government."




CHAPTER VI.

**Causes of the Apostasy.--Internal Causes**.


1. The cruel persecution to which the adherents of Christianity and
the Church as an organized body were subjected during the first three
centuries of our era have been treated as external causes,
contributing at least indirectly to the general apostasy. Details of
Judaistic and heathen opposition have been given with sufficient
fulness to show that the unpopular Church had a troubled existence,
and that such of its members as remained faithful to the tenets and
principles of the gospel were martyrs in spirit if not in fact.

2. As would naturally be expected, the immediate effect of persistent
persecution on those who professed a belief in the divinity of the
Lord Jesus was diverse and varied; indeed it ranged from unrestrained
enthusiasm expressed in frenzied clamoring for martyrdom, to ready and
abject apostasy with ostentatious display of devotion in idolatrous
service.

3. Many of the Christian devotees developed a zeal amounting to mania,
and, disregarding all prudence and discretion, gloried in the prospect
of winning the martyr's crown. Some who had been left unassailed felt
themselves aggrieved, and became their own accusers; while others
openly committed acts of aggression with intent to bring resentment
upon themselves.--(See Note 1, end of chapter.) These extravagances
were doubtless encouraged by the excessive veneration accorded the
memories and the bodily remains of those who had fallen as victims in
the cause. The reverential respect so rendered developed later into
the impious practice of martyr worship.

4. Commenting on the imprudent enthusiasm of the early Christians,
Gibbon says: "The Christians sometimes supplied by their voluntary
declaration the want of an accuser, rudely disturbed the public
service of paganism, and, rushing in crowds round the tribunal of the
magistrates, called upon them to pronounce and to inflict the sentence
of the law. The behavior of the Christians was too remarkable to
escape the notice of the ancient philosophers; but they seem to have
received it with much less admiration than astonishment. Incapable of
conceiving the motives which sometimes transported the fortitude of
believers beyond the bounds of prudence and reason, they treated such
an eagerness to die as the strange result of obstinate despair, of
stupid insensibility or of superstitious frenzy."--(Gibbon, "Decline
and Fall of the Roman Empire," ch. XVI.)

5. But there is another side to the picture. While imprudent zealots
invited dangers from which they might have remained exempt, others,
affrighted at the possibility of being included among the victims,
voluntarily deserted the Church and returned to heathen allegiances.
Milner, speaking of conditions existing in the third century, and
incorporating the words of Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, who lived at
the time of the incident described, says: "Vast numbers lapsed into
idolatry immediately. Even before men were accused as Christians, many
ran to the forum and sacrificed to the gods as they were ordered; and
the crowds of apostates were so great, that the magistrates wished to
delay numbers of them till the next day, but they were importuned by
the wretched suppliants to be allowed to prove themselves heathens
that very night."--(Milner, "Church History," Cent. III, ch. 8.)

6. In connection with this individual apostasy of Church members under
the pressure of persecution, there arose among the provincial
governors a practice of selling certificates or "libels" as these
documents were called, which "attested that the persons therein
mentioned had complied with the laws and sacrificed to the Roman
deities. By producing these false declarations, the opulent and timid
Christians were enabled to silence the malice of an informer, and to
reconcile, in some measure, their safety with their religion."--
(Gibbon, "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," ch. XVI.) A
modification of this practice of quasi-apostasy consisted in procuring
testimonials from persons of standing certifying that the holders had
abjured the gospel; these documents were presented to the heathen
magistrates, and they, on receipt of a specified fee, granted
exemption from the requirement of sacrificing to the pagan gods.--(See
Milner, "Church History," Cent. III, ch. 9.) As a result of these
practices, whereby under favorable circumstances the wealthy could
purchase immunity from persecution, and at the same time maintain a
semblance of standing in the Church, much dissension arose, the
question being as to whether those who had thus shown their weakness
could ever be received again into communion with the Church.

7. Persecution at most was but an indirect cause of the decline of
Christianity and the perversion of the saving principles of the gospel
of Christ. The greater and more immediate dangers threatening the
Church must be sought within the body itself. Indeed, the pressure of
opposition from without served to restrain the bubbling springs of
internal dissension, and actually delayed the more destructive
eruptions of schism and heresy.--(See Note 2, end of chapter.) A
general review of the history of the Church down to the end of the
third century shows that the periods of comparative peace were periods
of weakness and decline in spiritual earnestness, and that with the
return of persecution came an awakening and a renewal in Christian
devotion. Devout leaders of the people were not backward in declaring
that each recurring period of persecution was a time of natural and
necessary chastisement for the sin and corruption that had gained
headway within the Church.--(See Note 3, end of chapter.)

8. As to the condition of the Church in the middle of the third
century, Cyprian, the bishop of Carthage, thus speaks: "If the cause
of our miseries be investigated, the cure of the wound may be found.
The Lord would have his family to be tried. And because long peace had
corrupted the discipline divinely revealed to us, the heavenly
chastisement hath raised up our faith, which had lain almost dormant:
and when, by our sins, we have deserved to suffer still more, the
merciful Lord so moderated all things, that the whole scene rather
deserves the name of a trial than a persecution. Each had been bent on
improving his patrimony; and had forgotten what believers had done
under the apostles, and what they ought always to do:--they were
brooding over the arts of amassing wealth:--the pastors and the
deacons each forgot their duty: Works of mercy were neglected, and
discipline was at the lowest ebb.--Luxury and effeminacy prevailed:
Meretricious arts in dress were cultivated: Frauds and deceit were
practiced among brethren.--Christians could unite themselves in
matrimony with unbelievers; could swear not only without reverence,
but even without veracity. With haughty asperity they despised their
ecclesiastical superiors: They railed against one another with
outrageous acrimony, and conducted quarrels with determined
malice:--Even many bishops, who ought to be guides and patterns to the
rest, neglecting the peculiar duties of their stations, gave
themselves up to secular pursuits:--They deserted their places of
residence and their flocks: They traveled through distant provinces in
quest of pleasure and gain; gave no assistance to the needy brethren;
but were insatiable in their thirst of money:--They possessed estates
by fraud and multiplied usury. What have we not deserved to suffer for
such conduct? Even the divine word hath foretold us what we might
expect.--'If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
judgments, I will visit their offenses with the rod, and their sin
with scourges.' These things had been denounced and foretold, but in
vain. Our sins had brought our affairs to that pass, that because we
had despised the Lord's directions, we were obliged to undergo a
correction of our multiplied evils and a trial of our faith by severe
remedies."--(As quoted by Milner, "Church History," Cent. III, ch. 8.)

9. Milner, who quotes approvingly the severe arraignment of the Church
in the third century as given above, cannot be charged with bias
against Christian institutions, inasmuch as his declared purpose in
presenting to the world an additional "History of the Church of
Christ" was to give due attention to certain phases of the subject
slighted or neglected by earlier authors, and notably to emphasize the
piety, not the wickedness, of the professed followers of Christ. This
author, avowedly friendly to the Church and her votaries, admits the
growing depravity of the Christian sects, and declares that toward the
end of the third century the effect of the Pentecostal outpouring of
the Holy Spirit had become exhausted, and that there remained little
proof of any close relationship between Christ and the Church.

10. Note his summary of conditions: "The era of its actual declension
must be dated in the pacific part of Diocletian's reign. During this
whole century the work of God, in purity and power, had been tending
to decay. The connection with philosophers was one of the principal
causes. Outward peace and secular advantages completed the corruption.
Ecclesiastical discipline, which had been too strict, was now relaxed
exceedingly; bishops and people were in a state of malice. Endless
quarrels were fomented among contending parties, and ambition and
covetousness had in general gained the ascendency in the Christian
Church. * * * The faith of Christ itself appeared now an ordinary
business; and here _terminated_, or nearly so, as far as appears, the
first great effusion of the Spirit of God, which began at the day of
Pentecost. Human depravity effected throughout a general decay of
godliness; and one generation of men elapsed with very slender proofs
of the spiritual presence of Christ with His Church."--(Milner,
"Church History," Cent. III, ch. 17.)

11. If further evidence be wanted as to the fires of disaffection
smoldering within the Church, and so easily fanned into destructive
flame, let the testimony of Eusebius be considered with respect to
conditions characterizing the second half of the third century. And,
in weighing his words, let it be remembered that he had expressly
recorded his purpose of writing in defense of the Church, and in
support of her institutions. He bewails the tranquillity preceding the
Diocletian outbreak, because of its injurious effect upon both
officers and members of the Church. These are his words: "But when by
excessive liberty we have sunk into indolence and sloth, one envying
and reviling another in different ways, and we were almost, as it
were, on the point of taking up arms against each other, and were
assailing each other with words, as with darts and spears, prelates
inveighing against prelates, and people rising up against people, and
hypocrisy and dissimulation had arisen to the greater heights of
malignity, then the divine judgment, which usually proceeds with a
lenient hand, whilst the multitudes were yet crowding into the Church,
with gentle and mild visitations began to afflict its episcopacy; the
persecution having begun with those brethren that were in the army. *
* * But some that appeared to be our pastors, deserting the law of
piety, were inflamed against each other with mutual strifes,
accumulating quarrels and threats, rivalry, hostility, and hatred to
each other, only anxious to assert the government as a kind of
sovereignty for themselves."--(Eusebius, "Ecclesiastical History,"
Book VIII, ch. 1. See note 4, end of chapter.)

12. As further illustrative of the decline of the Christian spirit
toward the end of the third century, Milner quotes the following
observation of Eusebius, an eye-witness of the conditions described:
"The heavy hand of God's judgment began softly, by little and little,
