forgeries.

If there was ample evidence for the historicity of Jesus, why did his
biographers resort to forgery? The following admissions by Christian
writers themselves show the helplessness of the early preachers in the
presence of inquirers who asked for proofs. The church historian,
Mosheim, writes that, "The Christian Fathers deemed it a pious act to
employ deception and fraud." [Footnote: Ecclesiastical Hist., Vol. I,
P. 247.]

Again, he says: "The greatest and most pious teachers were nearly all
of them infected with this leprosy." Will not some believer tell us
why forgery and fraud were necessary to prove the historicity of
Jesus. Another historian, Milman, writes that, "Pious fraud was
admitted and avowed" by the early missionaries of Jesus. "It was an
age of literary frauds," writes Bishop Ellicott, speaking of the times
immediately following the alleged crucifixion of Jesus. Dr. Giles
declares that, "There can be no doubt that great numbers of books were
written with no other purpose than to deceive." And it is the opinion
of Dr. Robertson Smith that, "There was an enormous floating mass of
spurious literature created to suit party views." Books which are now
rejected as apochryphal were at one time received as inspired, and
books which are now believed to be infallible were at one time
regarded as of no authority in the Christian world. It certainly is
puzzling that there should be a whole literature of fraud and forgery
in the name of a historical person. But if Jesus was a myth, we can
easily explain the legends and traditions springing up in his name.

The early followers of Jesus, then, realizing the force of this
objection, did actually resort to interpolation and forgery in order
to prove that Jesus was a historical character.

One of the oldest critics of the Christian religion was a Pagan, known
to history under the name of Porphyry; yet, the early Fathers did not
hesitate to tamper even with the writings of an avowed opponent of
their religion. After issuing an edict to destroy, among others, the
writings of this philosopher, a work, called _Philosophy of Oracles,_
was produced, in which the author is made to write almost as a
Christian; and the name of Porphyry was signed to it as its author.
St. Augustine was one of the first to reject it as a forgery.
[Footnote: Geo. W. Foote. Crimes of Christianity.] A more astounding
invention than this alleged work of a heathen bearing witness to
Christ is difficult to produce. Do these forgeries, these apocryphal
writings, these interpolations, freely admitted to have been the
prevailing practice of the early Christians, help to prove the
existence of Jesus? And when to this wholesale manufacture of doubtful
evidence is added the terrible vandalism which nearly destroyed every
great Pagan classic, we can form an idea of the desperate means to
which the early Christians resorted to prove that Jesus was not a
myth. It all goes to show how difficult it is to make a man out of a
myth.




[Illustration: The Goddess Mother in the Grecian Pantheon.]

VIRGIN BIRTHS



Stories of gods born of virgins are to be found in nearly every age
and country. There have been many virgin mothers, and Mary with her
child is but a recent version of a very old and universal myth. In
China and India, in Babylonia and Egypt, in Greece and Rome, "divine"
beings selected from among the daughters of men the purest and most
beautiful to serve them as a means of entrance into the world of
mortals. Wishing to take upon themselves the human form, while
retaining at the same time their "divinity," this compromise--of an
earthly mother with a "divine" father--was effected. In the form of a
swan Jupiter approached Leda, as in the guise of a dove, or a
_Paracletus,_ Jehovah "overshadowed" Mary.

A nymph bathing in a river in China is touched by a lotus plant, and
the divine Fohi is born.

In Siam, a wandering sunbeam caresses a girl in her teens, and the
great and wonderful deliverer, Codom, is born. In the life of Buddha
we read that he descended on his mother Maya, "in likeness as the
heavenly queen, and entered her womb," and was "born from her right
side, to save the world." [Footnote: Stories of Virgin Births.
Reference: Lord Macartney. Voyage dans 'interview de la Chine et en
Tartarie. Vol. I, P. 48. See also Les Vierges Meres et les Naissance
Miraculeuse. P. Saintyves. P. 19, etc.] In Greece, the young god
Apollo visits a fair maid of Athens, and a Plato is ushered into the
world.

In ancient Mexico, as well as in Babylonia, and in modern Corea, as in
modern Palestine, as in the legends of all lands, virgins gave birth
and became divine mothers. [Footnote: Stories of Virgin Births.
Reference: Lord Macartney. Voyage dans 'interview de la Chine et en
Tartarie. Vol. I, P. 48. See also Les Vierges Meres et les Naissance
Miraculeuse. P. Saintyves. P. 19, etc.]

But the real home of virgin births is the land of the Nile. Eighteen
hundred years before Christ, we find carved on one of the walls of the
great temple of Luxor a picture of the _annunciation, conception and
birth_ of King Amunothph III, an almost exact copy of the
annunciation, conception and birth of the Christian God. Of course no
one will think of maintaining that the Egyptians borrowed the idea
from the Catholics nearly two thousand years before the Christian era.
"The story in the Gospel of Luke, the first and second chapters is,
"says Malvert, "a reproduction, 'point by point,' of the story in
stone of the miraculous birth of Amunothph." [Footnote: Science and
Religion P. 96.]

[Illustration: The Annunciation, Birth, and Adoration of Amenophis of
Egypt, Nearly 2000 Years Before Christ.]

Sharpe in his Egyptian Mythology, page 19, gives the following
description of the Luxor picture, quoted by G. W. Foote in his _Bible
Romances,_ page 126: "In this picture we have the annunciation, the
conception, the birth and the adoration, as described in the first and
second chapters of Luke's Gospel." Massey gives a more minute
description of the Luxor picture. "The first scene on the left hand
shows the god Taht, the divine Word or Loges, in the act of hailing
the virgin queen, announcing to her that she is to give birth to a
son. In the second scene the god Kneph (assisted by Hathor) gives life
to her. This is the Holy Ghost, or Spirit that causes conception....Next
the mother is seated on the midwife's stool, and the child is supported
in the hands of one of the nurses. The fourth scene is that of the
adoration. Here the child is enthroned, receiving homage from the gods
and gifts from men." [Footnote: Natural Genesis. Massey, Vol.  II, P.
398.] The picture on the wall of the Luxor temple, then, is one of the
sources to which the anonymous writers of the Gospels went for their
miraculous story. It is no wonder they suppressed their own identity
as well as the source from which they borrowed their material.

Not only the idea of a virgin mother, but all the other miraculous
events, such as the stable cradle, the guiding star, the massacre of
the children, the flight to Egypt, and the resurrection and bodily
ascension toward the clouds, have not only been borrowed, but are even
scarcely altered in the New Testament story of Jesus.

[Illustration: The Nativity of the God Dionysius, Museum of Naples. ]

That the early Christians borrowed the legend of Jesus from earthly
sources is too evident to be even questioned. Gerald Massey in his
great work on Egyptian origins demonstrates the identity of Mary, the
mother of Jesus, with Isis, the mother of Horus. He says: "The most
ancient, gold-bedizened, smoke-stained Byzantine pictures of the
virgin and child represent the mythical mother as Isis, and not as a
human mother of Nazareth." [Footnote: Vol. ii, P. 487.] Science and
research have made this fact so certain that, on the one hand
ignorance, and on the other, interest only, can continue to claim
inspiration for the authors of the undated and unsigned fragmentary
documents which pass for the Word of God. If, then, Jesus is stripped
of all the borrowed legends and miracles of which he is the subject;
and if we also take away from him all the teachings which collected
from Jewish and Pagan sources have been attributed to him--what will
be left of him? That the ideas put in his mouth have been culled and
compiled from other sources is as demonstrable as the Pagan origin of
the legends related of him.

Nearly every one of the dogmas and ceremonies in the Christian cult
were borrowed from other and older religions. The resurrection myth,
the ascension, the eucharisty, baptism, worship by kneeling or
prostration, the folding of the hands on the breast, the ringing of
bells and the burning of incense, the vestments and vessels used in
church, the candles, "holy" water,--even the word _Mass_ were all
adopted and adapted by the Christians from the religions of the
ancients. The Trinity is as much Pagan, as much Indian or Buddhist, as
it is Christian. The idea of a Son of God is as old as the oldest
cult. The sun is the son of heaven in all primitive faiths. The
physical sun becomes in the course of evolution, the Son of
Righteousness, or the Son of God, and heaven is personified as the
Father on High. The halo around the head of Jesus, the horns of the
older deities, the rays of light radiating from the heads of Hindu and
Pagan gods are incontrovertible evidence that all gods were at one
time--the sun in heaven.




[Illustration: Prehistoric Crosses Discovered in Pagan Sepulchres
(Italy).]

THE ORIGIN OF THE CROSS



Only the uninformed, of whom, we regret to say, there are a great
many, and who are the main support of the old religions, still believe
that the cross originated with Christianity. Like the dogmas of the
Trinity, the virgin birth, and the resurrection, the sign of the cross
or the cross as an emblem or a symbol was borrowed from the more
ancient faiths of Asia. Perhaps one of the most important discoveries
which primitive man felt obliged never to be ungrateful enough to
forget, was the production of fire by the friction of two sticks
placed across each other in the form of a cross. As early as the stone
age we find the cross carved on monuments which have been dug out of
the earth and which can be seen in the museums of Europe. On the coins
of later generations as well as on the altars of prehistoric times we
find the "sacred" symbol of the cross. The dead in ancient cemeteries
slept under the cross as they do in our day in Catholic churchyards.

[Illustration: House of Goodness, with Cross. Egyptian, 2000 B. C.]

In ancient Egypt, as in modern China, India, Corea, the cross is
venerated by the masses as a charm of great power. In the Musee
Guimet, in Paris, we have seen specimens of pre-Christian crosses. In
the Louvre Museum one of the "heathen" gods carries a cross on his
head. During his second journey to New Zealand, Cook was surprised to
find the natives marking the graves of their dead with the cross. We
saw, in the Museum of St. Germain, an ancient divinity of Gaul, before
the conquest of the country by Julius Caesar, wearing a garment on
which was woven a cross. In the same museum an ancient altar of Gaul
under Paganism, had a cross carved upon it. That the cross was not
adopted by the followers of Jesus until a later date may be inferred
from the silence of the earlier gospels, Matthew, Mark and Luke, on
the details of the crucifixion, which is more fully developed in the
later gospel of John. The first three evangelists say nothing about
the nails or the blood, and give the impression that he was hanged.
Writing of the two thieves who were sentenced to receive the same
punishment, Luke says, "One of the malefactors that was _hanged_ with
him." The idea of a bleeding Christ, such as we see on crosses in
Catholic churches, is not present in these earlier descriptions of the
crucifixion; the Christians of the time of Origin were called "the
followers of the god who was hanged." In the fourth gospel we see the
beginnings of the legend of the cross, of Jesus carrying or falling
under the weight of the cross, of the nail prints in his hands and
feet, of the spear drawing the blood from his side and smearing his
body. Of all this, the first three evangelists are quite ignorant.

[Illustration: Pagan Priest of Herculaneum Wearing the Cross.]

[Illustration: Cross of the Chinese Emperor Fou-Hi,2953 Years Before
Christ.]

[Illustration: Discovered in Newgrange, Ireland. An Ancient Pagan
Cross.]

Let it be further noted that it was not until eight hundred years
after the supposed crucifixion that Jesus is seen in the form of a
human being on the cross. Not in any of the paintings on the ancient
catacombs is found a crucified Christ. The earliest cross bearing a
human being is of the eighth century. For a long time a lamb with a
cross, or on a cross, was the Christian symbol, and it is a lamb which
we see entombed in the "holy sepulchre." In more than one mosaic of
early Christian times, it is not Jesus, but a lamb, which is bleeding
for the salvation of the world. How a lamb came to play so important a
role in Christianity is variously explained. The similarity between
the name of the Hindu god, _Agni_ and the meaning of the same word in
Latin, which is a lamb, is one theory. Another is that a ram, one of
the signs of the zodiac, often confounded by the ancients with a lamb,
is the origin of the popular reverence for the lamb as a symbol--a
reverence which all religions based on sun-worship shared. The lamb in
Christianity takes away the sins of the people, just as the paschal
lamb did in the Old Testament, and earlier still, just as it did in
Babylonia.

[Illustration: Used by a Priest of Bacchus, Showing the Cross.]

[Illustration: Engraving of the XI Century.]

[Illustration: Lamb on Cross.]

[Illustration: From a Picture in the Church of Genest. A Lamb Carrying
the Cross.]

[Illustration: The Lamb and the Cross, IX Century.]

To the same effect is the following letter of the bishop of Mende, in
France, bearing date of the year 800 A. D.: "Because the darkness has
disappeared, and because also Christ is a real man, Pope Adrian
commands us to paint him under the form of a man. The lamb of God must
not any longer be painted on a cross, but after a human form has been
placed on the cross, there is no objection to have a lamb also
represented with it, either at the foot of the cross or on the
opposite side." [Footnote: Translated from the French of Didron.
Quoted by Malvert.] We leave it to our readers to draw the necessary
conclusions from the above letter. How did a lamb hold its place on
the cross for eight hundred years? If Jesus was really crucified, and
that fact was a matter of history, why did it take eight hundred years
for a Christian bishop to write, "now that Christ is a real man,"
etc.? Today, it would be considered a blasphemy to place a lamb on a
cross.

On the tombstones of Christians of the fourth century are pictures
representing, not Jesus, but a lamb, working the miracles mentioned in
the gospels, such as multiplying the loaves and fishes, and raising
Lazarus from the dead.

[Illustration: Mosaic of St. Praxedes, V Century, Showing the Lamb
Christ.]

[Illustration: The Lamb Slowly Becoming Human.]

[Illustration: The Lamb Multiplying the Loaves and Fishes, IV Century
Sarcophagus.]

The first representations of a human form on the cross differ
considerably from those which prevail at the present time.

[Illustration: The Lamb Resurrecting Lazarus, IV Century Sarcophagus.]

While the figure on the modern cross is almost naked, those on the
earlier ones are clothed and completely covered. Wearing a flowing
tunic, Jesus is standing straight against the cross with his arms
outstretched, as though in the act of delivering an address.
Frequently, at his feet, on the cross, there is still painted the
figure of a lamb, which by and by, he is going to replace altogether.
Gradually the robe disappears from the crucified one, until we see him
crucified, as in the adjoining picture, with hardly any clothes on,
and wearing an expression of great agony.

[Illustration: Modern Christ.]




[Illustration: Christ and the Twelve Apostles, Carrying Swastikas and
Solar Discs Instead of the Cross. Sarcophagus, Milan.]

