powerful auxiliaries for good or for evil,--for good when under the
complete control of the will, for evil when they are emancipated from
its sway, for then they become the vultures of life, and a torment of
the soul.

Never lose sight of the fact that you require a stronger will to
obey than to command, and that your condition, far from rendering
your will less necessary, shows, on the contrary, that it is
indispensable to you; unless, by indorsing that unjust and outrageous
judgment by which the world seeks to degrade the dignity of woman,
you force upon yourself the conviction that her will should count for
nothing either at home or abroad,--that she is destined to be blindly
led by the caprices of others; unless you confound obedience with
servitude, and authorize the prejudices of those who pretend that
woman should have neither thought nor will of her own, but that
another is charged with thinking and willing for her, thus
exonerating her from all responsibility.

If this be your conviction, I ask: "Why do you read this book? Close
it, it is not written for you; because from the first page to the
last it constantly discloses to your view all the titles of your
glory and the grandeur of your dignity. Close your eyes to the light
of truth, shackle the will's liberty lest you may see and feel the
shame and humiliation of your sad condition; and, like a thing inert,
await in dumb silence until some trafficker may come and calculate
how much he will gain in fortune and pleasure by purchasing you!"
Behold the deplorable condition to which the pagan theories of the
world reduce woman! behold the degree of abjection to which she
herself descends when, losing sight of the light of faith, which
exposes the true nature of things, she suffers herself to be deceived
by the vain systems of a world worthy of God's anathemas, and
governed by the spirit of deception.

No, woman has not been created to be a slave; God has neither
destined nor consigned to such a humiliating state that half of
humanity from which He has chosen His mother, and which has been
favored with a holy reflection of the glory of Mary. God required a
positive act of woman's will in her co-operation in the work of our
redemption,--and to obtain it He did not hesitate to choose as His
ambassador, one of the brightest of His archangels. Judge from this
the respect and importance due to woman's will. Moreover, it is a
significant truth, sustained by a long experience, that the salvation
of a family, of a father, a brother, a son, a husband, is secured in
a great measure by the care and prayers, the firm and wise, yet mild
and prudent conduct of a Christian woman, deeply penetrated with the
profound sentiment of her dignity and the true importance of her
duties,--all of which depend upon a firm and patient will.




CHAPTER X.


THE IMAGINATION.

The imagination, that active agent of the senses, is the bee which,
in its continual excursions, gathers from the flower-cups the sweet
scented dust from which, by due process, it forms the wax that gives
us light and the honey that nourishes us. Your soul is like a
bee-hive, full of activity and life. The external world is like a
flower-garden, in which each flower has its peculiar color, perfume
and brightness. Your imagination is the working bee of this hive,
which resounds with the humming of the senses. The will governs and
directs all with perfect harmony, when peaceful order reigns in all
its workings. But the moment that the will fails to discharge the
duties of its office, the imagination and the senses, like bees
deprived of their queen, wander hither and thither without any
determined purpose, and the hive is abandoned to inaction or disorder.

It is of paramount importance to you to have a clear knowledge of
the nature, end and functions of all the faculties of your soul; so
that you may keep them within the province that God has allotted to
them, and that no disorder may arise from the attempted encroachments
of some upon others. This point becomes one of grave importance when
there is question of _the imagination_, because it is the most
rash, most ambitious, most violent and at the same time, the most
seductive, of all the faculties.

Holding an intermediate place between the soul and the senses, it is
the most accessible to the charms of the external world, and
participates in the inconstant and tumultuous movements of our own
sensibility. Confined to its own sphere of action, it is a precious
auxiliary, which often facilitates the perception of the truth, and
the accomplishment of good, by presenting them to the mind and heart
under colors that render them amiable and attractive. When properly
employed, it is an invaluable gift of God, who has given it to us to
aid the infirmity of our nature, by rendering less painful the
efforts that we are so often obliged to make in order to triumph over
our bad inclinations. But when we fail to make a proper use of it, it
then becomes for us a source of danger, and a great obstacle to our
advancement towards perfection.

Placed between the will and the senses, it should neither be
controlled by the latter nor emancipated from the sway of the former.
The faithful observance of this condition can alone insure us all the
advantages we may hope to derive from it. Should it prove to be a
frequent cause of mischief to us it is because we let it act
independently of the will's control--in which case it is sure to
become the slave of the senses. Separated from the intelligence, from
which it receives light, and from the will, which points out its
course of action, the imagination is a blind instinct, precipitous in
its movements, impetuous and inconstant in its flights, violent and
capricious in its pursuits. It is in constant agitation and torment,
passing from one object to another, jumping with a single bound from
one extreme to another, from sorrow to joy, from love to hate, from
fear to hope.

It magnifies or diminishes things according to the caprice of the
moment; and gives a color of sovereign importance to things which in
reality are the merest trifles; a word, a look, a sign preoccupies
and alarms it; it feasts on suspicion and anxiety, fictitious hopes
and deceitful reports; it seizes with avidity on the things that
please it, but scarcely is it in possession of the sought for objects
when it abandons them with disgust. Hence the impressions to which it
gives rise are as whimsical and as inconstant as itself; they appear
and disappear in the soul without any apparent reason for their
presence or absence.

The woman, whose imagination has been developed at the expense of
her other faculties, may be said to lead a dreamy, fictitious,
contentious and agitated life. This state is rendered still more
dangerous by the agreeable forms which it assumes, and which flatter
the mind and senses by their rapid and constant changes. Hence it is
that women endowed with this doleful gift have the sad privilege of
drawing around them persons of volatile minds and inconstant hearts.
They invariably finish by becoming the dupes of their own fickle
impressions, and are taken in the snares in which their vanity sought
to inveigle others.

Could you but see the living tableau of one of those souls
tyrannized by the imagination, the sight would arouse both your
compassion and disgust; for hers is a fickle, inconstant, fretful and
worried life. During the long dreary days not a single instant is
completely and sincerely given to God. Her thoughts, affections,
desires and occupations never rise above trivialness. Among the
multitude of persons of her acquaintance there is not a single one
whom she sincerely loves, or to whom she can render herself amiable.
In the multiplied interviews to which she has devoted her life-time
not a single genuine affection can be found: words which the lips
pronounce and which the heart ignores; visits made through etiquette
or inspired by frivolity; conversations that are mutually indulged in
for mutual illusion or deception;--such are the joys, such the
occupations, of this woman.

With dispositions such as these there cannot be question of sincere
piety nor of a Christian spirit. Piety resides in the will and
supposes the love of duty; imagination abhors duty and seeks only
after pleasure. True, the grace of God is all-powerful, it is not
tied down to the development of our natural qualities, and God knows
well, when He pleases, how to come to the assistance of the soul's
faculties, and plant the germs of solid virtue in a heart that is
frivolous and badly disposed; still it is an evident fact that among
souls there are some better prepared than others to receive this
divine seed, which takes deeper root when the heart is well disposed.
Now, among all the agents that can unfit us for the reception of
divine grace there is none so bad as an ungoverned imagination,
because it is the source, especially among women, of the most fatal
illusions.

A woman in this condition spends her whole life-time in deceiving
herself and in deceiving others--not purposely, but by a fatal and
voluntary illusion; she can see nothing in its true light; all
objects appear to her under strange colors; she forms her judgment of
them according to the impression they make on the senses, or the
effect they produce in the imagination. All this unfits her for the
reception of those supernatural truths which fortify the mind without
troubling the imagination, and, consequently, she remains insensible
to the sweet impressions of grace which acts so mildly on the heart
as to be unperceived by the senses. To such a woman piety is a mere
matter of form, made up of certain practices which, in the guise of
religion, flatter and feed her imagination. But the most terrible
feature of this condition is, that it always grows worse, keeping the
soul in a cloud of darkness, which even the special light attendant
on death cannot dispel.

Thus, living and dying, they deceive themselves, and carry their
illusions to the very tribunal of the Sovereign Judge. Then, and not
till then, do they discover the truth which, though _seeing_,
they did not _perceive_ during life. Then, in doleful cries and
lamentations will they exclaim, Alas! _"We deceived ourselves, we
have gone astray from the path of truth!"_

Do not expose yourself to the same sad fate and doleful end; avoid
the danger while it is yet time; train your imagination from a tender
age, keep its activity under control,--then, instead of being a
source of vile it will be a source of most precious advantages to you.

One of the best means by which you can succeed in doing this is to
fortify your will, giving it that authority and consistency which it
needs in order to govern the imagination; without a strong will, that
remains always self-composed in the midst of the tumult of the senses
and the activity of the imagination, you will certainly fail to
confine the latter to a just moderation.

That your judgment may enjoy perfect liberty and ease, your every
act should be determined during peaceful calmness. Do not forget
that, while you are passing through moments of excitement and
pre-occupation, you are unable to see things rightly and execute them
properly. When in this state of mind a project is proposed to your
consideration; you will find that your heart is already fixed upon it
before you have duly examined it; then the liberty of your mind
becomes shackled either by vain hopes or fears suggested by some
blind and violent instinct. In this and similar circumstances you
should proceed with great precaution.

It is prudent and wise to defer taking action in any serious matter
until self-composure is completely restored, until the mind is
serene, the heart at peace, and the will in full possession of its
liberty. Listen not to the plausible solicitations--obey not the
impulses of your imagination, but wait several days, or weeks, or
even months if necessary; for a final determination taken in the
midst of confusion and agitation will inevitably entail bitter
regrets. Even prayer will not obtain for you, while in such a state
of mind, all the light that you need. What you should first ask is,
that God would lull this storm, and restore peace to your soul; but
it is not the moment to pray that He may inspire you what to do in
this or that difficulty, because, preoccupied as you are, you will
perhaps take for the voice of God and of your conscience the cries of
your troubled imagination.

When, after a mature and serious examination of the matter at issue,
you have calmly discovered what course to adopt, it is then time to
enlist the service of the imagination to aid your will, and get it
interested in the work that you have to do, in order to impart new
energy to the soul, and new light to the intelligence; when it is
docile to the orders of the will it is a powerful auxiliary for good.

Never forget that the liberty of the mind and heart is an
indispensable condition to judge rightly, to love with security, and
to act with prudence; and that whatever tends to diminish this
liberty should arouse your suspicions, no matter what may be its
apparent advantages; for these can never equal the advantages
accruing from an unshackled heart and mind.




CHAPTER XI.


PIETY.

Most appropriately indeed was the name _piety_ given by our
fathers in the faith to the sentiment which elevates the mind and
heart to God. It establishes an intimate union between God and the
Christian soul, for it is an affection composed of the most generous
qualities of the human heart. In woman, it is a mixture of respect,
devotedness and tenderness, which are enhanced still more by a
certain blending of fear, confidence, and candor. Man is pious
towards God and his parents; but the woman whose heart is not
vitiated by anything fictitious is pious towards those whom she
loves, for in each one of her affections may be found, combined in
different degrees, all the shades of sentiment that we have mentioned
above; but it is in her piety towards God that they are especially
striking.

Woman's heart languishes for God, because it thirsts after the good
and beautiful; and all her efforts to satisfy its cravings will prove
futile until it is immersed in the bosom of the Divinity, the Source
of all goodness and beauty. With woman the heart is the great
receptacle of grace, the principal agent in the practice of piety and
virtue. If this precious disposition of her heart offers many and
great advantages, it carries with it also its inconveniences. The
heart is a near neighbor of the imagination, and the latter often
allures the former by its charms. Its activity is often developed and
exercised at the expense of the will, by diminishing and enfeebling
the power and influence of the latter. It not unfrequently happens
that the heart becomes the seat of dangerous illusions, when it not
only favors, but even indulges in that tender and sensible piety,
which is founded on and fed by lively sentiments and beautiful
images. In this state it costs no little effort to will and act.

The reading of a pious book, the meditating on the mysteries of the
passion and death of our Saviour will melt the heart to tenderness.
Thus, nature has a greater share than grace in piety and fervor of
this stamp. Self-complacency and self-love are here most adroitly
concealed under the garb of humility, and it requires a rare sagacity
to discover their presence. The Christian soul in this state seeks
not to please God or others, but it seeks rather its own pleasure,
and for many women this kind of piety is a form of affectation and
vanity. With those fine sentiments and enthusiastic transports they
remain unmortified, vain and curious lovers of flattery and averse to
reproof, retaining all their faults, which they endeavor to conceal
under the mask of external piety.

Do not ask such women to bridle their will or to restrain the
sallies of their humor,--speak not to them of the good derived from
self-mortification, self-abnegation and the love of the Cross,--words
such as these have no signification for them. They are satisfied with
simply feeling and giving expression to those virtues, after the
manner of artists who, by a happy disposition of mind, are expert in
becoming penetrated with ideas and sentiments in which their will has
no part whatever; and which have no moral influence over their life.

They are delighted to go with Jesus on Mount Tabor and contemplate
Him in the splendor of His glory; but when there is question of
participating in His ignominy on Calvary they most shamefully abandon
Him. And when He asks them to aid Him to carry His cross they do it,
if at all, as reluctantly as did Simon of Cyrene. They willingly
multiply prayers and exterior practices of piety, which flatter
natural inclinations; they frequent the Sacraments, and this
furnishes them the occasion and means of producing those lively and
tender sentiments upon which the heart loves to feast.

Their doleful condition is rendered still more deplorable by the use
of the most sacred things to nourish their self-love and sensibility.
Grace, according to their views of the spiritual life, is only a
means to render natural sensibility more delicate and refined. Thus,
led on from one delusion to another, such women come to the end of
their life, rich in foliage and flowers, but without ever having
produced any fruit.

I hope, dear reader, that such may not be your case; but, to avoid
all error on a point of such vital interest, meditate constantly on
the divine instructions that Jesus has left us in the Sacred
Scriptures, and on those also with which He inspired the pious author
of the "Following of Christ," their most perfect commentator. Learn
to discern genuine piety from that which bears only the name. Learn
to distinguish between its object and that which is only a means to
attain that object,--two things which are frequently and erroneously
confounded, yet which are very distinct and very different from each
other; for it is a great mistake to neglect the end by attaching too
much importance to the means by which to attain it.

Piety does not consist in sublime language, mystical thoughts, or
angelical sentiments, for, according to St. Paul, we might speak the
language of angels and be still only sounding brass; neither does it
consist in the knowledge of divine mysteries, nor in the more
excellent intellectual gifts; for, according to the same apostle, a
man might be a prophet and possess a knowledge of all science,
without being on that account anything in the sight of God.

Faith is truly grand, because it is the principal basis of our
justification; and because with it we are enabled to obtain all
things from God. Nevertheless, man might have faith strong enough to
move mountains and be absolutely nothing before God. Charity to the
poor, compassion for the unfortunate are indeed excellent virtues,
because they cancel numerous sins, and because they seem to form the
principal matter of that terrible judgment which will decide our weal
or woe for eternity; yet you might distribute all your wealth among
the poor, and still merit no reward from God.

We are recommended by the Holy Scriptures and by the masters of the
spiritual life to practice mortification, the perfection of which is
found in martyrdom; and nevertheless, though you should even lacerate
your body till it became one bleeding wound, and deliver it into the
hands of the executioner to be burned, you might gain nothing thereby.

None of all those things constitutes the essence of piety. One thing
alone can claim this privilege and that is CHARITY, not that charity
which consists merely in _feeling_ and _speaking_, but a
_charity that is active_, and which penetrates the entire life
by its divine, influence; that charity which is patient and
beneficent, not envious, dealing not perversely, not puffed up. True
charity is not ambitious seeks not its own, is not provoked to anger,
thinks no evil, does not rejoice in iniquity but for the good it
beholds everywhere, it bears all things, believes all things, hopes
all things and endures all things; such is the soul of true piety
according to the Apostle St. Paul. (Cor. I Epist., xiii chap.)

Our divine Lord clearly defines its nature in the following terms:
"_If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross, and follow me, for he that will save his life, shall lose
it, and he that shall lose his life for my sake shall find it._"
(Matth. ch. xvi.) To be a Christian consists in walking in the
footsteps of Jesus Christ. Hence, to follow Him and carry the cross,
self-denial is the first and most necessary qualification. In order
to enjoy the eternal happiness of the future life we must sacrifice
the false joys of earth. Again, He tells us: "_The kingdom of
heaven suffereth violence, and the violent bear it away_," that is
to say, _the valiant, the energetic, and persevering_, will
alone succeed in securing it; for the words _bear away_ express
the action of one that seizes a prey. Add to these texts those others
of St. Paul: _"If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none
of his,"_ that is--he does not belong to Christ, he is not His
disciple; and _"they that are Christ's have crucified their flesh
with the vices and concupiscences."_

Now I would not have you think that the piety of which I speak is
too elevated for you, that it can he practiced only by members of
religious orders, and very holy laics--this is by no means the case.
What is required of you is nothing more than what our Lord and all
the saints would have you do.

I must point out another error not less pernicious to the practice
of true piety, namely; that of taking the means to the acquisition of
piety as the end for which you practice it, for the means should at
all times be appreciated according to their just value, or according
to the assistance they give you to attain your end as a true
Christian, which consists in dying to self and to self-glory. I would
not have you judge of your progress in perfection by the number of
your communions, or the multitude of your pious practices, or the
length of your prayers, but by the victories which you gain over
yourself, over your passions, your character, and your temper.

Like all other good things, you can turn prayer to your spiritual
detriment, when you have recourse to it through vain glory. Be
thoroughly convinced of the truth expressed by the Evangelist St.
John, _that he is a liar who says that he loves God, and does not
keep his commandments._ Remember that the spirit of darkness, as
St. Paul tells us, can, and often does, transform himself into an
angel of light, and produce in the mind false lights, which dazzle
and blind it.

Now that you know in what the essence of piety consists, you ought
to learn in what faculty of the soul it resides, and this knowledge
will preserve you from many illusions, and point out to you the
direction in which you must advance in order to attain your end.

Piety, should, by its divine influence, penetrate all the faculties
of the soul and take possession of your whole being; it ought, as we
have said above, to make its presence especially felt in your heart,
by purifying all its affections; but its principal abode should be in
the will, through which it may reach all the other faculties in order
to elevate and vivify them.

The will is, indeed, if I may so speak, the organ or the instrument
of sacrifice and duty; and since piety properly consists in sacrifice
and duty, in suppressing the inordinate appetites of the human heart,
and elevating nature above herself, the will is the faculty in which
piety should reside.

It is not an easy matter to be truly pious, for, in order to attain
to a superior order of spiritual perfection, we must lay aside
_self_ which paralyzes all the generous movements of the soul,--
we must also faithfully correspond to divine grace. All this entails
much difficulty, many struggles, and, consequently, great and
constant efforts.

Every being has a tendency, founded on an imperious instinct, to
dwell in its natural sphere, which it can not leave even to enter a
superior one without making a great effort. Hence, the Holy Ghost
warns him who desires to serve God to prepare for temptation and
struggle. Now, among all the faculties of the soul, the will is the
best disposed for the combat, because pleasure has a smaller share in
its movements than in those of the heart and imagination; it is able,
when necessary, to rise superior to the most alluring charms,
preferring fidelity to duty with all its difficulties and bitterness.

To be pious implies the faithful observance of God's commandments,
_"If you love me,"_ says Christ, _"keep my commandments;"_
it consists in being resigned to the will of God, ready to be
disposed of at His good pleasure. To do this you must place all your
faculties, and especially your will at His disposal. God has reserved
to Himself the right of acting in an intimate and profound manner
upon the will. This faculty is His sanctuary, in which He delights to
dwell, and operate the prodigies of His grace and love, which He
communicates with unbounded prodigality to His elect.

This is the throne upon which He silently engraves the image of His
divine Son, the essential characteristic of predestination. It is in
this power of the human soul that He plants in the depth of Christian
humility the foundation of solid virtue, in defiance to the disorders
of the mind, the agitations of the heart and the incoherencies of the
memory.

From the bosom of the Divinity our Blessed Lord brought with Him two
special favors, one of which was for His eternal Father, and the
other to be given persons of good-will. He charged His angels to
announce them to the world in the person of the shepherds. They were,
glory for His Father and peace for men, but only for men of good-
will. This heavenly peace is a foretaste of the never-ending joys of
Paradise. It is a prize worth striving for, and easy to secure, at
least for you, since it is promised to all persons of good-will.




CHAPTER XII.


VOCATION.

God, who has created all things by His own power, conserves them by
an act of His divine love; and by His providence leads them to their
appointed destiny through ways conformable to their own nature. He
did not create man to live a solitary being, and, consequently,
implanted in his heart an instinctive need of society; desiring that
the latter should effectively contribute to the development of the
faculties of soul and body. And, as society cannot subsist without a
certain variety of conditions, and functions, which lend each other
mutual aid, He has planted in our souls certain dispositions in
harmony with the particular state of life to which He has destined
us. This is what is called _vocation_.

