exceedingly beautiful, that mountain is the haunt of the gods and the
Gandharvas. It is immeasurable and unapproachable by men of manifold sins.
Dreadful beasts of prey wander over its breasts, and it is illuminated by
many divine life-giving herbs. It stands kissing the heavens by its height
and is the first of mountains. Ordinary people cannot even think of
ascending it. It is graced with trees and streams, and resounds with the
charming melody of winged choirs. Once the celestials sat on its begemmed
peak in conclave. They who had practised penances and observed excellent
vows for amrita now seemed to be eager seekers after amrita (celestial
ambrosia). Seeing the celestial assembly in anxious mood Narayana said to
Brahman, 'Do thou churn the Ocean with the gods and the Asuras. By doing
so, amrita will be obtained as also all drugs and gems. O ye gods, churn
the Ocean, ye will discover amrita.'"

So ends the seventeenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XVIII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "There is a mountain called Mandara adorned with cloud-like
peaks. It is the best of mountains, and is covered all over with
intertwining herbs. There countless birds pour forth their melodies, and
beasts of prey roam about. The gods, the Apsaras and the Kinnaras visit
the place. Upwards it rises eleven thousand yojanas, and descends
downwards as much. The gods wanted to tear it up and use it as a churning
rod but failing to do so came to Vishnu and Brahman who were sitting
together, and said unto them, 'Devise some efficient scheme, consider, ye
gods, how Mandara may be dislodged for our good.'"

Sauti continued, "O son of Bhrigu! Vishnu with Brahman assented to it.
And the lotus-eyed one (Vishnu) laid the hard task on the mighty Ananta,
the prince of snakes. The powerful Ananta, directed thereto both by
Brahman and Narayana, O Brahmana, tore up the mountain with the woods
thereon and with the denizens of those woods. And the gods came to the
shore of the Ocean with Ananta and addressed the Ocean, saying, 'O Ocean,
we have come to churn thy waters for obtaining nectar.' And the Ocean
replied, 'Be it so, as I shall not go without a share of it. I am able to
bear the prodigious agitation of my waters set up by the mountain.' The
gods then went to the king of tortoises and said to him, 'O Tortoise-king,
thou wilt have to hold the mountain on thy back!' The Tortoise-king agreed,
and Indra contrived to place the mountain on the former's back.

"And the gods and the Asuras made of Mandara a churning staff and Vasuki
the cord, and set about churning the deep for amrita. The Asuras held
Vasuki by the hood and the gods held him by the tail. And Ananta, who was
on the side of the gods, at intervals raised the snake's hood and suddenly
lowered it. And in consequence of the stretch Vasuki received at the hands
of the gods and the Asuras, black vapours with flames issued from his
mouth. These, turned into clouds charged with lightning, poured showers
that refreshed the tired gods. And flowers that also fell on all sides of
the celestials from the trees on the whirling Mandara, refreshed them.

"Then, O Brahmana, out of the deep came a tremendous roar like unto the
roar of the clouds at the Universal Dissolution. Diverse aquatic animals
being crushed by the great mountain gave up the ghost in the salt waters.
And many denizens of the lower regions and the world of Varuna were killed.
Large trees with birds on the whirling Mandara were torn up by the roots
and fell into the water. The mutual friction of those trees also produced
fires that blazed up frequently. The mountain thus looked like a mass of
dark clouds charged with lightning. O Brahmana, the fire spread, and
consumed the lions, elephants and other creatures that were on the
mountain. Then Indra extinguished that fire by pouring down heavy showers.

"After the churning, O Brahmana, had gone on for some time, gummy
exudations of various trees and herbs vested with the properties of amrita
mingled with the waters of the Ocean. And the celestials attained to
immortality by drinking of the water mixed with those gums and with the
liquid extract of gold. By degrees, the milky water of the agitated deep
turned into clarified butter by virtue of those gums and juices. But
nectar did not appear even then. The gods came before the boon-granting
Brahman seated on his seat and said, 'Sire, we are spent up, we have no
strength left to churn further. Nectar hath not yet arisen so that now we
have no resource save Narayana.'

"On hearing them, Brahman said to Narayana, 'O Lord, condescend to grant
the gods strength to churn the deep afresh.'

"Then Narayana agreeing to grant their various prayers, said, 'Ye wise
ones, I grant you sufficient strength. Go, put the mountain in position
again and churn the water.'

"Re-established thus in strength, the gods recommenced churning. After a
while, the mild Moon of a thousand rays emerged from the Ocean. Thereafter
sprung forth Lakshmi dressed in white, then Soma, then the White Steed,
and then the celestial gem Kaustubha which graces the breast of Narayana.
Then Lakshmi, Soma and the Steed, fleet as the mind, all came before the
gods on high. Then arose the divine Dhanwantari himself with the white
vessel of nectar in his hand. And seeing him, the Asuras set up a loud cry,
saying, 'It be ours.'

"And at length rose the great elephant, Airavata, of huge body and with
two pair of white tusks. And him took Indra the wielder of the thunderbolt.
But with the churning still going on, the poison Kalakuta appeared at last.
Engulfing the Earth it suddenly blazed up like a fire attended with fumes.
And by the scent of the fearful Kalakuta, the three worlds were stupefied.
And then Siva, being solicited by Brahman, swallowed that poison for the
safety of the creation. The divine Maheswara held it in his throat, and it
is said that from that time he is called Nilakantha (blue-throated).
Seeing all these wondrous things, the Asuras were filled with despair, and
got themselves prepared for entering into hostilities with the gods for
the possession of Lakshmi and Amrita. Thereupon Narayana called his
bewitching Maya (illusive power) to his aid, and assuming the form of an
enticing female, coquetted with the Danavas. The Danavas and the Daityas
charmed with her exquisite beauty and grace lost their reason and
unanimously placed the Amrita in the hands of that fair damsel."

So ends the eighteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XIX

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Then the Daityas and the Danavas equipped with first-class
armours and various weapons attacked the gods. In the meantime the valiant
Lord Vishnu in the form of an enchantress accompanied by Nara deceived the
mighty Danavas and took away the Amrita from their hands.

"And all the gods at that time of great fright drank the Amrita with
delight, receiving it from Vishnu. And while the gods were partaking of it,
after which they had so much hankered, a Danava named Rahu was also
drinking it among them in the guise of a god. And when the Amrita had
reached Rahu's throat only, Surya and Soma (recognised him and) intimated
the fact to the gods. And Narayana instantly cut off with his discus the
well-adorned head of the Danava who was drinking the Amrita without
permission. And the huge head of the Danava, cut off by the discus and
resembling a mountain peak, then rose up to the sky and began to utter
dreadful cries. And the Danava's headless trunk, falling upon the ground
and rolling thereon, made the Earth tremble with her mountains, forests
and islands. And from that time there is a long-standing quarrel between
Rahu's head and Surya and Soma. And to this day it swalloweth Surya and
Soma (during solar and lunar eclipses).

"Then Narayana quitting his enchanting female form and hurling many
terrible weapons at the Danavas, made them tremble. And thus on the shores
of the salt-water sea, commenced the dreadful battle of the gods and the
Asuras. And sharp-pointed javelins and lances and various weapons by
thousands began to be discharged on all sides. And mangled with the discus
and wounded with swords, darts and maces, the Asuras in large numbers
vomited blood and lay prostrate on the earth. Cut off from the trunks with
sharp double-edged swords, heads adorned with bright gold, fell
continually on the field of battle. Their bodies drenched in gore, the
great Asuras lay dead everywhere. It seemed as if red-dyed mountain peaks
lay scattered all around. And when the Sun rose in his splendour,
thousands of warriors struck one another with weapons. And cries of
distress were heard everywhere. The warriors fighting at a distance from
one another brought one another down by sharp iron missiles, and those
fighting at close quarters slew one another with blows of their fists. And
the air was filled with shrieks of distress. Everywhere were heard the
alarming sounds,--'cut', 'pierce', 'at them', 'hurl down', 'advance'.

"And when the battle was raging fiercely, Nara and Narayana entered the
field. And Narayana seeing the celestial bow in the hand of Nara, called
to mind his own weapon, the Danava-destroying discus. And lo! the discus,
Sudarsana, destroyer of enemies, like to Agni in effulgence and dreadful
in battle, came from the sky as soon as thought of. And when it came,
Narayana of fierce energy, possessing arms like the trunk of an elephant,
hurled with great force that weapon of extraordinary lustre, effulgent as
blazing fire, dreadful and capable of destroying hostile towns. And that
discus blazing like the fire that consumeth all things at the end of Yuga,
hurled with force from the hands of Narayana, and falling constantly
everywhere, destroyed the Daityas and the Danavas by thousands. Sometimes
it blazed like fire and consumed them all; sometimes it struck them down
as it coursed through the sky; and sometimes, falling on the earth, it
drank their life-blood like a goblin.

"On the other hand, the Danavas, white as the clouds from which the rain
hath dropped, possessing great strength and bold hearts, ascended the sky,
and by hurling down thousands of mountains, continually harassed the gods.
And those dreadful mountains, like masses of clouds, with their trees and
flat tops, falling from the sky, collided with one another and produced a
tremendous roar. And when thousands of warriors shouted without
intermission in the field of battle and mountains with the woods thereon
began to fall around, the earth with her forests trembled. Then the divine
Nara appeared at the scene of the dreadful conflict between the Asuras and
the Ganas (the followers of Rudra), and reducing to dust those rocks by
means of his gold-headed arrows, he covered the heavens with dust. Thus
discomfited by the gods, and seeing the furious discus scouring the fields
of heaven like a blazing flame, the mighty Danavas entered the bowels of
the earth, while others plunged into the sea of salt-waters.

"And having gained the victory, the gods offered due respect to Mandara
and placed him again on his own base. And the nectar-bearing gods made the
heavens resound with their shouts, and went to their own abodes. And the
gods, on returning to the heavens, rejoiced greatly, and Indra and the
other deities made over to Narayana the vessel of Amrita for careful
keeping."

And so ends the nineteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XX

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Thus have I recited to you the whole story of how Amrita was
churned out of the Ocean, and the occasion on which the horse
Uchchaihsravas of great beauty and incomparable prowess was obtained. It
was this horse about which Kadru asked Vinata, saying, 'Tell me, amiable
sister, without taking much time, of what colour Uchchaishravas is.' And
Vinata answered, 'That prince of steeds is certainly white. What dost thou
think, sister? Say thou what is its colour. Let us lay a wager upon it.'
Kadru replied, then, 'O thou of sweet smiles, I think that horse is black
in its tail. Beauteous one, bet with me that she who loseth will become
the other's slave.'"

Sauti continued, "Thus wagering with each other about menial service as a
slave, the sisters went home, and resolved to satisfy themselves by
examining the horse next day. And Kadru, bent upon practising a deception,
ordered her thousand sons to transform themselves into black hair and
speedily cover the horse's tail in order that she might not become a slave.
But her sons, the snakes, refusing to do her bidding, she cursed them,
saying, 'During the snake-sacrifice of the wise king Janamejaya of the
Pandava race, Agni shall consume you all.' And the Grandsire (Brahman)
himself heard this exceedingly cruel curse pronounced by Kadru, impelled
by the fates. And seeing that the snakes had multiplied exceedingly, the
Grandsire, moved by kind consideration for his creatures, sanctioned with
all the gods this curse of Kadru. Indeed, as the snakes were of virulent
poison, great prowess and excess of strength, and ever bent on biting
other creatures, their mother's conduct towards them--those persecutors of
all creatures,--was very proper for the good of all creatures. Fate always
inflicts punishment of death on those who seek the death of other
creatures. The gods, having exchanged such sentiments with one another,
supported Kadru's action (and went away). And Brahman, calling Kasyapa to
him, spake unto him these words, 'O thou pure one who overcomest all
enemies, these snakes begotten by you, who are of virulent poison and huge
bodies, and ever intent on biting other creatures, have been cursed by
their mother. O son, do not grieve for it in the least. The destruction of
the snakes in the sacrifice hath, indeed, been ordained long ago.' Saying
this, the divine Creator of the Universe comforted Kasyapa and imparted to
that illustrious one the knowledge of neutralising poison."

And so ends the twentieth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XXI

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Then when the night had passed away and the sun had risen in
the morning, O thou whose wealth is asceticism, the two sisters Kadru and
Vinata, having laid a wager about slavery, went with haste and impatience
to view the steed Uchchaishravas from a near point. On their way they saw
the Ocean, that receptacle of waters, vast and deep, rolling and
tremendously roaring, full of fishes large enough to swallow the whale,
and abounding with huge makaras and creatures of various forms by
thousands, and rendered inaccessible by the presence of other terrible,
monster-shaped, dark, and fierce aquatic animals, abounding with tortoises
and crocodiles, the mine of all kinds of gems, the home of Varuna (the
water-God), the excellent and beautiful residence of the Nagas, the lord
of all rivers, the abode of the subterranean fire, the friend (or asylum)
of the Asuras, the terror of all creatures, the grand reservoir of water,
and ever immutable. It is holy, beneficial to the gods, and is the great
source of nectar; without limits, inconceivable, sacred, and highly
wonderful. It is dark, terrible with the sound of aquatic creatures,
tremendously roaring, and full of deep whirl-pools. It is an object of
terror to all creatures. Moved by the winds blowing from its shores and
heaving high, agitated and disturbed, it seems to dance everywhere with
uplifted hands represented by its surges. Full of swelling billows caused
by the waxing and waning of the moon the parent of Vasudeva's great conch
called Panchajanya, the great mine of gems, its waters were formerly
disturbed in consequence of the agitation caused within them by the Lord
Govinda of immeasurable prowess when he had assumed the form of a wild
boar for raising the (submerged) Earth. Its bottom, lower than the nether
regions, the vow observing regenerate Rishi Atri could not fathom after
(toiling for) a hundred years. It becomes the bed of the lotus-naveled
Vishnu when at the termination of every Yuga that deity of immeasurable
power enjoys yoga-nidra, the deep sleep under the spell of spiritual
meditation. It is the refuge of Mainaka fearful of falling thunder, and
the retreat of the Asuras overcome in fierce encounters. It offers water
as sacrificial butter to the blazing fire issuing from the mouth of Varava
(the Ocean-mare). It is fathomless and without limits, vast and
immeasurable, and the lord of rivers.

"And they saw that unto it rushed mighty rivers by thousands with proud
gait, like amorous competitors, each eager for meeting it, forestalling
the others. And they saw that it was always full, and always dancing in
its waves. And they saw that it was deep and abounding with fierce whales
and makaras. And it resounded constantly with the terrible sounds of
aquatic creatures. And they saw that it was vast, and wide as the expanse
of space, unfathomable, and limitless, and the grand reservoir of water."

And so ends the twenty-first section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XXII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "The Nagas after consultation arrived at the conclusion that
they should do their mother's bidding, for if she failed in obtaining her
desire she might withdraw her affection and burn them all. If, on the
other hand, she were graciously inclined, she might free them from her
curse. They said, 'We will certainly render the horse's tail black.' And
it is said that they then went and became hairs in the horse's tail.

"Now the two co-wives had laid the wager. And having laid the wager, O
best of Brahmanas, the two sisters Kadru and Vinata, the daughters of
Daksha, proceeded in great delight along the sky to see the other side of
the Ocean. And on their way they saw the Ocean, that receptacle of waters,
incapable of being easily disturbed, mightily agitated all of a sudden by
the wind, and roaring tremendously; abounding with fishes capable of
swallowing the whale and full of makaras; containing also creatures of
diverse forms counted by thousands; frightful from the presence of
horrible monsters, inaccessible, deep, and terrible, the mine of all kinds
of gems, the home of Varuna (the water-god), the wonderful habitations of
the Nagas, the lord of rivers, the abode of the subterranean fire; the
residence of the Asuras and of many dreadful creatures; the reservoir of
water, not subject to decay, aromatic, and wonderful, the great source of
the amrita of the celestials; immeasurable and inconceivable, containing
waters that are holy, filled to the brim by many thousands of great rivers,
dancing as it were in waves. Such was the Ocean, full of rolling waves,
vast as the expanse of the sky, deep, of body lighted with the flames of
subterranean fire, and roaring, which the sisters quickly passed over."

And so ends the twenty-second section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.



SECTION XXIII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Having crossed the Ocean, Kadru of swift speed, accompanied
by Vinata, soon alighted near the horse. They then both beheld that
foremost of steeds of great speed, with body white as the rays of the moon
but having black hairs (in the tail). And observing many black hairs in
the tail, Kadru put Vinata, who was deeply dejected, into slavery. And
thus Vinata having lost the wager, entered into a state of slavery and
became exceedingly sorry.

"In the meantime, when his time came, burst forth from the egg without
(the help of his) mother, Garuda of great splendour, enkindling all the
points of the universe, that mighty being endued with strength, that bird
capable of assuming at will any form, of going at will everywhere, and of
calling to his aid at will any measure of energy. Effulgent like a heap of
fire, he shone terribly. Of lustre equal to that of the fire at the end of
the Yuga, his eyes were bright like the lightning-flash. And soon after
birth, that bird grew in size and increasing his body ascended the skies.
Fierce and vehemently roaring, he looked as terrible as second Ocean-fire.
And all the deities seeing him, sought the protection of Vibhavasu (Agni).
And they bowed down to that deity of manifold forms seated on his seat and
spake unto him these words, 'O Agni, extend not thy body! Wilt thou
consume us? Lo, this huge heap of thy flames is spreading wide!' And Agni
replied, 'O, ye persecutors of the Asuras, it is not as ye imagine. This
is Garuda of great strength and equal to me in splendour, endued with
great energy, and born to promote the joy of Vinata. Even the sight of
this heap of effulgence hath caused this delusion in you. He is the mighty
son of Kasyapa, the destroyer of the Nagas, engaged in the well-being of
the gods, and the foe of the Daityas and the Rakshasas. Be not afraid of
it in the least. Come with me and see.' Thus he addressed the gods from a
distance.

"The gods said, 'Thou art a Rishi (i.e., one cognisant of all mantras),
sharer of the largest portion in sacrifices, ever resplendent, the
controller along with the Rishi wended their way towards Garuda and adored
him of birds, the presiding spirit of the animate and the inanimate
universe. Thou art the destroyer of all, the creator of all; thou art the
very Hiranyagarbha; thou art the progenitor of creation in the form of
Daksha and the other Prajapatis; thou art Indra (the king of the gods),
thou art Hayagriva the steed necked incarnation of Vishnu; thou art the
arrow (Vishnu himself, as he became such in the hands of Mahadeva at the
burning of Tripura); thou art the lord of the universe; thou art the mouth
of Vishnu; thou art the four-faced Padmaja; thou art the Brahmana (i.e.,
wise), thou art Agni, Pavana, etc. (i.e., the presiding deity of every
object in the universe). Thou art knowledge, thou art the illusion to
which we are all subject; thou art the all-pervading spirit; thou art the
lord of the gods; thou art the great Truth; thou art fearless; thou art
ever unchanged; thou art Brahma without attributes; thou art the energy of
the Sun; thou art the intellectual functions; thou art our great protector;
thou art the ocean of holiness; thou art purity; thou art bereft of the
attributes of darkness; thou art the possessor of the six high attributes;
thou art he who cannot be withstood in contest. From thee have emanated
all things; thou art of excellent deeds; thou art all that hath not been
and all that hath been. Thou art pure knowledge; thou displayest to us, as
Surya does by his rays, this animate and inanimate universe; thou
darkenest the splendour of Surya at every moment, and thou art the
destroyer of all; thou art all that is perishable and all that is
imperishable. O thou resplendent as Agni, thou burnest all even as Surya
in his anger burneth all creatures. O terrible one, thou resistest even as
the fire that destroys everything at the time of the Universal Dissolution.
O mighty Garuda who movest in the skies, we seek thy protection. O lord of
birds thy energy is extraordinary, thy splendour is that of fire, thy
brightness is like that of the lightning that no darkness can approach.
Thou reachest the very clouds, and art both the cause and the effect; the
dispenser of boons and invincible in prowess. O Lord, this whole universe
is rendered hot by thy splendour, bright as the lustre of heated gold.
Protect these high-souled gods, who overcome by thee and terrified withal,
are flying along the heavens in different directions on their celestial
cars. O thou best of birds, thou Lord of all, thou art the son of the
merciful and high-souled Rishi Kasyapa; therefore, be not wroth but have
mercy on the universe. Thou art Supreme. O pacify thy anger and preserve
us. At thy voice, loud as the roar of the thunder, the ten points, the
skies, the heavens, the Earth and our hearts, O bird, thou art
continuously shaking. O, diminish this thy body resembling Agni. At the
sight of the splendour resembling that of Yama when in wrath, our hearts
lose all equanimity and quake. O thou lord of birds, be propitious to us
who solicit thy mercy! O illustrious one, bestow on us good fortune and
joy.'

"And that bird of fair feathers, thus adored by the deities and diverse
sections of Rishis, reduced his own energy and splendour."

And thus ends the twenty-third section in the Astika Parva of the Adi
Parva.


SECTION XXIV

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Then hearing of and beholding his own body, that bird of
beautiful feathers diminished its size.

"And Garuda said, 'Let no creature be afraid; as ye are in a fright at the
sight of my terrible form, I shall diminish my energy.'"

Sauti continued, "Then that bird capable of going everywhere at will,
that ranger of the skies capable of calling to his aid any measure of
energy, bearing Aruna on his back, wended from his father's home and
arrived at his mother's side on the other shore of the great ocean. And he
placed Aruna of great splendour in the eastern regions, just at a time
when Surya had resolved to burn the worlds with his fierce rays."

Saunaka said, "When did the revered Surya resolve at the time to burn the
worlds? What wrong was done to him by the gods that provoked his ire?"

Sauti said, "O sinless one, when Rahu was drinking nectar among the gods
at the time of the churning of the ocean he was pointed out to the gods by
Surya and Soma, and from that time he conceived an enmity towards those
deities. And upon this Rahu sought to devour his afflictor (Surya), became
wroth, and thought, 'Oh, this enmity of Rahu towards me hath sprung from
my desire of benefiting the gods. And this dire consequence I alone have
to sustain. Indeed, at this pass help I obtain not. And before the very
eyes of the denizens of heaven I am going to be devoured and they brook it
quietly. Therefore, for the destruction of the worlds must I strive.' And
with this resolution he went to the mountains of the west.

"And from that place he began to radiate his heat around for the
destruction of the world. And then the great Rishis, approaching the gods,
spake unto them, 'Lo, in the middle of the night springeth a great heat
striking terror into every heart, and destructive of the three worlds.'
Then the gods, accompanied by the Rishis, wended to the Grandsire, and
said unto him, 'O what is this great heat today that causeth such panic?
Surya hath not yet risen, still the destruction (of the world) is obvious.
O Lord, what will happen when he doth rise?' The Grandsire replied,
'Indeed, Surya is prepared to rise today for the destruction of the world.
As soon as he will appear he will burn everything into a heap of ashes. By
me, however, hath the remedy been provided beforehand. The intelligent son
of Kasyapa is known to all by the name of Aruna. He is huge of body and of
great splendour; he shall stay in front of Surya, doing the duty of his
charioteer and taking away all the energy of the former. And this will
ensure the welfare of the worlds, of the Rishis, and of the dwellers in
heaven.'"

Sauti continued, "Aruna, at the behest of the Grandsire, did all that he
was ordered to do. And Surya rose veiled by Aruna's person. I have told
thee now why Surya was in wrath, and how Aruna, the brother of Garuda, was
appointed as his charioteer. Hear next of that other question asked by
thee a little while ago."

And so ends the twenty-fourth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.



SECTION XXV

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Then that bird of great strength and energy and capable of
going at will to every place repaired to his mother's side on the other
shore of the great ocean. Thither lived Vinata in affliction, defeated in
wager and put into a state of slavery. Once Kadru calling Vinata who had
prostrated herself before the former, addressed her these words in the
presence of her son, 'O gentle Vinata, there is in the midst of the ocean,
in a remote quarter, a delightful and fair region inhabited by the Nagas.
Bear me thither!' At this that mother of the bird of fair feathers bore
(on her shoulders) the mother of the snakes. And Garuda also, directed by
his mother's words, carried (on his back) the snakes. And that ranger of
the skies born of Vinata began to ascend towards the Sun. And thereupon
the snakes, scorched by the rays of the Sun, swooned away. And Kadru
seeing her sons in that state prayed to Indra, saying, 'I bow to thee,
thou Lord of all the gods! I bow to thee, thou slayer of Vritra! I bow to
thee, thou slayer of Namuchi! O thou of a thousand eyes, consort of Sachi!
By thy showers, be thou the protector of the snakes scorched by the Sun. O
thou best of the deities, thou art our great protector. O Purandara, thou
art able to grant rain in torrents. Thou art Vayu (the air), the clouds,
fire, and the lightning of the skies. Thou art the propeller of the clouds,
and hast been called the great cloud (i.e., that which will darken the
universe at the end of Yuga). Thou art the fierce and incomparable thunder,
and the roaring clouds. Thou art the Creator of the worlds and their
Destroyer. Thou art unconquered. Thou art the light of all creatures,
Aditya, Vibhavasu, and the wonderful elements. Thou art the ruler of all
the gods. Thou art Vishnu. Thou hast a thousand eyes. Thou art a god, and
the final resource. Thou art, O deity, all amrita, and the most adored
Soma. Thou art the moment, the lunar day, the bala (minute), thou art the
kshana (4 minutes). Thou art the lighted fortnight, and also the dark
fortnight. Thou art kala, thou kashtha, and thou Truti. Thou art the year,
the seasons, the months, the nights, and the days. Thou art the fair Earth
with her mountains and forests. Thou art also the firmament, resplendent
with the Sun. Thou art the great Ocean with heaving billows and abounding
with whales, swallowers of whales, and makaras, and various fishes. Thou
art of great renown, always adored by the wise and by the great Rishis
with minds rapt in contemplation. Thou drinkest, for the good of all
creatures, the Soma juice in sacrifices and the clarified butter offered
with sacred invocation. Thou art always worshipped at sacrifices by
Brahmanas moved by desire of fruit. O thou of incomparable mass of
strength, thou art sung in the Vedas and Vedangas. It is for that reason
that learned Brahmanas bent upon performing sacrifices, study the Vedas
with every care.'"

And so ends the twenty-fifth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XXVI

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "And then Indra, the king of gods, having the best of horses
for his bearer, thus adored by Kadru, covered the entire firmament with
masses of blue clouds. And he commanded the clouds, saying, 'Pour ye, your
vivifying and blessed drops!' And those clouds, luminous with lightning,
and incessantly roaring against each other in the welkin, poured abundant
water. And the sky, in consequence of those wonderful and terribly-roaring
clouds that were incessantly begetting vast quantities of water, looked as
if the end of Yuga had come. And in consequence of the myriads of waves
caused in the falling torrents, the deep roar of the clouds, the flashes
of lightning, the violence of the wind, and the general agitation, the sky
looked as if dancing in madness. The sky became overcast, and the rays of
the Sun and the Moon totally disappeared in consequence of that incessant
downpour.

"And upon Indra's causing that downpour, the Nagas became exceedingly
delighted. And the Earth was filled with water all around. And the cool,
clear water reached even the nether regions. And there were countless
waves of water all over the Earth. And the snakes with their mother
reached (in safety) the island called Ramaniyaka."

And so ends the twenty-sixth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XXVII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "And then the Nagas drenched by that shower, became
exceedingly glad. And borne by that bird of fair feathers, they soon
arrived at the island. That island had been fixed by the Creator of the
Universe as the abode of the makaras. There they saw the terrible Lavana
Samudra (ocean of salt). On arriving there with Garuda, they saw there a
beautiful forest washed by the waters of the sea and resounding with the
music of winged choirs. And there were clusters of trees all around laden
with various fruits and flowers. And there were also fair mansions all
around; and many tanks full of lotuses. And it was also adorned with many
lakes of pure water. And it was refreshed with pure incense-breathing
breezes. And it was adorned with many a tree that grew only on the hills
of Malaya, and seemed by their tallness to reach the very heavens. And
there were also various other trees whose flowers were scattered all
around by the breeze. And that forest was charming and dear to the
Gandharvas and always gave them pleasure. And it was full of bees maddened
with the honey they sucked. And the sight of all this was exceedingly
delightful. And in consequence of many things there, capable of charming
everybody, that forest was fair, delightful, and holy. And, echoing with
the notes of various birds, it delighted greatly the sons of Kadru.

"And the snakes, after arriving at that forest, began to enjoy themselves.
And they commanded the lord of birds, viz., Garuda, of great energy,
saying, 'Convey us to some other fair island with pure water. Thou ranger
of the skies, thou must have seen many fair regions while coursing
(through the air).' Garuda, after reflecting for a few moments, asked his
mother Vinata, saying, 'Why, mother, have I to do the bidding of the
snakes?' Vinata thus questioned by him spake unto that ranger of the skies,
her son, invested with every virtue, of great energy, and great strength,
as follows. Vinata said, 'O thou best of birds, I have become, from
misfortune, the slave of my co-wife. The snakes, by an act of deception,
caused me to lose my bet and have made me so.' When his mother had told
him the reason, that ranger of the skies, dejected with grief, addressed
the snakes, saying, 'Tell me, ye snakes, by bringing what thing, gaining a
knowledge of what thing, or doing what act of prowess, we may be freed
from this state of bondage to you.'"

Sauti continued, "The snakes, hearing him, said, 'Bring thou amrita by
force. Then O bird, shall you be freed from bondage.'"

And so ends the twenty-seventh section in the Astika Parva of the Adi
Parva.


SECTION XXVIII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Garuda, thus addressed by the snakes, then said unto his
mother, 'I shall go to bring amrita. I desire to eat something in the way.
Direct me to it.' Vinata replied, 'In a remote region in the midst of the
ocean, the Nishadas have their fair home. Having eaten the thousands of
Nishadas that live there, bring thou amrita. But let not thy heart be ever
set on taking the life of a Brahmana. Of all creatures a Brahmana must not
be slain. He is, indeed, like fire. A Brahmana, when angry, becomes like
fire or the Sun, like poison or an edged weapon. A Brahmana, it has been
said, is the master of all creatures. For these and other reasons, a
Brahmana is the adored of the virtuous. O child, he is never to be slain
by thee even in anger. Hostility with Brahmanas, therefore, would not be
proper under any circumstances. O sinless one, neither Agni nor Surya
truly can consume so much as does a Brahmana of rigid vows, when angry. By
these various indications must thou know a good Brahmana. Indeed, a
brahmana is the first-born of all creatures, the foremost of the four
orders, the father and the master of all.' Garuda then asked, 'O mother,
of what form is a Brahmana, of what behaviour, and of what prowess? Doth
he shine like fire, or is he of tranquil mien? And, O mother, it behoveth
thee to tell my inquiring self, those auspicious signs by which I may
recognise a Brahmana.' Vinata replied, saying, 'O child, him shouldst
thou know as the best amongst Brahmanas who having entered thy throat
would torture thee as a fish-hook or burn thee as blazing charcoal. A
Brahmana must never be slain by thee even in anger.' And Vinata out of
affection for her son, again told him these words, 'Him shouldst thou know
as a good Brahmana who would not be digested in thy stomach.' Although she
knew the incomparable strength of her son, yet she blessed him heartily,
for, deceived by the snakes, she was very much afflicted by woe. And she
said. 'Let Marut (the god of the winds) protect thy wings, and Surya and
Soma thy vertebral regions; let Agni protect thy head, and the Vasus thy
whole body. I also, O child (engaged in beneficial ceremonies), shall sit
here for your welfare. Go then, O child, in safety to accomplish thy
purpose.'"

Sauti continued, "Then Garuda, having heard the words of his mother,
stretched his wings and ascended the skies. And endued with great strength,
he soon fell upon the Nishadas, hungry and like another Yama. And bent
upon slaying the Nishadas, he raised a great quantity of dust that
overspread the firmament, and sucking up water from amid the ocean, shook
the trees growing on the adjacent mountains. And then that lord of birds
obstructed the principal thoroughfares of the town of the Nishadas by his
mouth, increasing its orifice at will. And the Nishadas began to fly in
great haste in the direction of the open mouth of the great serpent-eater.
And as birds in great affliction ascend by thousand into the skies when
the trees in a forest are shaken by the winds, so those Nishadas blinded
by the dust raised by the storm entered the wide-extending cleft of
Garuda's mouth open to receive them. And then the hungry lord of all
rangers of the skies, that oppressor of enemies, endued with great
strength, and moving with greatest celerity to achieve his end, closed his
mouth, killing innumerable Nishadas following the occupation of
fishermen."

So ends the twenty-eighth section in the Astika Parva of Adi Parva.


SECTION XXIX

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti continued, "A certain Brahmana with his wife had entered the throat
of that ranger of the skies. The former began to burn the bird's throat
like a piece of flaming charcoal. Him Garuda addressed, saying, 'O best of
Brahmanas, come out soon from my mouth which I open for thee. A Brahmana
must never be slain by me, although he may be always engaged in sinful
practices.' Unto Garuda who had thus addressed him that Brahmana said, 'O,
let this woman of the Nishada caste, who is my wife, also come out with
me.' And Garuda said, 'Taking the woman also of the Nishada caste with
thee, come out soon. Save thyself without delay since thou hast not yet
been digested by the heat of my stomach.'"

Sauti continued, "And then that Brahmana, accompanied by his wife of the
Nishada caste, came out, and praising Garuda wended whatever way he liked.
And when that Brahmana had come out with his wife, that lord of birds,
fleet as the mind, stretching his wings ascended the skies. He then saw
his father, and, hailed by him, Garuda, of incomparable prowess made
proper answers. And the great Rishi (Kasyapa) then asked him, 'O child, is
it well with thee? Dost thou get sufficient food every day? Is there food
in plenty for thee in the world of men?'

"Garuda replied, 'My mother is ever well. And so is my brother, and so am
I. But, father, I do not always obtain plenty of food, for which my peace
is incomplete. I am sent by the snakes to fetch the excellent amrita.
Indeed, I shall fetch it today for emancipating my mother from her bondage.
My mother command me, saying, "Eat thou the Nishadas." I have eaten them
by thousands, but my hunger is not appeased. Therefore, O worshipful one,
point out to me some other food, by eating which, O master, I may be
strong enough to bring away amrita by force. Thou shouldst indicate some
food wherewith I may appease my hunger and thirst.'

"Kasyapa replied, 'This lake thou seest is sacred. It hath been heard, of
even in the heavens. There is an elephant, with face downwards, who
continually draggeth a tortoise, his elder brother. I shall speak to you
in detail of their hostility in former life. Just listen as I tell you why
they are here.

"'There was of old a great Rishi of the name of Vibhavasu. He was
exceedingly wrathful. He had a younger brother of the name of Supritika.
The latter was averse to keeping his wealth jointly with his brother's.
And Supritika would always speak of partition. After some time his brother
Vibhavasu told Supritika, "It is from great foolishness that persons
blinded by love of wealth always desire to make a partition of their
patrimony. After effecting a partition they fight with each other, deluded
by wealth. Then again, enemies in the guise of friends cause estrangements
between ignorant and selfish men after they become separated in wealth,
and pointing out faults confirm their quarrels, so that the latter soon
fall one by one. Absolute ruin very soon overtakes the separated. For
these reasons the wise never speak approvingly of partition amongst
brothers who, when divided, do not regard the most authoritative Sastras
and live always in fear of each other. But as thou, Supritika, without
regarding my advice impelled by desire of separation, always wishest to
make an arrangement about your property, thou shall become an elephant."
Supritika, thus cursed, then spake unto Vibhavasu, "Thou also shall become
a tortoise moving in the midst of the waters."

"'And thus on account of wealth those two fools, Supritika and Vibhavasu,
from each other's curse, have become an elephant and a tortoise
respectively. Owing to their wrath, they have both become inferior animals.
And they are engaged in hostilities with each other, proud of their
excessive strength and the weight of their bodies. And in this lake those
two beings of huge bodies are engaged in acts according to their former
hostility. Look here, one amongst them, the handsome elephant of huge body,
is even now approaching. Hearing his roar, the tortoise also of huge body,
living within the waters, cometh out, agitating the lake violently. And
seeing him the elephant, curling his trunk, rusheth into the water. And
endued with great energy, with motion of his tusks and fore-part of his
trunk and tail and feet, he agitates the water of the lake abounding with
fishes. And the tortoise also of great strength, with upraised head,
cometh forward for an encounter. And the elephant is six yojanas in height
and twice that measure in circumference. And the height of the tortoise
also is three yojanas and his circumference ten. Eat thou up both of them
that are madly engaged in the encounter and bent upon slaying each other,
and then accomplish the task that thou desirest. Eating that fierce
elephant which looketh like a huge mountain and resembleth a mass of dark
clouds, bring thou amrita.'"

Sauti continued, "Having said so unto Garuda, he (Kasyapa) blessed him,
saying, 'Blest be thou when thou art in combat with the gods. Let water
pitchers filled to the brim, Brahmanas, kine, and other auspicious objects,
bless thee, thou oviparous one. And, O thou of great strength, when thou
