called an emperor. And, O monarch, king Sisupala endued with great
energy, hath placed himself under his protection and hath become the
generalissimo of his forces. And, O great king, the mighty Vaka, the
king of the Karushas, capable of fighting by putting forth his powers
of illusion, waiteth, upon Jarasandha, as his disciple. There are two
others, Hansa and Dimvaka, of great energy and great soul, who have
sought the shelter of the mighty Jarasandha. There are others also
viz., Dantavakra, Karusha, Karava, Meghavahana, that wait upon
Jarasandha. He also that beareth on his head that gem which is known as
the most wonderful on earth, that king of the Yavanas, who hath
chastised Muru and Naraka, whose power is unlimited, and who ruleth the
west like another Varuna, who is called Bhagadatta, and who is the old
friend of thy father, hath bowed his head before Jarasandha, by speech
and specially by act. In his heart, however, tied as he is by affection
to thee, he regardeth thee as a father regardeth his child. O king,
that lord of the earth who hath his dominions on the west and the
south, who is thy maternal uncle and who is called Purujit, that brave
perpetuator of the Kunti race, that slayer of all foes, is the single
king that regardeth thee from affection. He whom I did not formerly
slay, that wicked wretch amongst the Chedis, who represented himself in
this world as a divine personage and who hath become known also as
such, and who always beareth, from foolishness, the signs that
distinguish me that king of Vanga Pundra and the Kiratas, endowed with
great strength, and who is known on earth by the names of Paundraka and
Vasudeva hath also espoused the side of Jarasandha. And, O king of
kings, Bhishmaka, the mighty king of the Bhojas--the friend of
Indra--the slayer of hostile heroes--who governs a fourth part of the
world, who by his learning conquered the Pandyas and the
Kratha-Kausikas, whose brother the brave Akriti was like Rama, the son
of Jamdagni, hath become a servitor to the king of Magadha. We are his
relatives and are, therefore, engaged everyday in doing what is
agreeable unto him. But although we regard him much, still he regardeth
us not and is engaged in doing us ill. And, O king, without knowing his
own strength and the dignity of the race to which he belongeth, he hath
placed himself under Jarasandha's shelter at sight of the latter's
blazing fame alone. And, O exalted one, the eighteen tribes of the
Bhojas, from fear of Jarasandha, have all fled towards the west; so
also have the Surasenas, the Bhadrakas, the Vodhas, the Salwas, the
Patachchavas, the Susthalas, the Mukuttas, and the Kulindas, along with
the Kuntis. And the king of the Salwayana tribe with their brethren and
followers; and the southern Panchalas and the eastern Kosalas have all
fled to the country of the Kuntis. So also the Matsyas and the
Sannyastapadas, overcome with fear, leaving their dominions in the
north, have fled into the southern country. And so all the Panchalas,
alarmed at the power of Jarasandha, have left their own kingdom and
fled in all directions. Some time before, the foolish Kansa, having
persecuted the Yadavas, married two of the daughters of Jarasandha.
They are called Asti and Prapti and are the sister of Sahadeva.
Strengthened by such an alliance, the fool persecuting his relatives
gained an ascendency over them all. But by this conduct he earned great
obloquy. The wretch also began to oppress the old kings of the Bhoja
tribe, but they, to protect themselves from the persecution of their
relative, sought our help. Having bestowed upon Akrura the handsome
daughter of Ahuka, with Sankarshana as my second I did a service to my
relatives, for both Kansa and Sunaman were slain by me assisted by
Rama. But after the immediate cause of fear was removed (by the death
of Kansa), Jarasandha, his father-in-law, took up arms. Ourselves
consisting of the eighteen younger branches of the Yadavas arrived at
the conclusion that even if we struck our enemies continually with
excellent weapons capable of taking the lives of the foes, we should
still be unable to do anything unto him even in three hundred years. He
hath two friends that are like unto the immortals, and in point of
strength the foremost of all men endued with might. They are called
Hansa and Dimvaka who are both incapable of being slain by weapons. The
mighty Jarasandha, being united with them, becomes incapable, I think,
of being vanquished by even the three worlds. O thou foremost of all
intelligent men, this is not our opinion alone but all other kings also
are of the same mind. There lived, O monarch, a king of the name of
Hansa, who was slain by Rama (Valadeva) after a battle of eighteen
days. But, O Bharata, hearing people say that Hansa had been killed,
Dimvaka, O king, thought that he could not live without Hansa. He
accordingly jumped into the waters of the Yamuna and killed himself.
Afterwards when Hansa, the subjugator of hostile heroes, heard that
Dimvaka, had killed himself, he went to the Yamuna and jumped into its
waters. Then, O bull of the Bharata race, king Jarasandha, hearing that
both Hansa and Dimvaka had been killed, returned to his kingdom with an
empty heart. After Jarasandha had returned, O slayer of all foes, we
were filled with pleasure and continued to live at Mathura. Then the
widow of Hansa and the daughter of Jarasandha, that handsome woman with
eyes like lotus-petals, grieved at the death of her lord, went unto her
father, and repeatedly urged, O Monarch, the king of Magadha,
saying,--O slayer of all foes, kill thou the slayer of my
husband.--Then, O great king, remembering the conclusion to which we
had come of old we became exceedingly cheerless and fled from Mathura.
Dividing our large wealth into small portions so as to make each
portion easily portable, we fled from fear of Jarasandha, with our
cousins and relatives. Reflecting upon everything, we fled towards the
west. There is a delightful town towards the west called Kusasthali,
adorned by the mountains of Raivata. In that city, O monarch, we took
up our abode. We rebuilt its fort and made it so strong that it has
become impregnable even to the Gods. And from within it even the women
might fight the foe, what to speak of the Yadava heroes without fear of
any kind? O slayer of all foes, we are now living in that city. And, O
tiger of the Kuru race, considering the inaccessibility of that first
of mountains and regarding themselves as having already crossed the
fear of Jarasandha, the descendants of Madhu have become exceedingly
glad. Thus, O king, though possessed of strength and energy, yet from
the oppressions of Jarasandha we have been obliged to repair to the
mountains of Gomanta, measuring three Yojanas in length. Within each
yojana have been established one and twenty posts of armed men. And at
intervals of each yojana are hundred gates with arches which are
defended by valourous heroes engaged in guarding them. And innumerable
Kshatriyas invincible in war, belonging to the eighteen younger
branches of the Yadavas, are employed in defending these works. In our
race, O king, there are full eighteen thousand brothers and cousins.
Ahuka hath had a hundred sons, each of whom is almost like a god (in
prowess), Charudeshna with his brother Chakradeva, Satyaki, myself,
Valadeva the son of Rohini, and my son Samva who is equal unto me in
battle--these seven, O king are Atirathas. Besides these, there are
others, O king, whom I shall presently name. They are Kritavarman,
Anadhrishti, Samika, Samitinjaya, Kanka, Sanku and Kunti. These seven
are Maharathas. There are also two sons of Andhakabhoja, and the old
king himself. Endued with great energy these are all heroes, each
mighty as the thunderbolt. These Maharathas, choosing the middle
country, are now living amongst the Vrishnis. O thou best of the
Bharata line, thou alone art worthy of being an emperor. It behoveth
thee, O Bharata, to establish thy empire over all the Kshatriyas. But
this is my judgment, O king, that thou wilt not be able to celebrate
the Rajasuya sacrifice as long as the mighty Jarasandha liveth. By him
have been immured in his hillfort numerous monarchs, like a lion that
hath deposited the slain bodies of mighty elephants within a cave of
the king of mountains. O slayer of all enemies, king Jarasandha,
desirous of offering in sacrifice hundred monarchs, adored for his
fierce ascetic penances the illustrious god of gods, the lord of Uma.
It is by this means that the kings of the earth have been vanquished by
Jarasandha. And, O best of monarchs, he hath by that means been able to
fulfil the vow he had made relative to his sacrifice. By defeating the
kings with their troops and bringing all of them as captives into this
city, he had swelled its crowds enormously. We also, O king, from fear
of Jarasandha, at one time had to leave Mathura and fly to the city of
Dwaravati. If, O great king, thou desirest to perform this sacrifice,
strive to release the kings confined by Jarasandha, as also to compass
his death, O son of the Kuru race, otherwise this undertaking of thine
can never be completed. O thou foremost of intelligent men if the
Rajasuya is to be performed by thee, you must do this in this way and
not otherwise. This, O king, is my view (on the matter). Do, O sinless
one, as thou thinkest. Under these circumstances, O king, having
reflected upon everything, taking note of causes, tell us what thou
thyself thinkest proper."


SECTION XV

"Yudhishthira said,--'Intelligent as thou art, thou hast said what none
else is capable of saying. There is none else on earth who is settler
of all doubts. Behold, there are kings in every province employed in
benefiting their respective selves. But no one amongst them hath been
able to achieve the imperial dignity. Indeed, the title emperor is
difficult of acquisition. He that knoweth the valour and strength of
others never applaudeth himself. He, indeed, is really worthy of
applause (worship) who, engaged in encounters with his enemies, beareth
himself commendably. O thou supporter of the dignity of the Vrishni
race, man's desires and propensities, like the wide earth itself
adorned with many jewels, are varied and extensive. As experience can
seldom be gained but by travelling in regions remote from one's home,
so salvation can never be attained except by acting according to
principles that are very high, compared with the ordinary level of our
desire and propensities. I regard peace of mind as the highest object
here, for from that quality may proceed my prosperity. In my judgment,
if I undertake to celebrate this sacrifice, I shall never win the
highest reward. O Janardana, endued with energy and intelligence, these
that have been born in our race think that some one amongst them will
at one time become the foremost amongst all Kshatriyas. But, O exalted
one, we also were all frightened by the fear of Jarasandha and, O
sinless one, by the wickedness of that monarch. O thou invincible in
battle, the might of thy arm is my refuge. When, therefore, thou taken
fright at Jarasandha's might, how should I regard myself strong in
comparison with him? Madhava, O thou of the Vrishni race, I am
repeatedly depressed by the thought whether Jarasandha is capable or
not of being slain by thee, by Rama, by Bhimasena, or by Arjuna. But
what shall I say, O Keshava? Thou art my highest authority on
everything.'

"On hearing these words, Bhima well-skilled in speech said,--'That king
who is without exertion, or who being weak and without resources
entereth into hostility with one that is strong, perisheth like an
ant-hill. It may be generally seen, however, that even a king that is
weak may vanquish an enemy that is strong and obtain the fruition of
all his wishes, by wakefulness and by the application of policy. In
Krishna is policy, in myself strength, in Arjuna triumphs. So like the
three (sacrificial) fires that accomplish a sacrifice, we shall
accomplish the death of the king of Magadha.'

"Krishna then said,--'One that is immature in understanding seeketh the
fruition of his desire without an eye to what may happen to him in
future. It is seen that no one forgiveth for that reason a foe that is
of immature understanding and inclined to serve his own interests. It
hath been heard by us that in the krita age, having brought every one
under their subjection, Yauvanaswin by the abolition of all taxes,
Bhagiratha by his kind treatment to his subjects, Kartavirya by the
energy of his asceticism, the lord Bharata by his strength and valour,
and Maruta by his prosperity, all these five became emperors. But, O
Yudhishthira, thou who covetest the imperial dignity deserves it, not
by one but by all these qualities, viz., victory, protection afforded
to thy people, virtue, prosperity, and policy. Know, O bull of the Kuru
race, that Jarasandha, the son of Vrihadratha, is even such (i.e., a
candidate for the imperial dignity). A hundred dynasties of kings have
become unable to oppose Jarasandha. He, therefore, may be regarded to
be an emperor for his strength. Kings that are wearers of jewels
worship Jarasandha (with presents of jewels). But, wicked from his
childhood, he is scarcely satisfied with such worship. Having become
the foremost among all, he attacketh yet with violence kings with
crowns on their heads. Nor is there seen any king from whom he taketh
not tribute. Thus hath he brought under his sway nearly a hundred
kings. How can, O son of Pritha, any weak monarch approach him with
hostile intentions? Confined in the temple of Shiva and offered as
sacrifice unto him like so many animals, do not these monarchs
dedicated unto that god feel the most poignant misery, O bull of the
Bharata race? A Kshatriya that dieth in battle is ever regarded with
respect. Why shall we not, therefore, meet together and oppose
Jarsandha in battle? He hath already brought eighty-six kings; fourteen
only are wanting to complete one hundred. As soon as he obtaineth those
fourteen, he will begin his cruel act. He that shall be to obstruct
that act will surely win blazing renown. And he that will vanquish
Jarasandha will surely become the emperor of all the Kshatriyas.'


SECTION XVI

"Yudhishthira said,--'Desirous of the imperial dignity but acting from
selfish motives and relying upon courage alone, how, O Krishna, can I
despatch ye (unto Jarasandha)? Both Bhima and Arjuna, I regard as my
eyes, and thee, O Janardana as my mind. How shall I live, deprived of
my eyes and mind. Yama himself cannot vanquish in battle the mighty
host of Jarasandha that is endued, besides, with terrible valour. What
valour can ye exhibit against it. This affair that promises to
terminate otherwise may lead to great mischief. It is my opinion,
therefore, that the proposed task should not be undertaken. Listen, O
Krishna, to what I for one think. O Janardana, desisting from this act
seemeth to me to be beneficial. My heart to-day is afflicted. The
Rajasuya appeareth to me difficult of accomplishment.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Arjuna who had obtained that excellent of bows and
that couple of inexhaustible quivers, and that car with that banner, as
also that assembly room, now addressed Yudhishthira and said,--'I have
obtained, O king, a bow and weapons and arrows and energy and allies
and dominions and fame and strength. Those are always difficult of
acquisition, however much they may be desired. Learned men of repute
always praise in good society nobleness of descent. But nothing is
equal to might. Indeed, O monarch, there is nothing I like more than
prowess. Born in a race noted for its valour, one that is without
valour is scarcely worthy of regard. One, however, possessed of valour,
that is born in a race not noted for it, is much superior to the
former. He, O king, is a Kshatriya in every thing who increaseth his
fame and possessions by the subjugation of his enemies. And he that is
possessed of valour, though destitute of all (other) merits, will
vanquish his foes. One, however, that is destitute of valour, though
possessed of every (other) merit, can scarcely accomplish anything.
Every merit exists by the side of valour in an incipient state.
Concentration of attention, exertion and destiny exist as the three
causes of victory. One, however, that is possessed of valour doth not
yet deserve success if he acts carelessly. It is for this that an enemy
endued with strength sometimes suffers death at the hands of his foes.
As meanness overtakes the weak, so folly sometimes overtakes the
strong. A king, therefore, that is desirous of victory, should avoid
both these causes of destruction. If, for the purpose of our sacrifice,
we endeavour to slay Jarasandha and rescue the kings kept by him for a
cruel purpose, there is no higher act which we could employ ourselves
in. If, however, we do not undertake the task, the world will always
think us incompetent. We have certainly the competence, O king! Why
should you, therefore, regard us as incompetent? Those that have become
Munis desirous of achieving tranquillity of souls, obtain yellow robes
with ease. So if we vanquish the foe, the imperial dignity will easily
be ours. We shall, therefore fight the foe.'


SECTION XVII

"Vasudeva said,--'Arjuna hath indicated what the inclination should be
of one that is born in the Bharata race, especially of one who is the
son of Kunti. We know not when death will overtake us, in the night or
in the day. Nor have we ever heard that immortality hath been achieved
by desisting from fight. This, therefore, is the duty of men, viz., to
attack all enemies in accordance with the principles laid down in the
ordinance. This always gives satisfaction to the heart. Aided by good
policy, if not frustrated by Destiny, an undertaking becomes crowned
with success. If both parties aided by such means encounter each other,
one must obtain ascendency over the other, for both cannot win or lose.
A battle however, if directed by bad policy which again is destitute of
the well-known arts, ends in defeat or destruction. If, again, both
parties are equally circumstanced, the result becomes doubtful. Both,
however, cannot win. When such is the case, why should we not, aided by
good policy, directly approach the foe; and destroy him, like the
current of the river uprooting a tree? If, disguising our own faults,
we attack the enemy taking advantage of his loopholes, why should we
not succeed? Indeed, the policy of intelligent men, is that one should
not fight openly with foes that are exceedingly powerful and are at the
head of their well-arrayed forces. This too is my opinion. If, however,
we accomplish our purpose secretly entering the abode of our foe and
attacking his person, we shall never earn obloquy. That bull among
men--Jarasandha--alone enjoyeth unfaded glory, like unto him who is the
self in the heart of every created being. But I see his destruction
before me. Desirous of protecting our relatives we will either slay him
in battle or shall ascend to heaven being ourselves slain in the end by
him.'

"Yudhishthira said--'O Krishna, who is this Jarasandha? What is his
energy and what is his prowess, that having touched thee he hath not
been burnt like an insect at the touch of fire?'

"Krishna said,--'Hear, O monarch, who Jarasandha is; what his energy;
and what is his prowess; and why also he hath been spared by us, even
though he hath repeatedly offended us. There was a mighty king of the
name of Vrihadratha, the lord of the Magadhas. Proud in battle, he had
three Akshauhinis of troops. Handsome and endued with energy, possessed
of affluence and prowess beyond measure, and always bearing on his
person marks indicating installation at sacrifices. He was like a
second Indra. In glory he was like unto Suryya, in forgiveness like
unto the Earth, in wrath like unto the destroyer Yama and in wealth
like unto Vaisravana. And O thou foremost of the Bharata race, the
whole earth was covered by his qualities that descended upon him from a
long line of ancestors, like the rays emerging from the sun. And, O
bull of the Bharata race, endued with great energy that monarch married
two twin daughters of the king of Kasi, both endued with the wealth of
beauty. And that bull among men made an engagement in secret with his
wives that he would love them equally and would never show a preference
for either. And the lord of the earth in the company of his two dearly
loved wives, both of whom suited him well, passed his days in joy like
a mighty elephant in the company of two cow-elephants, or like the
ocean in his personified form between Ganga and Yamuna (also in their
personified forms). The monarch's youth however, passed away in the
enjoyment of his possessions, without any son being born unto him to
perpetuate his line. The best of monarch failed to obtain a son to
perpetuate his race, even by means of various auspicious rites, and
homas, and sacrifices performed with the desire for having an
offspring. One day the king heard that the high-souled Chanda-kausika,
the son of Kakshivat of the illustrious Gautama race, having desisted
from ascetic penances had come in course of his wanderings to his
capital and had taken his seat under the shade of a mango tree. The
king went unto that Muni accompanied by his two wives, and worshipping
him with jewels and valuable presents gratified him highly. That best
of Rishis truthful in speech and firmly attached to truth, then told
the king,--"O king of kings, I have been pleased with thee. O thou of
excellent vows, solicit thou a boon." King Vrihadratha then, with his
wives, bending low unto that Rishi, spoke these words choked with tears
in consequence of his despair of obtaining a child.--"O holy one
forsaking my kingdom I am about to go into the woods to practise
ascetic penances. I am very unfortunate for I have no son. What shall I
do, therefore, with my kingdom or with a boon?"'

"Krishna continued,--'Hearing these words (of the king), the Muni
controlling his outer senses entered into meditation, sitting in the
shade of that very mango tree where he was. And there fell upon the lap
of the seated Muni a mango that was juicy and untouched by the beak of
a parrot or any other bird. That best of Munis, taking up the fruit and
mentally pronouncing certain mantras over it, gave it unto the king as
the means of his obtaining an incomparable offspring. And the great
Muni, possessed also of extraordinary wisdom, addressing the monarch,
said,--"Return, O king, thy wish is fulfilled. Desist, O king, from
going (into the woods)".--Hearing these words of the Muni and
worshipping his feet, the monarch possessed of great wisdom, returned
to his own abode. And recollecting his former promise (unto them) the
king gave, O bull of the Bharata race, unto his two wives that one
fruit. His beautiful queens, dividing that single fruit into two parts,
ate it up. In consequence of the certainty of the realisation of the
Muni's words and his truthfulness, both of them conceived, as an effect
of their having eaten that fruit. And the king beholding them in that
state became filled with great joy. Then, O wise monarch, some time
after, when the time came, each of the queens brought forth a
fragmentary body. And each fragment had one eye, one arm, one leg, half
a stomach, half a face, and half an anus. Beholding the fragmentary
bodies, both the mothers trembled much. The helpless sisters then
anxiously consulted each other, and sorrowfully abandoned those
fragments endued with life. The two midwives (that waited upon the
queens) then carefully wrapping up the still-born (?) fragments went
out of the inner apartments (of the palace) by the back door and
throwing away the bodies, returned in haste. A little while after, O
tiger among men, a Rakshasa woman of the name of Jara living upon flesh
and blood, took up the fragments that lay on a crossing. And impelled
by force of fate, the female cannibal united the fragments for facility
of carrying them away. And, O bull among men, as soon as the fragments
were united they formed a sturdy child of one body (endued with life).
Then, O king, the female cannibal, with eyes expanded in wonder, found
herself unable to carry away that child having a body as hard and
strong as the thunder-bolt. That infant then closing his fists red as
copper and inserting them into its mouth, began to roar terribly as
rain-charged clouds. Alarmed at the sound, the inmates of the palace, O
tiger among men, suddenly came out with the king, O slayer of all foes.
The helpless and disappointed and sad queens also, with breasts full of
