authors gave to the Evangelists the names of Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John. Thus knowing the true signification of the Disciples and
Evangelists, the very pertinent question presents itself: If they are
not the genii of the months and the seasons, why are there just twelve
of the one and four of the other?

[See plate7.gif]


Half Year of Increasing Days.

In the ancient astrolatry, the half year of increasing days, extending
from the Winter to the Summer Solstice, was personified by the
composite figure representing the constellations of Taurus and
Aquarius, which, constituted of the winged body of a bull and the head
and beard of a man, was called the Cherubim. This personification we
find portrayed upon the Assyrian marbles on exhibition in the British
Museum.


Half Year of Decreasing Days.

The half year of decreasing days, extending from the Summer to the
Winter Solstice, was personified by the figure, which, representing the
constellations of Leo and Aquila, and composed of the winged body and
limbs of a lion, with the head of an eagle, was called the Seraphim.
These last two personifications constituted the Archangels of the
ancient Astral Worship.


Last Quarter of the Year.

The last quarter of the year was personified in the ancient allegories
as a decrepit old man, who, stung by a Scorpion (Scorpio), and fatally
wounded by an arrow from the quiver of an archer (Saggitarius) dies at
the Winter Solstice; and, after lying in the grave for the space of
three days, is brought to life again. Such was the personification
referred to in the Christian Gospel-story as having been raised from
the grave by the mandate, "Come forth, Lazarus." Thus have we shown
that the elders and the saints; the angels, and the Archangels; the
Cherubim and Seraphim; and also poor old Lazarus, are but
personifications of the several divisions of time.



ZODIACAL SYMBOLS OF SOLAR WORSHIP.

Having shown that the founders of the ancient astrolatry accorded
homage to God Sol as Lord of Evil, under the symbol of the serpent, and
marked the beginning of his reign, as such, by the constellation
"Serpens" placed in conjunction with the Autumnal Equinox; we will now
direct attention to the symbols under which he was worshipped as Lord
of Good, which, corresponding to the form of the constellation in which
occurred the Vernal Equinox, and which was changed to correspond to the
form of the succeeding constellation as that Cardinal point passed into
it, by that process, known in Astronomy, as the precession of the
Equinoxes, its explanation becomes essential to a correct understanding
of our subject.

After long observation, aided by the telescope, of which they were
undoubtedly the original inventors, the ancient Astrologers discovered
that the Sun, in making his apparent annual revolution, did not return
to the same point in the heavens, but fell behind that of the preceding
year, at the rate of 50 1/4 seconds of a degree annually. At this rate
of precession, which modern, calculation has confirmed, it requires 71
2-3 years for the Cardinal points to pass through one degree on the
Ecliptic, and 2150 years through thirty degrees, or one sign of the
Zodiac. The knowledge of this process affording an exact chronology, we
are enabled, not only to determine the origin of these symbols, but to
approximate, very nearly, to the respective dates of their adoption.


The Sphinx.

From the teachings of Astronomy we learn that the Summer Solstice is
now occupying the point between the signs of Taurus and Gemini, from
which we know that that Cardinal point has passed through three whole
signs since it was between the signs of Leo and Virgo, and we have but
to multiply 2,150 by 3 to determine that it has been about 6,450 years
ago. Hence, the tourist to the Nile valley, when viewing, near the base
of old Cheops, the great Egyptian pyramid, a colossal head and bust of
a woman, carved in stone, and learns that it is attached to a body, in
the form of a lion in a crouching attitude 146 feet long, hidden
beneath the shifting sands of the Libyan desert; if possessed of the
knowledge of the precession of the Equinoxes, he will be enabled to
solve the riddle of the Sphinx by recognizing in that grotesque
monument the mid-summer symbol of solar worship, when the Summer
Solstice was between the signs of Leo and Virgo.


The Dragon.

When the Summer Solstice was between the signs of Leo and Virgo, the
Winter Solstice was between those of Aquarius and Pisces, and the
figure composed of the body of a man with the tail of a fish became the
mid-winter symbol of solar worship. Such was the form of this symbol to
which the ancient Phoenicians paid homage to the Lord under the name of
Dagon.


The Bull.

At the same time the Summer Solstice entered the sign of Leo, the
Vernal Equinox entered that of Taurus, and the bull becoming the spring
symbol of solar worship--the Lord was designated in the ancient
allegories as the bull of God which taketh away the sin of the world;
which, shorn of its allegorical sense, signifies the sun in Taurus, or
sun of spring, which taketh away the evil of Winter. Such is the
purport of hieroglyphical inscriptions upon papyrus rolls found in
Egypt, and engraved upon obelisks erected in the Nile valley, one of
which has been recently brought to the City of New York and set up in
Central Park. In the East Indies this symbol was represented by the
figure of a bull with the solar disk between his horns; and the
Egyptians, who were of Hindoo origin, perpetuating it in their "Apis,"
it was reproduced in the golden calf of the ancient Israelites. The
Assyrians represented this symbol by the figure of a winged bull with
the face and beard of a man; the Phoenicians, in their "Baal," by the
figure of a man with a bull's head and horns; and the small silver
bull's heads with golden horns, recently discovered by Dr. Schliemann
in the ruins of Mycenae, were jewels worn by the women of that ancient
city, when the Vernal Equinox was in the sign of Taurus.


The Ram.

By deducting 2,150 years from 6,450, we determine that about 4,300
years; ago the Vernal Equinox entered the sign of Aries, and the spring
symbol of solar worship, changing from the bull to the ram, was
represented by ram-headed figures, two of which, found in Egypt, are on
exhibition in the British Museum. Then the text which read the bull of
God, was changed to the Ram of God which taketh away the sins of the
world.


The Lamb.

Ultimately attaching a meek and lowly disposition to the imaginary
incarnations of the mythical genius of the sun, the symbol of the ram
was changed to that of the lamb, and the text in the allegories, which
read the Ram of God, was changed to read "The Lamb of God which taketh
away the sin of the World," John i, 29. The explanation we have given
relative to the Zodiacal Symbols of solar worship makes the assurance
doubly sure that the originals of the New Testament were composed when
the Vernal Equinox was in the sign of Aries, as will be shown
hereafter. Having adopted the symbol of the lamb, it was represented by
several forms of what is known as Agnus Dei, or Lamb of God, one of
which was in the form of a bleeding lamb with a vase attached into
which blood is flowing, which originated in reference to the shedding
of blood as a vicarious atonement for sin. But the most comprehensive
form of this symbol in its astronomical signification, was represented
by the figure of a lamb in a standing attitude, supporting the circle
of the Zodiac, divided into quarters to denote the seasons. At each of
the cardinal points there was a small cross, and the lamb held in its
uplifted fore-foot a larger cross, the long arm of which was made to
cut the celestial equator at the angle of 23 1/2 degrees, the true
angle of obliquity of the Ecliptic. This symbol is still retained in
the Catholic Church.

[See plate8.gif]


The Fish.

By deducting 2,150 years from 4,300 we determine that about 2,150 years
ago the Vernal Equinox entered the sign of Pisces; and although the
original version of the New Testament was founded upon the symbol of
the lamb, it is a historical fact that for centuries after the
beginning of our era, the Christians paid homage to the Lord under the
symbol of the fish; but ultimately going into desuetude, the lamb was
retained as the distinguishing symbol of the Christian religion until
the year 680, at which date another was substituted, as will be shown
under our next heading.



SIGNS OP THE CROSS.

Among the numerous symbols of solar worship, besides those we have
already referred to, there are three to which we will direct attention.
Two of these were of astronomical signification: the one adopted when
the Spring Equinox was in the sign of Taurus and shaped like the letter
T, was the model after which the ancient temples were built; and the
other, shaped like the letter X, in reference to the angle of 23 1/2
degrees made by the crossing of the Ecliptic and the Celestial equator,
is known as St. Andrew's Cross. The third, and most important of all
the symbols of solar worship, in its relation to the Christian
religion, which, having no astronomical signification, originated in
Egypt, in reference to the annual inundation of the river Nile. To mark
the height to which the water should rise to secure an abundant
harvest, posts were planted upon its banks to which cross beams were
attached thus +. If the water should rise to the designated height, it
was called "the waters of life," or "river of life;" and, ultimately,
this form of the cross was adopted as the symbol of the life to come,
or eternal life; and the ancient astrologers had it engraved upon
stone, encircled with a hieroglyphical inscription to that effect, one
of which was discovered in the ruins of the temple erected at
Alexandria, and dedicated to "our Lord and Saviour Serapis."

But, if the water failed to rise to the required height, and the
horrors of starvation becoming the inevitable result, it was the custom
of the people to nail to these crosses symbolical personifications of
the Demon of Famine. To indicate the sterility of the domain over which
he reigned, he was represented by the figure of a lean and haggard man,
with a crown of thorns upon his head; a reed cut from the river's bank
was placed in his hands, as his unreal sceptre; and, considering the
inhabitants of Judea as the most slavish and mean-spirited race in
their knowledge, they placarded this figure with the inscription: "This
is the King of the Jews." Thus, to the ancient Egyptians, this sign of
the cross was blessed or accursed as it was represented with, or
without, this figure suspended upon it.

When the Roman, or modern, form of Christianity was instituted, the
hieroglyphical inscription signifying the life to come or eternal life
was substituted by a placard nailed to the cross with the letters I. N.
R. I. inscribed upon it, which are the initials of the Latin words
conveying the same meaning. But if we would learn how the figure of a
man came to be suspended upon this form of the cross, we must refer to
Mediaeval History, which teaches that in the year 680, under the
Pontificate of Agathon, and during the reign of Constantine Pogonat, at
the sixth council of the church, and third at Constantinople, it was
ordered in Canon 82 that "Instead of a lamb, the figure of a man nailed
to a cross should be the distinguishing symbol of the Christian
religion." Now, as this figure is represented by that of a lean and
haggard man, with a crown of thorns upon his head, does it not look as
if the old Egyptian Demon of Famine was the model after which it was
constructed?



FUTURE REWARDS AND PUNISHMENTS.

In the ancient Astrolatry, two different systems of future rewards and
punishments were inculcated; the Oriental or East Indian, and the
Occidental or Egyptian; the former, ignoring the resurrection of the
body, taught but one judgment immediately after death, and the latter
inculcated an individual judgment immediately after death, the
resurrection of the body, and a general judgment at the end of the
world, or conclusion of the 12,000 year cycle.


The Oriental System.

Considering perfect happiness to consist in absolute rest, the Oriental
astrologers conceived a state of eternal and unconscious repose,
equivalent to soul absorption, to which they gave the name of Nirvana,
into which they taught that, by the awards of the gods, the souls of
the righteous, or those who had lived what they called "the
contemplative life," would be permitted to enter immediately after
death. But, for the souls of sinners, they invented a system of
expiatory punishments which, known as the Metempsychosis, or
transmigration of souls, taught that they would be compelled to
successively animate the bodies of beasts, birds, fishes, etc., for a
thousand years before being permitted to enter the Nirvana.


The Occidental System.

In concocting the doctrine of the first judgment the Egyptian
astrologers, ignoring the Nirvana, inculcated the future sentient
existence of the soul; and, while retaining the Metempsychotial
expiations of the Oriental system, taught that its rewards, and
principal punishments, would be enjoyed or suffered in the under or
nether world, the existence of which they had conceived in constructing
their system of nature. This imaginary region, known to the Egyptians
as the Amenti, to the Greeks as Hades, and to the Hebrews as Sheol, was
divided by an impassable gulf into the two states of happiness and
misery which were designated in the Grecian mythology as the Elysium,
or Elysian Fields, and the Tartarus. In the lower part of the latter
was located the Phlegethon, or lake of fire and brimstone, the smoke
from which ascended into an upper apartment.

In this system it was taught that the souls of the two extremes of
society, constituted of the righteous and the great sinners, would be
consigned immediately after the first judgment, the one to the Elysium,
and the other to the Phlegethon, where they were to remain until the
second or general judgment; while the souls of less venial sinners,
constituting the greater mass of mankind, before being permitted to
enter the Elysium would be compelled to suffer the expiatory
punishments of the Metempsychosis, or in the upper region, or "smoky
row" of the Tartarus. Such was the Egyptian purgatory, and its denizens
constituted "the spirits in prison" referred to in I. Peter iii. 19,
from which the astrologers claimed to have the power to release,
provided their surviving friends paid liberally for their propitiatory
offices; and, from this assumption, the clergy of the Catholic church
derived the idea of saying masses for the repose of the soul. These
doctrines were carried by Pythagoras from Egypt to Greece about 550
years before the beginning of our era; and passing from thence to Rome,
the Greek and Latin poets vied with each other in portraying Hades and
the joys and terrors of its two states.


