ever can on you and me, just because He was the Son of Man, the perfect 
Man, and, therefore, had more real reason for being proud (if such a 
thing could be) than any man, or than all men put together.  But He 
conquered the temptations because He was perfect Man, led by the Spirit 
of God; and, therefore, He knew that the only way to be a perfect man was 
not to be proud, however powerful, wise, and glorious He might be; but to 
submit Himself humbly and utterly, as every man should do, to the will of 
His Father in Heaven, from whom alone His greatness came.

Now the spirit of pride cannot understand the beauty of humility, and the 
spirit of self-will cannot understand the beauty of obedience; and, 
therefore, it is reasonable to suppose the devil could not understand our 
Lord.  If He be the Son of God, so might Satan argue, He has all the more 
reason to be proud; and, therefore, it is all the more easy to tempt Him 
into shewing His pride, into proving Himself a conceited, self-willed, 
rebellious being--in one word, an evil spirit.

And therefore (as you will see at first sight) the first two temptations 
were clearly meant to tempt our Lord to pride; for would they not tempt 
you and me to pride?  If we could feed ourselves by making bread of 
stones, would not that make us proud enough?  So proud, I fear, that we 
should soon fancy that we could do without God and His providence, and 
were masters of nature and all her secrets.  If you and I could make the 
whole city worship and obey us, by casting ourselves off this cathedral 
unhurt, would not that make us proud enough?  So proud, I fear, that we 
should end in committing some great folly, or great crime in our conceit 
and vainglory.

Now, whether our Lord could or could not have done these wonderful deeds, 
one thing is plain--that He would not do them; and, therefore, we may 
presume that He ought not to have done them.  It seems as if He did not 
wish to be a wonderful man:  but only a perfectly good man, and He would 
do nothing to help Himself but what any other man could do.  He answered 
the evil spirit simply out of Scripture, as any other pious man might 
have done.  When He was bidden to make the stones into bread, He answers 
not as the Eternal Son of God, but simply as a man.  "It is written:"--it 
is the belief of Moses and the old prophets of my people that man doth 
not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the 
mouth of God:--as much as to say, If I am to be delivered out of this 
need, God will deliver me by some means or other, just as He delivers 
other men out of their needs.  When He was bidden cast Himself from the 
temple, and so save Himself, probably from sorrow, poverty, persecution, 
and the death on the cross, He answers out of Scripture as any other Jew 
would have done.  "It is written again, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy 
God."  He says nothing--this is most important--of His being the eternal 
Son of God.  He keeps that in the background.  There the fact was; but He 
veiled the glory of His godhead, that He might assert the rights of His 
manhood, and shew that mere man, by the help of the Spirit of God, could 
obey God, and keep His commandments.

I say these last words with all diffidence and humility, and trusting 
that the Lord will pardon any mistake which I may make about His Divine 
Words.  I only say them because wiser men than I have often taken the 
same view already.  Of course there is more, far more, in this wonderful 
saying than we can understand, or ever will understand.  But this I think 
is plain--that our Lord determined to behave as any and every other man 
ought to have done in His place; in order to shew all God's children the 
example of perfect humility and perfect obedience to God.

But again, the devil asked our Lord to fall down and worship him.  Now 
how could that be a temptation to pride?  Surely that was asking our Lord 
to do anything but a proud action, rather the most humiliating and most 
base of all actions.  My friends, it seems to me that if our Lord had 
fallen down and worshipped the evil spirit, He would have given way to 
the spirit of pride utterly and boundlessly; and I will tell you why.

The devil wanted our Lord to do evil that good might come.  It would have 
been a blessing, that all the kingdoms of the world and the glory of man 
should be our Lord's,--the very blessing for this poor earth which He 
came to buy, and which He bought with His own precious blood.  And here 
the devil offered Him the very prize for which He came down on earth, 
without struggle or difficulty, if He would but do, for one moment, one 
wrong thing.  What temptation that would be to our Lord as God, I dare 
not say.  But that to our Lord as Man, it must have been the most 
terrible of all temptations, I can well believe:  because history shews 
us, and, alas! our own experience in modern times shews us, persons 
yielding to that temptation perpetually; pious people, benevolent people, 
people who long to spread the Bible, to convert sinners, to found 
charities, to amend laws, to set the world right in some way or other, 
and who fancy that therefore, in carrying out their fine projects, they 
have a right to do evil that good may come.

This is a very painful subject; all the more painful just now, because I 
sometimes think it is the special sin of this country and this 
generation, and that God will bring on us some heavy punishment for it.  
But all who know the world in its various phases, and especially what are 
called the religious world, and the philanthropic world, and the 
political world, know too well that men, not otherwise bad men, will do 
things and say things, to carry out some favourite project or movement, 
or to support some party, religious or other, which they would (I hope) 
be ashamed to say and do for their own private gain.  Now what is this, 
but worshipping the evil spirit, in order to get power over this world, 
that they may (as they fancy) amend it?  And what is this but self-
conceit--ruinous, I had almost said, blasphemous?  These people think 
themselves so certainly in the right, and their plans so absolutely 
necessary to the good of the world, that God has given them a special 
licence to do what they like in carrying them out; that He will excuse in 
them falsehoods and meannesses, even tyranny and violences which He will 
excuse in no one else.

Now, is not this self-conceit?  What would you think of a servant who 
disobeyed you, cheated you, and yet said to himself--No matter, my master 
dare not turn me off:  I am so useful that he cannot do without me.  Even 
so in all ages, and now as much as, or more than ever, have men said, We 
are so necessary to God and God's cause, that He cannot do without us; 
and therefore though He hates sin in everyone else, He will excuse sin in 
us, as long as we are about His business.

Therefore, my dear friends, whenever we are tempted to do or say anything 
rash, or vain, or mean, because we are the children of God; whenever we 
are inclined to be puffed up with spiritual pride, and to fancy that we 
may take liberties which other men must not take, because we are the 
children of God; let us remember the words of the text, and answer the 
tempter, when he says, If thou be the Son of God, do this and that, as 
our Lord answered him--"If I be the Child of God, what then?  This--that 
I must behave as if God were my Father.  I must trust my God utterly, and 
I must obey Him utterly.  I must do no rash or vain thing to tempt God, 
even though it looks as if I should have a great success, and do much 
good thereby.  I must do no mean or base thing, nor give way for a moment 
to the wicked ways of this wicked world, even though again it looks as if 
I should have a great success, and do much good thereby.  In one word, I 
must worship my Father in heaven, and Him only must I serve.  If He wants 
me, He will use me.  If He does not want me, He will use some one else.  
Who am I, that God cannot govern the world without my help?  My business 
is to refrain my soul, and keep it low, even as a weaned child, and not 
to meddle with matters too high for me.  My business is to do the little, 
simple, everyday duties which lie nearest me, and be faithful in a few 
things; and then, if Christ will, He may make me some day ruler over many 
things, and I shall enter into the joy of my Lord, which is the joy of 
doing good to my fellow men.  But I shall never enter into that by 
thrusting myself into Christ's way, with grand schemes and hasty 
projects, as if I knew better than He how to make His kingdom come.  If I 
do, my pride will have a fall.  Because I would not be faithful over a 
few things, I shall be tempted to be unfaithful over many things; and 
instead of entering into the joy of my Lord, I shall be in danger of the 
awful judgment pronounced on those who do evil that good may come, who 
shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? 
and in thy name cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful 
works?  And then will He protest unto them--I never knew you.  Depart 
from me, ye that work iniquity."

Oh, my friends, in all your projects for good, as in all other matters 
which come before you in your mortal life, keep innocence and take heed 
to the thing that is right.  For that, and that alone, shall bring a man 
peace at the last.

To which, may God in His mercy bring us all.  Amen.



SERMON VIII.  MOTHER'S LOVE



Eversley, Second Sunday in Lent, 1872.

St Matthew xv. 22-28.  "And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the 
same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou 
son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.  But he 
answered her not a word.  And his disciples came and besought him, 
saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.  But he answered and 
said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.  Then 
came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.  But he answered and 
said, It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to 
dogs.  And she said, Truth, Lord:  yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which 
fall from their master's table.  Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O 
woman, great is thy faith:  be it unto thee even as thou wilt.  And her 
daughter was made whole from that very hour."

If you want a proof from Scripture that there are two sides to our 
blessed Lord's character--that He is a Judge and an Avenger as well as a 
Saviour and a Pardoner--that He is infinitely severe as well as 
infinitely merciful--that, while we may come boldly to His throne of 
grace to find help and mercy in time of need, we must, at the same time, 
tremble before His throne of justice--if you want a proof of all this, I 
say, then look at the Epistle and the Gospel for this day.  Put them side 
by side, and compare them, and you will see how perfectly they shew, one 
after the other, the two sides.

The Epistle for the day tells men and women that they must lead moral, 
pure, and modest lives.  It does not advise them to do so.  It does not 
say, It will be better to do so, more proper and conducive to the good of 
society, more likely to bring you to heaven at last.  It says, You must, 
for it is the commandment of the Lord Jesus, and the will of God.  Let no 
man encroach on or defraud his brother in the matter, says St Paul; by 
which he means, Thou shalt not covet thy neighbour's wife.  And why?  
"Because that the Lord is the avenger of all such, as we also have 
forewarned you and testified."

My friends, people talk loosely of the Thunder of Sinai and the rigour of 
Moses' law, and set them against what they call the gentle voice of the 
Gospel, and the mild religion of Christ.  Why, here are the Thunders of 
Sinai uttered as loud as ever, from the very foot of the Cross of Christ; 
and the terrible, "Thou shalt not," of Moses' law, with the curse of God 
for a penalty on the sinner, uttered by the Apostle of Faith, and 
Freedom, in the name of Christ and of God.  St Paul is not afraid to call 
Christ an Avenger.  How could he be?  He believed that it was Christ who 
spoke to Moses on Sinai--the very same Christ who prayed for His 
murderers, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do."  And 
he knew that Christ was the eternal Son of God, the same yesterday, to-
day, and for ever; that He had not changed since Moses' time, and could 
never change; that what He forbade in Moses' time, hated in Moses' time, 
and avenged in Moses' time, He would forbid, and hate, and avenge for 
ever.  And that, therefore, he who despises the warnings of the Law 
despises not man merely, but God, who has also given to us His Holy 
Spirit to know what is unchangeable, the everlastingly right, from what 
is everlastingly wrong.  So much for that side of our Lord's character; 
so much for sinners who, after their hardness and impenitent hearts, 
treasure up for themselves wrath against the day of wrath and revelation 
of the righteous judgment of God, in the day when God shall judge the 
secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to St Paul's Gospel.

But, when we turn to the Gospel for the day, we see the other side of our 
Lord's character, boundless condescension and boundless charity.  We see 
Him there still a Judge, as He always is and always will be, judging the 
secrets of a poor woman's heart, and that woman a heathen.  He judges her 
openly, in public, before His disciples.  But He is a Judge who judges 
righteous judgment, and not according to appearances; who is no respecter 
of persons; who is perfectly fair, even though the woman be a heathen:  
and, instead of condemning her and driving her away, He acquits her, He 
grants her prayer, He heals her daughter, even though that daughter was 
also a heathen, and one who knew Him not.  I say our Lord judged the 
woman after He had tried her, as gold is tried in the fire.  Why He did 
so, we cannot tell.  Perhaps He wanted, by the trial, to make her a 
better woman, to bring out something noble which lay in her heart unknown 
to her, though not to Him who knew what was in man.  Perhaps He wished to 
shew his disciples, who looked down on her as a heathen dog, that a 
heathen, too, could have faith, humility, nobleness, and grace of heart.  
Be that as it may, when the poor woman came crying to Him, He answered 
her not a word.  His disciples besought Him to send her away--and I am 
inclined to think that they wished Him to grant her what she asked, 
simply to be rid of her.  "Send her away," they said, "for she crieth 
after us."  Our Lord, we learn from St Mark, did not wish to be known in 
that place just then.  The poor woman, with her crying, was drawing 
attention to them, and, perhaps, gathering a crowd.  Somewhat noisy and 
troublesome, perhaps she was, in her motherly eagerness.  But our Lord 
was still seemingly stern.  He would not listen, it seemed, to His 
disciples any more than to the heathen woman.  "I am not sent but unto 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel."  So our Lord said, and (what is 
worth remembering) if He said so, what He said was true.  He was the King 
of the people of Israel, the Royal Prince of David's line; and, as a man, 
His duty was only to His own people.  And this woman was a Greek, a Syro-
phenician by nation--of a mixed race of people, notoriously low and 
profligate, and old enemies of the Jews.

Then, it seems, He went into a house, and would have no man know it.  
But, says St Mark, "He could not be hid."  The mother's wit found our 
Lord out, and the mother's heart urged her on, and, in spite of all His 
rebuffs, she seems to have got into the house and worshipped Him.  She 
"fell at His feet," says St Mark--doubtless bowing her forehead to the 
ground, in the fashion of those lands--an honour which was paid, I 
believe, only to persons who were royal or divine.  So she confessed that 
He was a king--perhaps a God come down on earth--and again she cried to 
Him.  "Lord, help me."  And what was our Lord's answer--seemingly more 
stern than ever?  "Let the children first be filled:  for it is not meet 
to take the children's bread and cast it unto the dogs."  Hard words.  
Yes:  but all depends on how they were spoken.  All depends on our Lord's 
look as He spoke them, and, even more, on the tone of His voice.  We all 
know that two men may use the very same words to us;--and the one shall 
speak sneeringly, brutally, and raise in us indignation or despair; 
another shall use the same words, but solemnly, tenderly, and raise in us 
confidence and hope.  And so it may have been--so, I fancy, it must have 
been--with the tone of our Lord's voice, with the expression of His face.  
Did He speak with a frown, or with something like a smile?  There must 
have been some tenderness, meaningness, pity in His voice which the quick 
woman's wit caught instantly, and the quick mother's heart interpreted as 
a sign of hope.

Let Him call her a dog if He would.  What matter to a mother to be called 
a dog, if she could thereby save her child from a devil?  Perhaps she was 
little better than a dog.  They were a bad people these Syrians, quick-
witted, highly civilised, but vicious, and teaching vice to other 
nations, till some of the wisest Romans cursed the day when the Syrians 
first spread into Rome, and debauched the sturdy Romans with their new-
fangled, foreign sins.  They were a bad people, and, perhaps, she had 
been as bad as the rest.  But if she were a dog, at least she felt that 
the dog had found its Master, and must fawn on Him, if it were but for 
the hope of getting something from Him.

And so, in the poor heathen mother's heart, there rose up a whole heaven 
of perfect humility, faith, adoration.  If she were base and mean, yet 
our Lord was great, and wise, and good; and that was all the more reason 
why He should be magnanimous, generous, condescending, like a true King, 
to the basest and meanest of His subjects.  She asked not for money, or 
honour, or this world's fine things:  but simply for her child's health, 
her child's deliverance from some mysterious and degrading illness.  
Surely there was no harm in asking for that.  It was simply a mother's 
prayer, a simply human prayer, which our Lord must grant, if He were 
indeed a man of woman born, if He had a mother, and could feel for a 
mother, if He had human tenderness, human pity in Him.  And so, with her 
quick Syrian wit, she answers our Lord with those wonderful words--
perhaps the most pathetic words in the whole Bible--so full of humility, 
of reverence, and yet with a certain archness, almost playfulness, in 
them, as it were, turning our Lord's words against Him; and, by that very 
thing, shewing how utterly she trusted Him,--"Truth, Lord:  yet the dogs 
eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table."

Those were the beautiful words--more beautiful to me than whole volumes 
of poetry--which our Lord had as it were crushed out of the woman's 
heart.  Doubtless, He knew all the while that they were in her heart, 
though not as yet shaped into words.  Doubtless, He was trying her, to 
shew His disciples--and all Christians who should ever read the Bible--
what was in her heart, what she was capable of saying when it came to the 
point.  So He tried her, and judged her, and acquitted her.  Out of the 
abundance of her heart her mouth had spoken.  By her words she was 
justified.  By those few words she proved her utter faith in our Lord's 
power and goodness--perhaps her faith in His godhead.  By those words she 
proved the gentleness and humility, the graciousness and gracefulness of 
her own character.  By those words she proved, too,--and oh, you that are 
mothers, is that nothing?--the perfect disinterestedness of her mother's 
love.  And so she conquered--as the blessed Lord loves to be conquered--
as all noble souls who are like their blessed Lord, love to be conquered-
-by the prayer of faith, of humility, of confidence, of earnestness, and 
she had her reward.  "O woman," said He, the Maker of all heaven and 
earth, "great is thy faith.  For this saying go thy way.  Be it unto thee 
even as thou wilt.  The devil is gone out of thy daughter."  She went, 
full of faith; and when she was come to her house, she found the devil 
gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.

One word more, and I have done.  I do not think that any one who really 
took in the full meaning of this beautiful story, would ever care to pray 
to Saints, or to the Blessed Virgin, for help; fancying that they, and 
specially the Blessed Virgin, being a woman, are more humane than our 
Lord, and can feel more quickly, if not more keenly, for poor creatures 
in distress.  We are not here to judge these people, or any people.  To 
their own master they stand or fall.  But for the honour of our Lord, we 
may say, Does not this story shew that the Lord is humane enough, tender 
enough, to satisfy all mankind?  Does not this story shew that even if He 
seem silent at first, and does not grant our prayers, yet still He may be 
keeping us waiting, as He kept this heathen woman, only that He may be 
gracious to us at last?  Does not this story shew us especially that our 
Lord can feel for mothers and with mothers; that He actually allowed 
Himself to be won over--if I may use such a word in all reverence--by the 
wit and grace of a mother pleading for her child?  Was it not so?  "O 
woman, great is thy faith.  For this saying go thy way.  Be it unto thee 
even as thou wilt."  Ah! are not those gracious words a comfort to every 
mother, bidding her, in the Lord's own name, to come boldly where 
mothers--of all human beings--have oftenest need to come, to the throne 
of Christ's grace, to find mercy, and grace to help in time of need?

Yes, my friends, such is our Lord, and such is our God.  Infinite in 
severity to the scornful, the proud, the disobedient:  infinite in 
tenderness to the earnest, the humble, the obedient.  Let us come to Him, 
earnest, humble, obedient, and we shall find Him, indeed, a refuge of the 
soul and body in spirit and in truth.


Thou, O Lord, art all I want.
All and more in thee I find.  Amen.


