years. Search ye, therefore, in this mighty forest for some spot
abounding in birds and deer and flowers and fruits, beautiful to behold,
and auspicious, and inhabited by virtuous persons and where we may dwell
pleasantly for all these years!' Thus addressed by Yudhishthira,
Dhananjaya replied unto the son of Dharma, after reverencing the
illustrious king as if he were his spiritual preceptor. And Arjuna said,
'Thou hast respectfully waited upon all the great and old _Rishis_.
There is nothing unknown to thee in the world of men. And O bull of the
Bharata race, thou hast always waited with reverence upon Brahmanas
including Dwaipayana and others, and Narada of great ascetic merit, who
with senses under control, ever goeth to the gates of all the world from
the world of the gods unto that of Brahma, including that of the
Gandharvas and Apsaras! And thou knowest, without doubt, the opinions of
the Brahmanas, and, O king, their prowess also! And O monarch, thou
knowest what is calculated to do us good! And O great king, we will live
wherever thou likest! Here is this lake, full of sacred water, called
_Dwaitavana_, abounding with flowers, and delightful to look at, and
inhabited by many species of birds. If, O king, it pleaseth thee, here
should we like to dwell these twelve years! Thinkest thou otherwise?'
Yudhishthira replied, 'O Partha, what thou hast said recommendeth itself
to me! Let us go that sacred and celebrated and large lake called
_Dwaitavana_!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then the virtuous son of Pandu, accompanied by
numerous Brahmanas, all went to the sacred lake called _Dwaitavana_. And
Yudhishthira was surrounded by numerous Brahmanas some of whom
sacrificed with fire and some without it and some of whom, devoted to
the study of the Vedas, lived upon alms or were of the class called
_Vanaprasthas_. And the king was also surrounded by hundreds of
_Mahatmas_ crowned with ascetic success and of rigid vows. And those
bulls of the Bharata race, the sons of Pandu setting out with those
numerous Brahmanas, entered the sacred and delightful woods of _Dwaita_.
And the king saw that mighty forest covered on the close of summer with
_Salas_, and palms, and mangoes, and _Madhukas_, and _Nipas_ and
_Kadamvas_ and _Sarjjas_ and _Arjunas_, and _Karnikars_, many of them
covered with flowers. And flocks of peacocks and _Datyuhas_ and
_Chakoras_ and _Varhins_ and _Kokilas_, seated on the tops of the
tallest trees of that forest were pouring forth their mellifluous notes.
And the king also saw in that forest mighty herds of gigantic elephants
huge as the hills, with temporal juice trickling down in the season of
rut, accompanied by herds of she-elephants. And approaching the
beautiful Bhogavati (Saraswati), the king saw many ascetics crowned with
success in the habitations in that forest, and virtuous men of
sanctified souls clad in barks of trees and bearing matted locks on
their heads. And descending from their cars, the king that foremost of
virtuous men with his brothers and followers entered that forest like
Indra of immeasurable energy entering heaven. And crowds of _Charanas_
and _Siddhas_, desirous of beholding the monarch devoted to truth, came
towards him. And the dwellers of that forest stood surrounding that lion
among kings possessed of great intelligence. And saluting all the
_Siddhas_, and saluted by them in return as a king or a god should be,
that foremost of virtuous men entered the forest with joined hands
accompanied by all those foremost of regenerate ones. And the
illustrious and virtuous king, saluted in return by those virtuous
ascetics that had approached him, sat down in their midst at the foot of
a mighty tree decked with flowers, like his father (Pandu) in days
before. And those chiefs of the Bharata race _viz_., Bhima and
Dhananjaya and the twins and Krishna and their followers, all fatigued,
leaving their vehicles, sat themselves down around that best of kings.
And that mighty tree bent down with the weight of creepers, with those
five illustrious bowmen who had come there for rest sitting under it,
looked like a mountain with (five) huge elephants resting on its side."


SECTION XXV

Vaisampayana said, "Having fallen into distress, those princes thus
obtained at last a pleasant habitation in that forest. And there in
those woods abounding with _Sala_ trees and washed by the Saraswati,
they who were like so many Indras, began to sport themselves. And the
illustrious king, that bull of the Kuru race, set himself to please all
the _Yatis_ and _Munis_ and the principal Brahmanas in that forest, by
offerings of excellent fruits and roots. And their priest, Dhaumya
endued with great energy, like unto a father to those princes, began to
perform the sacrificial rites of _Ishti_ and _Paitreya_ for the Pandavas
residing in that great forest. And there came, as a guest, unto the
abode of the accomplished Pandavas living in the wood after loss of
their kingdom, the old Rishi Markandeya, possessed of intense and
abundant energy. And that bull of the Kuru race, the high-souled
Yudhishthira, possessed of unrivalled strength and prowess, paid his
homage unto that great _Muni_, reverenced by celestials and Rishis of
men, and possessed of the splendour of blazing fire. And that
illustrious and all-knowing _Muni_, of unrivalled energy, beholding
Draupadi and Yudhishthira and Bhima and Arjuna, in the midst of the
ascetics, smiled, recollecting Rama in his mind. And Yudhishthira the
just, apparently grieved at this, asked him, saying, 'All these ascetics
are sorry for seeing me here. Why is it that thou alone smilest, as if
in glee, in the presence of these?' Markandeya replied, 'O child, I too
am sorry and do not smile in glee! Nor doth pride born of joy possess my
heart! Beholding to-day thy calamity, I recollect Rama, the son of
Dasaratha, devoted to truth! Even that Rama, accompanied by Lakshman,
dwelt in the woods at the command of his father. O son of Pritha, I
beheld him in days of old ranging with his bow on the top of the
_Rishyamuka_ hills! The illustrious Rama was like unto Indra, the lord
of Yama himself, and the slayer of Namuchi! Yet that sinless one had to
dwell in the forest at the command of his father, accepting it as his
duty. The illustrious Rama was equal unto Sakra in prowess, and
invincible in battle. And yet he had to range the forest renouncing all
pleasures! Therefore should no one act unrighteously, saying,--_I am
mighty!_ Kings Nabhaga and Bhagiratha and others, having subjugated by
truth this world bounded by the seas, (finally) obtained, O child, all
the region hereafter. Therefore, should no one act unrighteously,
saying,--_I am mighty!_ And, O exalted of men, the virtuous and truthful
king of Kasi and Karusha was called a mad dog for having renounced his
territories and riches! Therefore, should no one act unrighteously,
saying,--_I am mighty!_ O best of men, O son of Pritha, the seven
righteous Rishis, for having observed the ordinance prescribed by the
Creator himself in the Vedas, blaze in the firmament. Therefore, should
no one act unrighteously, saying,--_I am mighty!_ Behold, O king, the
mighty elephants, huge as mountain cliffs and furnished with tusks,
transgress not, O exalted of men, the laws of the Creator! Therefore,
should none act unrighteously saying, _Might is mine!_ And, O foremost
of monarchs, behold all the creatures acting according to their species,
as ordained by the Creator. Therefore, should none act unrighteously,
saying, _Might is mine_. O son of Pritha, in truth, and virtue, and
proper behaviour, and modesty, thou hast surpassed all creatures, and
thy fame and energy are as bright as fire or the Sun! Firm in thy
promises, O illustrious one, having passed in the woods thy painful
exile, thou wilt again, O king, snatch from the Kauravas thy blazing
prosperity with the help of thy own energy!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having spoken these words unto Yudhishthira
(seated) in the midst of the ascetics with friends, the great Rishi
having also saluted Dhaumya and all the Pandavas set out in a northerly
direction!"


SECTION XXVI

Vaisampayana said, "While the illustrious son of Pandu continued to
dwell in the _Dwaita_ woods, that great forest became filled with
Brahmanas. And the lake within that forest, ever resounding with Vedic
recitations, became sacred like a second region of Brahma. And the
sounds of the _Yajus_, the _Riks_, the _Samas_, and other words uttered
by the Brahmanas, were exceedingly delightful to hear. And the Vedic
recitations of the Brahmanas mingling with the twang of bows of the sons
of Pritha, produced a union of the Brahmana and Kshatriya customs that
was highly beautiful. And one evening the Rishi Vaka of the _Dalvya_
family addressed Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti seated in the midst of
the Rishis, saying, 'Behold, O chief of the Kurus, O son of Pritha, the
_homa_ time is come of these Brahmanas devoted to ascetic austerities,
the time when the (sacred) fires have all been lit up! These all, of
rigid vows, protected by thee, are performing the rites of religion in
this sacred region! The descendants of Bhrigu and Angiras, along with
those of Vasistha and Kasyapa, the illustrious sons of Agastya, the
offspring of Atri all of excellent vows, in fact, all the foremost
Brahmanas of the whole, are now united with thee! Listen, O son of the
Kuru race born of Kunti, thyself with thy brothers, to the words I speak
to thee! As fire aided by the wind consumeth the forest, so _Brahma_
energy mingling with _Kshatriya_ energy, and _Kshatriya_ might mingling
with Brahma power, might, when they gathered force, consume all enemies!
O child, he should never desire to be without Brahmanas who wisheth to
subdue this and the other world for length of days! Indeed, a king
slayeth his enemies having obtained a Brahmana conversant with religion
and worldly affairs and freed from passion and folly. King Vali
cherishing his subjects practised those duties that lead to salvation,
and knew not of any other means in this world than Brahmanas. It was for
this that all the desires of Virochana's son, the Asura (Vali), were
ever gratified, and his wealth was ever inexhaustible. Having obtained
the whole earth through the aid of the Brahmanas, he met with
destruction when he began to practise wrong on them! This earth with her
wealth never adoreth long as her lord a Kshatriya living without a
Brahmana! The earth, however, girt by the sea, boweth unto him who is
ruled by a Brahmana and taught his duties by him! Like an elephant in
battle without his driver, a Kshatriya destitute of Brahmanas decreaseth
in strength! The Brahmana's sight is without compare, and the
Kshatriya's might also is unparalleled. When these combine, the whole
earth itself cheerfully yieldeth to such a combination. As fire becoming
mightier with the wind consumeth straw and wood, so kings with Brahmanas
consume all foes! An intelligent Kshatriya, in order to gain what he
hath not, and increase what he hath, should take counsel of Brahmanas!
Therefore, O son of Kunti, for obtaining what thou hast not and
increasing what thou hast, and spending what thou hast on proper objects
and persons, keep thou with thee a Brahmana of reputation, of a
knowledge of the Vedas, of wisdom and experience! O Yudhishthira, thou
hast ever highly regarded the Brahmanas. It is for this that thy fame is
great and blazeth in the three worlds!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then all those Brahmanas who were with
Yudhishthira worshipped Vaka of the Dalvya race, and having heard him
praise Yudhishthira became highly pleased. And Dwaipayana and Narada and
Jamadagnya and Prithusravas; and Indradyumna and Bhalaki and Kritachetas
and Sahasrapat; and Karnasravas and Munja and Lavanaswa and Kasyapa; and
Harita and Sthulakarana and Agnivesya and Saunaka; and Kritavak and
Suvakana, Vrihadaswa and Vibhavasu; and Urdharetas and Vrishamitra and
Suhotra and Hotravahana; these and many other Brahmanas of rigid vows
then adored Yudhishthira like Rishis adoring Purandara in heaven!"


SECTION XXVII

Vaisampayana said, "Exiled to the woods the sons of Pritha with Krishna
seated in the evening, conversed with one another afflicted with sorrow
and grief. And the handsome and well informed Krishna dear unto her
lords and devoted to them, thus spake unto Yudhishthira, 'The sinful,
cruel, and wicked-minded son of Dhritarashtra certainly feeleth no
sorrow for us, when, O king, that evil-hearted wretch having sent thee
with myself into the woods dressed in deer-skin feeleth no regret! The
heart of that wretch of evil deeds must surely be made of steel when he
could at that time address thee, his virtuous eldest brother, in words
so harsh! Having brought thee who deservest to enjoy every happiness and
never such woe, into such distress, alas, that wicked-minded and sinful
wretch joyeth with his friends! O Bharata, when dressed in deer-skin
thou hast set out for the woods, only four persons, O monarch, _viz_.,
Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-minded Sakuni, and Dussasana that bad and
fierce brother of Duryodhana, did not shed tears! With the exception of
these, O thou best of the Kurus, all other Kurus filled with sorrow shed
tears from their eyes! Beholding this thy bed and recollecting what thou
hadst before, I grieve, O king, for thee who deservest not woe and hast
been brought up in every luxury! Remembering that seat of ivory in thy
court, decked with jewels and beholding this seat of _kusa_ grass, grief
consumeth me, O king! I saw thee, O king, surrounded in thy court by
kings! What peace can my heart know in not beholding thee such now? I
beheld thy body, effulgent as the sun, decked with sandal paste! Alas,
grief depriveth me of my senses in beholding thee now besmeared with mud
and dirt! I saw thee before, O king, dressed in silken clothes of pure
white! But I now behold thee dressed in rags! Formerly, O king, pure
food of every kind was carried from thy house on plates of gold for
Brahmanas by thousands! And, O king, food also of the best kind was
formerly given by thee unto ascetics both houseless and living in
domesticity! Formerly, living in thy mansion thou hadst ever filled with
food of every kind plates by thousands, and worshipped the Brahmanas
gratifying every wish of theirs! What peace, O king, can my heart know
in not beholding all this now? And, O great king, these thy brothers,
endued with youth and decked with ear-rings, were formerly fed by cook
with food of the sweet flavour and dressed with skill! Alas, O king, I
now behold them all, so undeserving of woe, living in the woods and upon
what the wood may yield! My heart, O King knoweth no peace! Thinking of
this Bhimasena living in sorrow in the woods, doth not thy anger blaze
up, even though it is time? Why doth not thy anger, O king, blaze up
upon beholding the illustrious Bhimasena who ever performeth everything
unaided, so fallen into distress, though deserving of every happiness?
Why, O king, doth not thy anger blaze up on beholding that Bhima living
in the woods who was formerly surrounded with numerous vehicles and
dressed in costly apparel? This exalted personage is ready to slay all
the Kurus in battle. He beareth, however, all this sorrow, only because
he waiteth for the fufilment of thy promise! This Arjuna, O king, though
possessed of two hands, is equal, for the lightness of his hand in
discharging shafts, to (Kaitavirya) Arjuna of a thousand arms! He is
even (to foes), like unto Yama himself at the end of the _Yuga_! It was
by the prowess of his weapons that all the kings of the earth were made
to wait upon the Brahmanas at thy sacrifice! Beholding that Arjuna that
tiger among men worshipped by both the celestials and the Danavas so
anxious, why, O king, dost thou not feel indignant? I grieve, O Bharata,
that thy wrath doth not blaze up at sight of that son of Pritha in
exile, that prince who deserveth not such distress and who hath been
brought up in every luxury! Why doth not thy wrath blaze up at sight of
that Arjuna in exile, who, on a single car, hath vanquished celestials
and men and serpents? Why, O king, doth not thy wrath blaze up at sight
of that Arjuna in exile who, honoured with offerings of cars and
vehicles of various forms and horses and elephants, forcibly took from
the kings of the earth their treasures, who is the chastiser of all
foes, and who at one impetus can throw full five hundred arrows? Why, O
king, doth not thy wrath blaze up at sight of Nakula, in exile, who so
fair and able-bodied and young, is the foremost of all swordsmen? Why, O
king, dost thou pardon the foe, O Yudhishthira, at sight of Madri's son,
the handsome and brave Sahadeva in exile? Why doth not thy anger blaze
up, O king, it sight of both Nakula and Sahadeva overwhelmed with grief,
though so undeserving of distress? Why also, O king, dost thou pardon
the foe at sight of myself in exile who, born in the race of Drupada
and, therefore, the sister of Dhrishtadyumna, am the daughter-in-law of
the illustrious Pandu and the devoted wife of heroes? Truly, O thou best
of the Bharatas, thou hast no anger, else why is it that thy mind is not
moved at sight of thy brothers and myself (in such distress)? It is said
that there is no Kshatriya in the world who is bereft of anger. I now
behold in thee, however, a refutation of the proverb! That Kshatriya, O
son of Pritha, who discovereth not his energy when the opportunity
cometh, is ever disregarded by all creatures! Therefore, O king, thou
shouldst not extend thy forgiveness to the foe. Indeed, with thy energy,
without doubt, thou mayst slay them all! So also, O king, that Kshatriya
who is not appeased when the time for forgiveness cometh, becometh
unpopular with every creature and meeteth with destruction both in this
and the other world!'"


SECTION XXVIII

"Draupadi continued, 'On this subject, the ancient story of the
conversation between Prahlada and Vali, the son of Virochana, is quoted
as an example. One day Vali asked his grand-father Prahlada, the chief
of the Asuras and the Danavas, possessed of great wisdom and well-versed
in the mysteries of the science of duty, saying, "O sire, is forgiveness
meritorious or might and energy such? I am puzzled as regards this; O
sire, enlighten me who ask thee this! O thou conversant with all duties,
tell me truly which of these is meritorious? I will strictly obey
whatever thy command may be!" Thus asked (by Vali), his wise
grandfather, conversant with every conclusion, replied upon the whole
subject unto his grand-son who had sought at his hands the resolution of
his doubts. And Prahlada said, "Know, O child, these two truths with
certainty, viz., that might is not always meritorious and forgiveness
also is not always meritorious! He that forgiveth always suffereth many
evils. Servants and strangers and enemies always disregard him. No
creature ever bendeth down unto him. Therefore it is, O child, that the
learned applaud not a constant habit of forgiveness! The servants of an
ever-forgiving person always disregard him, and contract numerous
faults. These mean-minded men also seek to deprive him of his wealth.
Vile-souled servants also appropriate to themselves his vehicles and
clothes and ornaments and apparel and beds and seats and food and drink
and other articles of use. They do not also at the command of their
master, give unto others the things they are directed to give. Nor do
they even worship their master with that respect which is their master's
due. Disregard in this world is worse than death. O child, sons and
servants and attendants and even strangers speak harsh words unto the
man who always forgiveth. Persons, disregarding the man of an
ever-forgiving temper, even desire his wife, and his wife also, becometh
ready to act as she willeth. And servants also that are ever fond of
pleasure, if they do not receive even slight punishments from their
master, contract all sorts of vices, and the wicked ever injure such a
master. These and many other demerits attach to those that are
ever-forgiving!

"'"Listen now, O son of Virochana, to the demerits of those that are
never forgiving! The man of wrath who, surrounded by darkness, always
inflicteth, by help of his own energy, various kinds of punishment on
persons whether they deserve them or not, is necessarily separated from
his friends in consequence of that energy of his. Such a man is hated by
both relatives and strangers. Such a man, because he insulteth others,
suffereth loss of wealth and reapeth disregard and sorrow and hatred and
confusion and enemies. The man of wrath, in consequence of his ire,
inflicteth punishments on men and obtaineth (in return) harsh words. He
is divested of his prosperity soon and even of life, not to say, of
friends and relatives. He that putteth forth his might both upon his
benefactor and his foe, is an object of alarm to the world, like a snake
that hath taken shelter in a house, to the inmates thereof. What
prosperity can he have who is an object of alarm to the world? People
always do him an injury when they find a hole. Therefore, should men
never exhibit might in excess nor forgiveness on all occasions. One
should put forth his might and show his forgiveness on proper occasions.
He that becometh forgiving at the proper time and harsh and mighty also
at the proper time, obtaineth happiness both in this world and the
other.

"'"I shall now indicate the occasions in detail of forgiveness, as laid
down by the learned, and which should ever be observed by all. Hearken
unto me as I speak! He that hath done thee a service, even if he is
guilty of a grave wrong unto thee, recollecting his former service,
shouldst thou forgive that offender. Those also that have become
offenders from ignorance and folly should be forgiven for learning and
wisdom are not always easily attainable by man. They that having
offended thee knowingly, plead ignorance should be punished, even if
their offences be trivial. Such crooked men should never be pardoned.
The first offence of every creature should be forgiven. The second
offence, however, should be punished, even if it be trivial. If,
however, a person committeth an offence unwillingly, it hath been said
that examining his plea well by a judicious enquiry, he should be
pardoned. Humility may vanquish might, humility may vanquish weakness.
There is nothing that humility may not accomplish. Therefore, humility
is truly fiercer (than it seemeth)! One should act with reference to
place and time, taking note of his own might or weakness. Nothing can
succeed that hath been undertaken without reference to place and time.
Therefore, do thou ever wait for place and time! Sometimes offenders
should be forgiven from fear of the people. These have been declared to
be times of forgiveness. And it hath been said that on occasions besides
these, might should be put forth against transgressors."'

"Draupadi continued, 'I, therefore, regard, O king, that the time hath
come for thee to put forth thy might! Unto those Kurus the covetous sons
of Dhritarashtra who injure us always, the present is not the time for
forgiveness! It behoveth thee to put forth thy might. The humble and
forgiving person is disregarded; while those that are fierce persecute
others. He, indeed, is a king who hath recourse to both, each according
to its time!'"


SECTION XXIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'Anger is the slayer of men and is again their
prosperor. Know this, O thou possessed of great wisdom, that anger is
the root of all prosperity and all adversity. O thou beautiful one, he
that suppresseth his anger earneth prosperity. That man, again, who
always giveth way to anger, reapeth adversity from his fierce anger. It
is seen in this world that anger is the cause of destruction of every
creature. How then can one like me indulge his anger which is so
destructive of the world? The angry man commiteth sin. The angry man
killeth even his preceptors. The angry man insulteth even his superiors
in harsh words. The man that is angry faileth to distinguish between
what should be said and what should not. There is no act that an angry
man may not do, no word that an angry man may not utter. From anger a
man may slay one that deserveth not to be slain, and may worship one
that deserveth to be slain. The angry man may even send his own soul to
the regions of Yama. Beholding all these faults, the wise control their
anger, desirous of obtaining high prosperity both in this and the other
world. It is for this that they of tranquil souls have banished wrath.
How can one like us indulge in it then? O daughter of Drupada,
reflecting upon all this, my anger is not excited. One that acteth not
against a man whose wrath hath been up, rescueth himself as also others
from great fear. In fact, he may be regarded to be the physician of the
two (_viz_., himself and angry man). If a weak man, persecuted by
others, foolishly becometh angry towards men that are mightier than he,
he then becometh himself the cause of his own destruction. And in
respect of one who thus deliberately throweth away his life, there are
no regions hereafter to gain. Therefore, O daughter of Drupada, it hath
been said that a weak man should always suppress his wrath. And the wise
man also who though persecuted, suffereth not his wrath to be roused,
joyeth in the other world--having passed his persecutor over in
indifference. It is for this reason hath it been said that a wise man,
whether strong or weak, should ever forgive his persecutor even when the
latter is in the straits. It is for this, O Krishna, that the virtuous
applaud them that have conquered their wrath. Indeed, it is the opinion
of the virtuous that the honest and forgiving man is ever victorious.
Truth is more beneficial than untruth; and gentleness than cruel
behaviour. How can one like me, therefore, even for the purpose of
slaying Duryodhana, exhibit anger which hath so many faults and which
the virtuous banish from their souls? They that are regarded by the
learned of foresight, as possessed of (true) force of character, are
certainly those who are wrathful in outward show only. Men of learning
and of true insight call him to be possessed of force of character who
by his wisdom can suppress his risen wrath. O thou of fair hips, the
angry man seeth not things in their true light. The man that is angry
seeth not his way, nor respecteth persons. The angry man killeth even
those that deserve not to be killed. The man of wrath slayeth even his
preceptors. Therefore, the man possessing force of character should ever
banish wrath to a distance. The man that is overwhelmed with wrath
acquireth not with ease generosity, dignity, courage, skill, and other
attributes belonging to real force of character. A man by forsaking
anger can exhibit proper energy, whereas, O wise one, it is highly
difficult for the angry man to exhibit his energy at the proper time!
The ignorant always regard anger as equivalent to energy. Wrath, however
hath been given to man for the destruction of the world. The man,
therefore, who wisheth to behave properly, must ever forsake anger. Even
one who hath abandoned the excellent virtues of his own order, it is
certain, indulgeth in wrath (if behaveth properly). If fools, of mind
without light, transgress in every respect, how, O faultless one, can
one like me transgress (like them)? If amongst men there were not
persons equal unto the earth in forgiveness, there would be no peace
among men but continued strife caused by wrath. If the injured return
their injuries, if one chastised by his superior were to chastise his
superior in return, the consequence would be the destruction of every
creature, and sin also would prevail in the world. If the man who hath
ill speeches from another, returneth those speeches afterwards; if the
injured man returneth his injuries; if the chastised person chastiseth
in return; if fathers slay sons, and sons fathers and if husbands slay
wives, and wives husbands; then, O Krishna, how can birth take place in
a world where anger prevaileth so! For, O thou of handsome face, know
that the birth of creatures is due to peace! If the kings also, O
Draupadi, giveth way to wrath, his subjects soon meet with destruction.
Wrath, therefore, hath for its consequence the destruction and the
distress of the people. And because it is seen that there are in the
world men who are forgiving like the Earth, it is therefore that
creatures derive their life and prosperity. O beautiful one, one should
forgive under every injury. It hath been said that the continuation of
species is due to man being forgiving. He, indeed, is a wise and
excellent person who hath conquered his wrath and who showeth
forgiveness even when insulted, oppressed, and angered by a strong
person. The man of power who controleth his wrath, hath (for his
enjoyment) numerous everlasting regions; while he that is angry, is
called foolish, and meeteth with destruction both in this and the other
world. O Krishna, the illustrious and forgiving Kasyapa hath, in this
respect, sung the following verses in honour of men that are ever
forgiving, "Forgiveness is virtue, forgiveness is sacrifice, forgiveness
is the Vedas, forgiveness is the _Shruti_. He that knoweth this is
capable of forgiving everything. Forgiveness is _Brahma_; forgiveness is
truth; forgiveness is stored ascetic merit; forgiveness protecteth the
ascetic merit of the future; forgiveness is asceticism; forgiveness is
holiness; and by forgiveness is it that the universe is held together.
Persons that are forgiving attain to the regions obtainable by those
that have performed meritorious sacrifices, or those that are
well-conversant with the Vedas, or those that have high ascetic merit.
Those that perform Vedic sacrifices as also those that perform the
meritorious rites of religion obtain other regions. Men of forgiveness,
however, obtain those much-adored regions that are in the world of
Brahma. Forgiveness is the might of the mighty; forgiveness is
sacrifice; forgiveness is quiet of mind. How, O Krishna, can one like us
abandon forgiveness, which is such, and in which are established
_Brahma_, and truth, and wisdom and the worlds? The man of wisdom should
ever forgive, for when he is capable of forgiving everything, he
attaineth to _Brahma_. The world belongeth to those that are forgiving;
the other world is also theirs. The forgiving acquire honours here, and
a state of blessedness hereafter. Those men that ever conquer their
wrath by forgiveness, obtain the higher regions. Therefore hath it been
