celestial weapons, and who is the repository of all the sciences, now
weareth ear-rings (like one of the fair sex). That youth whom kings of
incomparable prowess could not overpower in fight, even as the waters of
the mighty ocean cannot overleap the continents, is now the
dancing-master of king Virata's daughters and waits upon them in
disguise. O Bhima, that Arjuna the clatter of whose car-wheels caused
the entire earth with her mountains and forests, her mobile and immobile
things to tremble, and whose birth dispelled all the sorrows of Kunti,
that exalted hero, that younger brother of thine, O Bhimasena, now
maketh me weep for him. Beholding him coming towards me, decked in
golden ear-rings and other ornaments, and wearing on the wrists
bracelets of conchs, my heart is afflicted with despondency. And
Dhananjaya who hath not a bowman equal unto him on earth in prowess, now
passeth his days in singing, surrounded by women. Beholding that son of
Pritha who in virtue, heroism and truth, was the most admired in the
world, now living in the guise of a woman, my heart is afflicted with
sorrow. When I behold, the godlike Partha in the music-hall like an
elephant with rent temples surrounded by she-elephants in the midst of
females, waiting before Virata the king of the Matsyas, then I lose all
sense of directions. Surely, my mother-in-law doth not know Dhananjaya
to be afflicted with such extreme distress. Nor doth she know that
descendant of the Kuru race, Ajatasatru, addicted to disastrous dice, to
be sunk in misery. O Bharata, beholding the youngest of you all,
Sahadeva, superintending the kine, in the guise of a cowherd, I grow
pale. Always thinking of Sahadeva's plight, I cannot, O Bhimasena,
obtain sleep,--what to speak you of the rest? I do not know, O
mighty-armed one, what sin Sahadeva may have committed for which that
hero of unbaffled prowess suffereth such misery. O foremost of the
Bharatas, beholding that beloved brother of thine, that bull among men,
employed by Matsya in looking after his kine, I am filled with woe.
Seeing that hero of proud disposition gratifying Virata, by living at
the head of his cowherds, attired in robes dyed in red, I am attacked
with fever. My mother-in-law always applauds the heroic Sahadeva as one
possessed of nobility, excellent behaviour, and rectitude of conduct.
Ardently attached to her sons, the weeping Kunti stood, embracing
Sahadeva while he was about to set out (with us) for the great forest.
And she addressed me saying, "Sahadeva is bashful and sweet-speeched,
and virtuous. He is also my favourite child. Therefore, O Yajnaseni,
tend him in the forest day and night. Delicate and brave, devoted to the
king, and always worshipping his elder brother, do thou, O Panchali,
feed him thyself." O Pandava, beholding that foremost of warriors,
Sahadeva, engaged in tending kine, and sleeping at night on calf-skins,
how can I bear to live? He again who is crowned with the three
attributes of beauty, arms, and intelligence, is now the superintendent
of Virata's steeds. Behold the change brought on by time. Granthika
(Nakula), at sight of whom hostile hosts fled from the field of battle,
now traineth horses in the presence of the king, driving them with the
speed. Alas, I now see that handsome youth wait upon the gorgeously
decked and excellent Virata, the king of the Matsyas, and display horses
before him. O son of Pritha, afflicted as I am with all these hundred
kinds of misery on account of Yudhishthira, why dost thou, O chastiser
of foes, yet deem me happy? Listen now to me, O son of Kunti, as I tell
thee of other woes far surpassing these. What can be sadder to me than
miseries so various as these should emaciate me while ye are alive.'"


SECTION XX

"Draupadi said, 'Alas, on account of that desperate gambler, I am now
under Sudeshna's command, living in the palace in the guise of a
_Sairindhri_. And, O chastiser of foes, behold the plight of poignant
woe which I, a princess, am now in. I am living in expectation of the
close of this stated period.[14] The extreme of misery, therefore, is
mine. Success of purpose, victory, and defeat, as regards mortals, are
transitory. It is in this belief that I am living in expectation of the
return of prosperity to my husbands. Prosperity and adversity revolve
like a wheel. It is in this belief that I am living in expectation of
the return of prosperity to my husbands. That cause which bringeth on
victory, may bring defeat as well. I live in this hope. Why dost thou
not, O Bhimasena, regard me as one dead? I have heard that persons that
give may beg: that they who slay may be slain; and that they who
over-throw others may themselves be overthrown by foes. Nothing is
difficult for Destiny and none can over-ride Destiny. It is for this
that I am awaiting the return of favourable fortune. As a tank once
dried, is filled up once again, so hoping for a change for the better, I
await the return of prosperity. When one's business that hath been
well-provided for is seen to be frustrated, a truly wise person should
never strive for bringing back good fortune. Plunged as I am an sorrow,
asked or unasked by thee to explain the purpose of these words spoken by
me, I shall tell thee everything. Queen of the sons of Pandu and
daughter of Drupada, who else, save myself, would wish to live, having
fallen into such a plight? O represser of foes, the misery, therefore,
that hath overtaken me, hath really humiliated the entire _Kuru_ race,
the Panchalas, and the sons of Pandu. Surrounded by numerous brothers
and father-in-law and sons, what other woman having such cause for joy,
save myself, would be afflicted with such woe? Surely, I must, in my
childhood, have committed act highly offensive to _Dhatri_ through whose
displeasure, O bull of the Bharata race, I have been visited with such
consequences. Mark, O son of Pandu, the pallour that hath come over my
complexion which not even a life in the woods fraught as it was with
extreme misery, could bring about. Thou, O Pritha's son, knowest what
happiness, O Bhima, was formerly mine. Even I, who was such have now
sunk into servitude. Sorely distressed, I can find no rest. That the
mighty-armed and terrible bowman, Dhananjaya the son of Pritha, should
now live like a fire that hath been put out, maketh me think of all this
as attributable to Destiny. Surely, O son of Pritha, it is impossible
for men to understand the destinies of creatures (in this world). I,
therefore, think this downfall of yours as something that could not be
averted by forethought. Alas, she who hath you all, that resemble Indra
himself to attend to her comforts--even she, so chaste and exalted, hath
now to attend to the comforts of others, that are to her far inferior in
rank. Behold, O Pandava, my plight. It is what I do not deserve. You are
alive, yet behold this inversion of order that time hath brought. She
who had the whole Earth to the verge of the sea under her control, is
now under the control of Sudeshna and living in fear of her. She who had
dependants to walk both before and behind her, alas, now herself walketh
before and behind Sudeshna. This, O Kaunteya, is another grief of mine
that is intolerable. O, listen to it. She who had never, save for Kunti,
pounded unguents even for her own use, now, good betide thee, poundeth
sandal (for others). O Kaunteya, behold these hands of mine which were
not so before.' Saying this she showed him her hands marked with corns.
And she continued, 'she who had never feared Kunti herself nor thee and
thy brothers, now standeth in fear before Virata as a slave, anxious of
what that king of kings may say unto her regarding the proper
preparation of the unguents, for Matsya liketh not sandal pounded by
others.'"

    [14] What Draupadi means is that instead of passing her days in
    joy and happiness, instead of being able to wish time to be
    stationary with her, she is obliged in consequence of her
    misery, to wish time to pass off quickly.

Vaisampayana continued, "Relating her woes thus, O Bharata, unto
Bhimasena, Krishna began to weep silently, casting her eyes on Bhima.
And then, with words choked in tears, and sighing repeatedly, she
addressed Bhima in these words, powerfully stirring his heart, 'Signal,
O Bhima, must have been my offence of old unto the gods, for,
unfortunate as I am. I am yet alive, when, O Pandava, I should die.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Then that slayer of hostile heroes, Vrikodara,
covering his face with those delicate hands of his wife marked with
corns, began to weep. And that mighty son of Kunti, holding the hands of
Draupadi in his, shed copious tears. And afflicted with great woe, he
spoke these words."


SECTION XXI

"Bhima said, 'Fie on the might of my arms and fie on the _Gandiva_ of
Phalguna, inasmuch as thy hands, red before, now become covered with
corns. I would have caused a carnage in Virata's court but for the fact
that Kunti's son eyed me (by way of forbidding it), or like a mighty
elephant, I would, without ado, have crushed the head of Kichaka
intoxicated with the pride of sovereignty. When, O Krishna, I beheld
thee kicked by Kichaka, I conceived at that instant a wholesale
slaughter of the Matsyas. Yudhishthira, however, forbade me by a glance,
and, O beauteous lady, understanding his intention I have kept quiet.
That we have been deprived of our kingdom, that I have not yet slain the
Kurus, that I have not yet taken the heads of Suyodhana and Karna, and
Suvala's son Sakuni, and the wicked Duhsasana, these acts and omissions,
O lady, are consuming every limb of mine. The thought of those abides in
my heart like a javelin implanted in it. O thou of graceful hips, do not
sacrifice virtue, and, O noble-hearted lady, subdue thy wrath. If king
Yudhishthira hear from thee such rebukes, he will surely put an end to
his life. If also Dhananjaya and the twins hear thee speak thus, even
they will renounce life. And if these, O slender-waisted maiden, give up
life, I also shall not be able to bear my own. In olden days Sarjati's
daughter, the beautiful Sukanya, followed into the forest Chyavana of
Bhrigu's race, whose mind was under complete control, and over whom,
while engaged in ascetic meditation, the ants had built a hill. Thou
mayst have heard that Indrasena also who in beauty was like unto
_Narayani_ herself, followed her husband aged a thousand years. Thou
mayst have heard that Janaka's daughter Sita, the princess of Videha,
followed her lord while living in dense woods. And that lady of graceful
hips, Rama's beloved wife, afflicted with calamities and persecuted by
the Rakshasas, at length regained the company of Rama. Lopamudra also, O
timid one, endued with youth and beauty, followed Agastya, renouncing
all the objects of enjoyment unattainable by men. And the intelligent
and faultless Savitri also followed the heroic Satyavan, the son of
Dyumatsena, alone into the world of Yama. Even like these chaste and
beautiful ladies that I have named, thou, O blessed girl, bloomest with
every virtue. Do thou spend a short while more that is measured by even
a half month. And when the thirteenth year is complete, thou wilt
(again) become the Queen regnant of a king.' Hearing these words,
Draupadi said, 'Unable, O Bhima, to bear my griefs, it is from grief
alone that I have shed these tears. I do not censure Yudhishthira. Nor
is there any use in dwelling on the past. O Bhima of mighty strength,
come quickly forward to the work of the hour. O Bhima, Kaikeyi, jealous
of my beauty, always pains me by her endeavours to prevent the king from
taking a fancy to me. And understanding this disposition of hers, the
wicked-souled Kichaka of immoral ways constantly solicits me himself.
Angry with him for this, but then suppressing my wrath I answer that
wretch deprived of sense by lust, saying, "O Kichaka, protect thyself. I
am the beloved queen and wife of five Gandharvas. Those heroes in wrath
will slay thee that art so rash." Thus addressed, Kichaka of wicked soul
replied unto me, saying, "I have not the least fear of the Gandharvas, O
Sairindhri of sweet smiles. I will slay hundred thousand Gandharvas,
encountering them in battle. Therefore, O timid one, do thou consent."
Hearing all this, I again addressed the lust-afflicted Suta, saying,
"Thou art no match for those illustrious Gandharvas. Of respectable
percentage and good disposition, I ever adhere to virtue and never wish
for the death of any one. It is for this that thou I vest, O Kichaka!"
At this, that wight of wicked soul burst out into a loud laughter. And
it came to pass that Kaikeyi previously urged by Kichaka, and moved by
affection for her brother, and desirous of doing him a good turn,
despatched me to him, saying "Do thou, O Sairindhri, fetch wine from
Kichaka's quarters!" On beholding me the Suta's son at first addressed
me in sweet words, and when that failed, he became exceedingly enraged,
and intended to use violence. Understanding the purpose of the wicked
Kichaka, I speedily rushed towards the place where the king was. Felling
me on the ground the wretch then kicked me in the very presence of the
king himself and before the eyes of Kanka and many others, including
charioteers, and royal favourites, and elephant-riders, and citizens. I
rebuked the king and Kanka again and again. The king, however, neither
prevented Kichaka, nor inflicted any chastisement on him. The principal
ally of king Virata in war, the cruel Kichaka reft of virtue is loved by
both the king and the queen. O exalted one, brave, proud, sinful,
adulterous, and engrossed in all objects of enjoyment, he earneth
immense wealth (from the king), and robs the possessions of others even
if they cry in distress. And he never walketh in the path of virtue, nor
doth he any virtuous act. Of wicked soul, and vicious disposition,
haughty and villainous, and always afflicted by the shafts of Kama,
though repulsed repeatedly, if he sees me again, he will outrage me. I
shall then surely renounce my life. Although striving to acquire virtue
(on my death) your highly meritorious acts will come to naught. Ye that
are now obeying your pledge, ye will lose your wife. By protecting one's
wife one's offspring are protected, and by protecting one's offspring,
one's own self is protected. And it is because one begets one's own self
in one's wife that the wife is called _Jaya_[15] by the wise. The
husband also should be protected by the wife, thinking,--_How else will
he take his birth in my womb_?--I have heard it from Brahmanas
expounding the duties of the several orders that a Kshatriya hath no
other duty than subduing enemies. Alas, Kichaka kicked me in the very
presence of Yudhishthira the Just, and also of thyself, O Bhimasena of
mighty strength. It was thou, O Bhima, that didst deliver me from the
terrible Jatasura. It was thou also that with thy brothers didst
vanquish Jayadratha. Do thou now slay this wretch also who hath insulted
me. Presuming upon his being a favourite of the king, Kichaka, O
Bharata, hath enhanced my woe. Do thou, therefore, smash this lustful
wight even like an earthen pot dashed upon a stone. If, O Bharata,
tomorrow's sun sheds his rays upon him who is the source of many griefs
of mine, I shall, surely, mixing poison (with some drink), drink it
up,--for I never shall yield to Kichaka. Far better it were, O Bhima,
that I should die before thee.'"

    [15] _Jayate asyas_--i.e., she from whom one is born.

Vaisampayana continued, "Having said this, Krishna, hiding her face in
Bhima's breast began to weep. And Bhima, embracing her, consoled her to
the best of his power. And having abundantly consoled that
slender-waisted daughter of Drupada by means of words fraught with grave
reason and sense, he wiped with his hands her face flooded with tears.
And thinking of Kichaka and licking with his tongue the corners of his
mouth, Bhima, filled with wrath thus spake to that distressed lady."


SECTION XXII

"Bhima said, 'I will, O timid one, do even as thou sayest. I will
presently slay Kichaka with all his friends. O Yajnaseni of sweet
smiles, tomorrow evening, renouncing sorrow and grief, manage to have a
meeting with Kichaka. The dancing-hall that the king of the Matsya hath
caused to be erected is used by the girls for dancing during the day.
They repair, however, to their homes at night. There in that hall, is an
excellent and well-placed wooden bed-stead. Even there I will make him
see the spirits of his deceased grandsires. But, O beautiful one, when
thou holdest converse with him, thou must manage it so that others may
not espy thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having thus conversed with others, and shed
tears in grief, they waited for the dawn of that night with painful
impatience. And when the night had passed away, Kichaka, rising in the
morning, went to the palace, and accosted Draupadi saying, 'Throwing
thee down in the court I kicked thee in the presence of the king.
Attacked by mighty self, thou couldst not obtain protection. This Virata
is in name only the king of the Matsyas. Commanding the forces of this
realm it is I, who am the real lord of the Matsyas. Do thou, O timid
one, accept me cheerfully. I shall become thy slave. And, O thou of
graceful hips, I will immediately give thee a hundred _nishkas_, and
engage a hundred male and a hundred female servants (to tend thee), and
will also bestow on thee cars yoked with she-mules. O timid lady, let
our union take place.' Draupadi replied, 'O Kichaka, know even this is
my condition. Neither thy friends nor thy brothers should know thy union
with me. I am a terror of detection by those illustrious Gandharvas.
Promise me this, and I yield to thee.' Hearing this Kichaka said, 'I
will, O thou of graceful hips, do even as thou sayest. Afflicted by the
god of love, I will, O beauteous damsel, alone repair to thy abode for
union with thee, O thou of thighs round and tapering like the trunks of
the plantain,--so that those Gandharvas, effulgent as the sun, may not
come to know of this act of thine.' Draupadi said, 'Do thou, when it is
dark, go to the dancing-hall erected by the king of the Matsyas where
the girls dance during the day, repairing to their respective homes at
night. The Gandharvas do not know that place. We shall then without
doubt, escape all censure.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Reflecting on the subject of her conversation
with Kichaka, that half a day seemed to Krishna as long as a whole
month. And the stupid Kichaka also, not knowing that it was Death that
had assumed the form of a _Sairindhri_, returning home experienced the
greatest delight. And deprived of sense by lust, Kichaka became speedily
engaged in embellishing his person with unguents and garlands and
ornaments. And while he was doing all this, thinking of that damsel of
large eyes, the day seemed to him to be without an end. And the beauty
of Kichaka, who was about to forsake his beauty for ever, seemed to
heighten, like the wick of a burning lamp about to expire. And reposing
the fullest confidence in Draupadi, Kichaka, deprived of his senses by
lust and absorbed in the contemplation of expected meeting, did not even
perceive that the day had departed. Meanwhile, the beautiful Draupadi
approaching her husband Bhima of the Kuru race, stood before him in the
kitchen. And that lady with tresses ending in beautiful curls then spake
unto him, saying, 'O chastiser of foes, even as thou hadst directed, I
have given Kichaka to understand that our meeting will take place in the
dancing-hall. Alone will he come at night to the empty hall. Slay him
there, O thou of mighty arms. Do thou, O son of Kunti, repair to that
dancing-hall, and take the life, O Pandava, of Kichaka, that son of a
_Suta_ intoxicated with vanity. From vanity alone, that son of a _Suta_
slights the Gandharvas. O best of smiters, lift him up from the earth
even as Krishna had lifted up the _Naga_ (Kaliya) from the Yamuna. O
Pandava, afflicted as I am with grief, wipe thou my tears, and blessed
be thou, protect thy own honour and that of thy race.'

"Bhima said, 'Welcome, O beauteous lady. Except the glad tidings thou
bringest me, I need, O thou of exceeding beauty, no other aid whatever.
The delight that I feel, O thou of great beauty, on hearing from thee
about my coming encounter with Kichaka, is equal to what I felt in
slaying Hidimva. I swear unto thee by Truth, by my brothers, and by
morality, that I will slay Kichaka even as the lord of the celestials
slew Vritra. Whether secretly or openly, I will crush Kichaka, and if
