illustriously displayed; for, says the apostle, "He shall come to be
glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe."

But this glory of the Divinity is specially to shine forth in the person
of the Son. He it was, that "being found in fashion as a man, humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God hath highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is
above every name: that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven and things in earth, and things under the earth; and
that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory
of God the Father." Accordingly, "the Father judgeth no man, but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son." It is the _Son_ who will come "in
the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory"; whom "every eye shall
see;" and who, "in his own glory, and in the glory of the Father, and of
the holy angels," shall "judge the world in righteousness." Then will he
who humbled himself, and "became obedient unto death," be publicly
recognised as "the Mighty God," "by whom, and for whose pleasure, all
things are, and were created." Then will "every tongue confess that he
is Lord." The conviction will then be universal, "that all men should
honour the Son even as they honour the Father." This leads us to
inquire,


III. _What connexion will the Judgment have with our future and eternal
condition?_

Here let us not indulge in vain speculations, but examine simply the
word of God. According to the Scriptures, the judgment will result in
assigning to men _very different allotments_. It will recognise among
them two entirely different and opposite classes of character. One of
these classes, which the Bible denominates "the righteous," will be
graciously acquitted by the Judge, and publicly treated as his friends.
The other, comprising all the impenitent, will be as publicly condemned,
and driven from his presence. They "will have judgment without mercy."
Such is plainly the account which Christ and the sacred writers have
given of the final awards to the righteous and the wicked. We have the
account in detail. Says the Saviour himself, "When the Son of Man shall
come in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then shall he sit
upon the throne of his glory: and before him shall be gathered all
nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a shepherd
divideth his sheep from the goats; and he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them
on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world." "Then shall he say
also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." And again;
"The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves shall hear
his voice, and shall come forth; _they that have done good_, unto the
resurrection of _life_; and _they that have done evil_, unto the
resurrection of _damnation_". Thus broad and fearful is the
discrimination which the great day will make between the righteous and
the wicked. So entirely different are the awards in reserve for the two
different classes of mankind. The difference will be great, as between
holiness and sin; between cheerful submission to the will and providence
of God, and unyielding rebellion against him; between cordial faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and wilful rejection of the only Saviour; between
the splendour and joy of the celestial Paradise, and the gloominess and
misery of hell. No wonder, then, that "as Paul reasoned of
righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix trembled." There
will, indeed, be fearful reason for "weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth," with those who shall then "see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob,
and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out."

We are not to forget, my hearers, that these different awards of the
judgment day will be _irreversible_ and literally _endless_. All admit
this conclusion, with respect to the _righteous_. But if the righteous
are _finally acquitted_ at the judgment, so are the wicked _finally
condemned_. If the righteous are said to enter into "_life eternal_," so
are the wicked to "go away into _everlasting punishment_." The
Scriptures say not one word of any reprieve from this condemnation, or
of any other period of merciful visitation. But they close with the most
solemn assurance, that, from that awful day, he that is unjust shall be
unjust still; and he that is filthy shall be filthy still; and he that
is righteous shall be righteous still; and he that is holy shall be holy
still. Other passages, of similar import, might be quoted: but if men
will pour contempt on a single declaration of Jehovah--if they will
_make God a liar_--they would not be persuaded, though his voice from
the heavens were a thousand times repeated. And _because they receive
not the love of the truth_, _that they might be saved_, most justly may
he _send them strong delusion_, _that they should believe a lie_, and
_be damned._

I have thus endeavoured, with much brevity, to give a scriptural view of
the final Judgment. On a subject so tremendously awful, I have chosen to
present simply God's testimony. A practical inference from the whole
is,--that the present life must be regarded as probationary. We are
living here as responsible agents, continually adding to the number of
actions, for which we must give account to God. How solemnly
interesting, then, is this scene of our earthly pilgrimage! How
inexpressibly valuable is time! How infinitely precious are the means of
grace!--particularly those invitations of mercy, which meet us in the
word of God, and address us from the sacred desk.

You, my fellow sinners, are the very individuals who must stand at the
judgment-seat of Christ. You must mingle in that vast multitude, which
the voice of the archangel and the trump of God shall assemble. And when
your characters are all laid open, you must pass off to the right hand,
or to the left, accordingly as it shall appear, that you have repented,
and believed on the Son of God, or have neglected this great salvation.
And are you diligently preparing for that day? Are you working out your
salvation with fear and trembling? Are you _agonizing_ to enter in at
the strait gate? Are you escaping for your life?

Fellow mortals, your time of preparation may be far more brief than you
now think. A few, _very few_ more opportunities for prayer, and
reconciliation with God, and your account is sealed up. While you
hesitate, the recording angel may be writing your condemnation. In such
circumstances, what are worldly honours, or wealth, or all your hopes of
enjoyment here? The life, the _eternal life_ of the _soul_, is the _one
thing needful_--the _only_ thing really important. You will realize this
truth, when the last trumpet is sounding through the universe, and, with
increasing agony or ecstasy, millions of ages after the final sentence
is pronounced. O, then, consider it _now_. Prepare for that judgment,
_now_. To-morrow! where is it? Repent _to-morrow_! You may have far
other work to do. God, and conscience, and your immortal interests
plead, "_To-day_, if you will hear his voice, harden not your heart."
"Behold, _now_ is the accepted time; behold, _now_ is the day of
salvation." _Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way,
when his wrath is kindled but a little. For he cometh, for he cometh, to
judge the world, in righteousness to judge the earth, and the people
with his truth_.




TERMS

OF THE

NATIONAL PREACHER.


I. Each Monthly Number to contain one long Sermon, or two of moderate
length, on fine paper. The Volume to commence annually the last week in
June.

II. Price, One Dollar annually, _in advance, or on becoming a
Subscriber_, or One Dollar and Fifty cents, if payment is delayed after
the receipt of six Numbers.

III. _Five_ or more persons forwarding their annual payments _at one
time_, _on becoming Subscribers_, _or immediately after the receipt of
the first Numbers of the Volume_, may receive the work for the year at
_eighty cents_ each. Or _twelve_ or more so doing, may receive it at
_seventy-five cents_ each: (viz. 6 1/4 cents a Number.)

IV. An Index and Title-page, referring to all the Numbers, will
accompany the twelfth.

SUBSCRIBERS' NAMES. RESIDENCE.

NOTE. _Ten Cents_ each will be allowed for procuring and furnishing the
Editor _new_ Subscribers on any terms stated above. Essential service
might be rendered by copying the above terms in handsome form, and
employing a faithful person to go through the neighbourhood, with a
specimen of the work. The names of present subscribers may be
ascertained at the Post Office.

Copies furnished, by the dozen or hundred, at Tract prices, for
gratuitous distribution.

Such Subscribers as do not give the Editor notice to the contrary,
before the first of June, will be considered as Subscribers for the
ensuing year. Any one can discontinue on paying up arrearages.

