those who have themselves failed in the business of the soul pay the
debts of their spiritual insolvents? Can a million wrongs make one
right?

Poneropolis was a city where King Philip of Thracia put all the bad
people of his kingdom. If any man had opened a primary school at
Poneropolis I do not think the parents from other cities would have
sent their children there. Instead of amendment in the other world,
all the associations, now that the good are evolved, will be
degenerating and down. You would not want to send a man to a cholera
or yellow fever hospital for his health; and the great lazaretto of
the next world, containing the diseased and plague-struck, will be a
poor place for moral recovery. If the surroundings in this world were
crowded of temptation, the surroundings of the next world, after the
righteous have passed up and on, will be a thousand per cent. more
crowded of temptation.

The Count of Chateaubriand made his little son sleep at night at the
top of a castle turret, where the winds howled and where specters were
said to haunt the place; and while the mother and sisters almost died
with fright, the son tells us that the process gave him nerves that
could not tremble and a courage that never faltered. But I don't think
that towers of darkness and the spectral world swept by Sirocco and
Euroclydon will ever fit one for the land of eternal sunshine. I
wonder what is the curriculum of that college of Inferno, where, after
proper preparation by the sins of this life, the candidate enters,
passing on from freshman class of depravity to sophomore of
abandonment, and from sophomore to junior, and from junior to senior,
and day of graduation comes, and with diploma signed by Satan, the
president, and other professorial demoniacs, attesting that the
candidate has been long enough under their drill, he passes up to
enter heaven! Pandemonium a preparative course for heavenly admission!
Ah, my friends, Satan and his cohorts have fitted uncounted
multitudes for ruin, but never fitted one soul for happiness.

Furthermore, it would not be safe for this world if men had another
chance in the next. If it had been announced that, however wickedly a
man might act in this world, he could fix it up all right in the next,
society would be terribly demoralized, and the human race demolished
in a few years. The fear that, if we are bad and unforgiven here, it
will not be well for us in the next existence, is the chief influence
that keeps civilization from rushing back to semi-barbarism, and
semi-barbarism from rushing into midnight savagery, and midnight
savagery from extinction; for it is the astringent impression of all
nations, Christian and heathen, that there is no future chance for
those who have wasted this.

Multitudes of men who are kept within bounds would say, "Go to, now!
Let me get all out of this life there is in it. Come, gluttony, and
inebriation, and uncleanness, and revenge, and all sensualities, and
wait upon me! My life may be somewhat shortened in this world by
dissoluteness, but that will only make heavenly indulgence on a larger
scale the sooner possible. I will overtake the saints at last, and
will enter the Heavenly Temple only a little later than those who
behaved themselves here. I will on my way to heaven take a little
wider excursion than those who were on earth pious, and I shall go to
heaven _via_ Gehenna and _via_ Sheol." Another chance in the next
world means free license and wild abandonment in this.

Suppose you were a party in an important case at law, and you knew
from consultation with judges and attorneys that it would be tried
twice, and the first trial would be of little importance, but that the
second would decide everything; for which trial would you make the
most preparation, for which retain the ablest attorneys, for which be
most anxious about the attendance of witnesses? You would put all the
stress upon the second trial, all the anxiety, all the expenditure,
saying, "The first is nothing, the last is everything." Give the race
assurance of a second and more important trial in the subsequent life,
and all the preparation for eternity would be _post-mortem_,
post-funeral, post-sepulchral, and the world with one jerk be pitched
off into impiety and godlessness.

Furthermore, let me ask why a chance should be given in the next world
if we have refused innumerable chances in this? Suppose you give a
banquet, and you invite a vast number of friends, but one man declines
to come, or treats your invitation with indifference. You in the
course of twenty years give twenty banquets, and the same man is
invited to them all, and treats them all in the same obnoxious way.
After awhile you remove to another house, larger and better, and you
again invite your friends, but send no invitation to the man who
declined or neglected the other invitations. Are you to blame? Has he
a right to expect to be invited after all the indignities he has done
you? God in this world has invited us all to the banquet of His grace.
He invited us by His Providence and His Spirit three hundred and
sixty-five days of every year since we knew our right hand from our
left. If we declined it every time, or treated the invitation with
indifference, and gave twenty or forty or fifty years of indignity on
our part toward the Banqueter, and at last He spreads the banquet in a
more luxurious and kingly place, amid the heavenly gardens, have we a
right to expect Him to invite us again, and have we a right to blame
Him if He does not invite us?

If twelve gates of salvation stood open twenty years or fifty years
for our admission, and at the end of that time they are closed, can we
complain of it and say, "These gates ought to be open again. Give us
another chance"? If the steamer is to sail for Hamburg, and we want to
get to Germany by that line, and we read in every evening and every
morning newspaper that it will sail on a certain day, for two weeks we
have that advertisement before our eyes, and then we go down to the
docks fifteen minutes after it has shoved off into the stream and say:
"Come back. Give me another chance. It is not fair to treat me in this
way. Swing up to the dock again, and throw out planks, and let me come
on board." Such behavior would invite arrest as a madman.

And if, after the Gospel ship has lain at anchor before our eyes for
years and years, and all the benign voices of earth and heaven have
urged us to get on board, as she might sail away at any moment, and
after awhile she sails without us, is it common sense to expect her to
come back? You might as well go out on the Highlands at Neversink and
call to the "Aurania" after she has been three days out, and expect
her to return, as to call back an opportunity for heaven when it once
has sped away. All heaven offered us as a gratuity, and for a
life-time we refuse to take it, and then rush on the bosses of
Jehovah's buckler demanding another chance. There ought to be, there
can be, there will be no such thing as posthumous opportunity. Thus,
our common sense agrees with my text--"If the tree fall toward the
south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falleth, there
it shall be."

You see that this idea lifts this world up from an unimportant
way-station to a platform of stupendous issues, and makes all eternity
whirl around this hour. But one trial for which all the preparation
must be made in this world, or never made at all. That piles up all
the emphases and all the climaxes and all the destinies into life
here. No other chance! Oh, how that augments the value and the
importance of this chance!

Alexander with his army used to surround a city, and then would lift a
great light in token to the people that, if they surrendered before
that light went out, all would be well; but if once the light went
out, then the battering-rams would swing against the wall, and
demolition and disaster would follow. Well, all we need do for our
present and everlasting safety is to make surrender to Christ, the
King and Conqueror--surrender of our hearts, surrender of our lives,
surrender of everything. And He keeps a great light burning, light of
Gospel invitation, light kindled with the wood of the cross and
flaming up against the dark night of our sin and sorrow. Surrender
while that great light continues to burn, for after it goes out there
will be no other opportunity of making peace with God through our Lord
Jesus Christ. Talk of another chance! Why, this is a supernal chance!

In the time of Edward the Sixth, at the battle of Musselburgh, a
private soldier, seeing that the Earl of Huntley had lost his helmet,
took off his own helmet and put it upon the head of the earl; and the
head of the private soldier uncovered, he was soon slain, while his
commander rode safely out of the battle. But in our case, instead of a
private soldier offering helmet to an earl, it is a King putting His
crown upon an unworthy subject, the King dying that we might live.
Tell it to all points of the compass. Tell it to night and day. Tell
it to all earth and heaven. Tell it to all centuries, all ages, all
millenniums, that we have such a magnificent chance in this world that
we need no other chance in the next.

I am in the burnished Judgment Hall of the Last Day. A great white
throne is lifted, but the Judge has not yet taken it. While we are
waiting for His arrival I hear immortal spirits in conversation. "What
are you waiting here for?" says a soul that went up from Madagascar to
a soul that ascended from America. The latter says: "I came from
America, where forty years I heard the Gospel preached, and Bible
read, and from the prayer that I learned in infancy at my mother's
knee until my last hour I had Gospel advantage, but, for some reason,
I did not make the Christian choice, and I am here waiting for the
Judge to give me a new trial and another chance." "Strange!" says the
other; "I had but one Gospel call in Madagascar, and I accepted it,
and I do not need another chance."

"Why are you here?" says one who on earth had feeblest intellect to
one who had great brain, and silvery tongue, and scepters of
influence. The latter responds: "Oh, I knew more than my fellows. I
mastered libraries, and had learned titles from colleges, and my name
was a synonym for eloquence and power. And yet I neglected my soul,
and I am here waiting for a new trial." "Strange," says the one of the
feeble earthly capacity; "I knew but little of worldly knowledge, but
I knew Christ, and made Him my partner, and I have no need of another
chance."

Now the ground trembles with the approaching chariot. The great
folding-doors of the Hall swing open. "Stand back!" cry the celestial
ushers. "Stand back, and let the Judge of quick and dead pass
through!" He takes the throne, and, looking over the throng of
nations, He says: "Come to judgment, the last judgment, the only
judgment!" By one flash from the throne all the history of each one
flames forth to the vision of himself and all others. "Divide!" says
the Judge to the assembly. "Divide!" echo the walls. "Divide!" cry the
guards angelic.

And now the immortals separate, rushing this way and that, and after
awhile there is a great aisle between them, and a great vacuum
widening and widening, and the Judge, turning to the throng on one
side, says: "He that is righteous, let him be righteous still, and he
that is holy, let him be holy still;" and then, turning toward the
throng on the opposite side, He says: "He that is unjust, let him be
unjust still, and he that is filthy, let him be filthy still;" and
then, lifting one hand toward each group, He declares: "If the tree
fall toward the south or toward the north, in the place where the
tree falleth, there it shall be." And then I hear something jar with a
great sound. It is the closing of the Book of Judgment. The Judge
ascends the stairs behind the throne. The hall of the last assize is
cleared and shut. The high court of eternity is adjourned forever.




THE LORD'S RAZOR.

    "In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is
    hired, namely, by them beyond the river, by the King of
    Assyria."--ISAIAH vii: 20.


The Bible is the boldest book ever written. There are no similitudes
in Ossian or the Iliad or the Odyssey so daring. Its imagery sometimes
seems on the verge of the reckless, but only seems so. The fact is
that God would startle and arouse and propel men and nations. A tame
and limping similitude would fail to accomplish the object. While
there are times when He employs in the Bible the gentle dew and the
morning cloud and the dove and the daybreak in the presentation of
truth, we often find the iron chariot, the lightning, the earthquake,
the spray, the sword, and, in my text, the razor.

This keen-bladed instrument has advanced in usefulness with the ages.
In Bible times and lands the beard remained uncut save in the seasons
of mourning and humiliation, but the razor was always a suggestive
symbol. David says of Doeg, his antagonist: "Thy tongue is a sharp
razor working deceitfully;" that is, it pretends to clear the face,
but is really used for deadly incision. In this morning's text the
weapon of the toilet appears under the following circumstances: Judea
needed to have some of its prosperities cut off, and God sends
against it three Assyrian kings--first Sennacherib, then Esrahaddon,
and afterward Nebuchadnezzar. Those three sharp invasions, that cut
down the glory of Judea, are compared to so many sweeps of the razor
across the face of the land. And these circumstances were called a
hired razor because God took the kings of Assyria, with whom He had no
sympathy, to do the work, and paid them in palaces and spoils and
annexations. These kings were hired to execute the divine behests. And
now the text, which on its first reading may have seemed trivial or
inapt, is charged with momentous import: "In the same day shall the
Lord shave with a razor that is hired--namely, by them beyond the
river, by the King of Assyria."

Well, if God's judgments are razors, we had better be careful how we
use them on other people. In careful sheath these domestic weapons are
put away, where no one by accident may touch them, and where the hands
of children may not reach them. Such instruments must be carefully
handled or not handled at all. But how recklessly some people wield
the judgments of God! If a man meet with business misfortune, how many
there are ready to cry out: "That is a judgment of God upon him
because he was unscrupulous, or arrogant, or overreaching, or miserly.
I thought he would get cut down! What a clean sweep of everything! His
city house and country house gone! His stables emptied of all the fine
bays and sorrels and grays that used to prance by his door! All his
resources overthrown, and all that he prided himself on tumbled into
demolition! Good for him!" Stop, my brother. Don't sling around too
freely the judgments of God, for they are razors.

Some of the most wicked business men succeed, and they live and die in
prosperity, and some of the most honest and conscientious are driven
into bankruptcy. Perhaps his manner was unfortunate, and he was not
really as proud as he looked to be. Some of those who carry their head
erect and look imperial are humble as a child, while many a man in
seedy coat and slouch hat and unblacked shoes is as proud as Lucifer.
You can not tell by a man's look. Perhaps he was not unscrupulous in
business, for there are two sides to every story, and everybody that
accomplishes anything for himself or others gets industriously lied
about. Perhaps his business misfortune was not a punishment, but the
fatherly discipline to prepare him for heaven, and God may love him
far more than He loves you, who can pay dollar for dollar, and are put
down in the commercial catalogues as A1. Whom the Lord loveth He gives
four hundred thousand dollars and lets die on embroidered pillows? No:
whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth. Better keep your hand off the
Lord's razors, lest they cut and wound people that do not deserve it.
If you want to shave off some of the bristling pride of your own heart
do so; but be very careful how you put the sharp edge on others.

How I do dislike the behavior of those persons who, when people are
unfortunate, say: "I told you so--getting punished--served him right."
If those I-told-you-so's got their desert they would long ago have
been pitched over the battlements. The mote in their neighbor's
eyes--so small that it takes a microscope to find it--gives them more
trouble than the beam which obscures their own optics. With air
sometimes supercilious and sometimes Pharisaical, and always
blasphemous, they take the razor of the divine judgment and sharpen it
on the hone of their own hard hearts, and then go to work on men
sprawled out at full length under disaster, cutting mercilessly. They
begin by soft expressions of sympathy and pity and half praise, and,
lather the victim all over before they put on the sharp edge.

Let us be careful how we shoot at others lest we take down the wrong
one, remembering the servant of King William Rufus who shot at a deer,
but the arrow glanced against a tree and killed the king. Instead of
going out with shafts to pierce, and razors to cut, we had better
imitate the friend of Richard Coeur de Lion, who, in the war of the
Crusades, was captured and imprisoned, but none of his friends knew
where. So his loyal friend went around the land from stronghold to
stronghold, and sung at each window a snatch of song that Richard
Coeur de Lion had taught him in other days. And one day, coming before
a jail where he suspected his king might be incarcerated, he sung two
lines of song, and immediately King Richard responded from his cell
with the other two lines, and so his whereabouts were discovered, and
immediately a successful movement was made for his liberation. So let
us go up and down the world with the music of kind words and
sympathetic hearts, serenading the unfortunate, and trying to get out
of trouble men who had noble natures, but, by unforeseen
circumstances, have been incarcerated, thus liberating kings. More
hymn-book and less razor.

Especially ought we to be apologetic and merciful toward those who,
while they have great faults, have also great virtues. Some people are
barren of virtues. No weeds verily, but no flowers. I must not be too
much enraged at a nettle along the fence if it be in a field
containing forty acres of ripe Michigan wheat. At the present time,
naturalists tell us, there is on the sun a spot twenty thousand miles
long, but from the brightness and warmth I conclude it is a good deal
of a sun yet.

Again, when I read in my text that the Lord shaves with the hired
razor of Assyria the land of Judea, I bethink myself of the precision
