words of war.


_Notes._

There is slight mention of the deity Xipe Totec in the Spanish writers.
He was the patron divinity of the silversmiths, and his festival,
attended with peculiarly bloody rites, was celebrated in the first month
of the calendar. (Duran, _Historia_, cap. 87; Sahagun, Lib. I., cap. 18,
Lib. II., cap. 21, etc.) Totec is named as one of the companions of
Quetzalcoatl, and an ancient divinity whose temple stood on the
_Tzatzitepec_ (see the _Codex Vaticanus_; Tab. XII., in Kingsborough's
_Mexico_). His high priest was called _Youallauan_, "the nocturnal
tippler" (_youalli_, night, and _tlauana_, to drink to slight
intoxication), and it was his duty to tear out the hearts of the human
victims (Sahagun, _u.s._). The epithet _Yoatzin_, "noble night-god,"
bears some relation to the celebration of his rites at night.




[Illustration: CHICOMECOATL, GODDESS OF FOOD AND DRINK. HYMN XVI.]




XVI. _Chicomecoatl icuic._


  1. Chicomollotzin xayameua, ximicotica aca tona titech icnocauazqui
tiyauia mochan tlallocan nouia.

  2. Xayameua ximicotica aca tonan titech icnocauazqui tiyauian mochan
tlallocan nouiya.

_Var._ 1. Xaia mehoa.


_Gloss._

  1. _Q.n._, yn ti chicomolotl, _id est_, in ti centli ximeua, xica,
xixoa, ca otimouicaya in mochan tlallocan.

  2. _Q.n._, xayameua, _id est_, ximeua, xixua, xica, ca otimouicaya in
mochantzinco in tlallocan ca yuhquin ti tonatzon.


_Hymn to Chicomecoatl._

  1. O noble Chicomolotl, arise, awake, leave us not unprotected on the
way, conduct us to the home of Tlaloc.

  2. Arise, awake, leave us not unprotected on the way, conduct us to
the home of Tlaloc.


_Notes._

The goddess Chicomecoatl, "seven guests," was the deity who presided
over food and drink. Hence in the first verse she is referred to as
Chicomolotl, "seven ears of corn," and is spoken of as a guide to
Tlalocan, or the home of abundance.

Father Duran, who gives a long chapter on this goddess (_Historia_, cap.
92), translates her name "serpent of seven heads," and adds that she was
also called _Chalciucihuatl_, "Lady of the Emerald," and _Xilonen_,
"goddess of the tender ears of maize." Every kind of seed and vegetable
which served for food was under her guardianship, and hence her festival,
held about the middle of September, was particularly solemn. Her statue
represented her as a girl of about twelve years old.




[Illustration: TOTOCHTIN, THE RABBITS, GODS OF THE DRUNKARDS. HYMN XVII.]




XVII. _Totochtin incuic Tezcatzoncatl._


  1. Yyaha, yya yya, yya ayya, ayya ouiya, ayya yya, ayya yya, yyauiyya,
ayya ayya, yya ayya, yya yya yye.

  2. Coliuacan mauizpan atlacatl ichana, yya ayya, yyayyo.

  3. Tezcatzonco tecpan teutl, macoc ye chocaya, auia, macaiui, macayui
teutl, macoc yye chocaya.

  4. Auia axalaco tecpanteutl, macoc yye chocaya, macayui, macayui
teutl, macoc yye chocaya.

_Var._ 3. Tezcatzoncatl tepan. 4. Axalaca.


_Gloss._

  1. Y tlauelcuic, tlauelcuica.

  2. Coliuacan mauizpa tlacatlichana, _q.n._, in tlacatl, _id est_,
octli ompa ichan ni colhoacan. Mauizpa, _q.n._, temamauhtican.

  3. Tezcatzonco tecpanteutl, _q.n._, ye choca in omacoc teutl
tezcatzonco tecpan, _id est_, octli. Quimonacayotia in teutl. Macaiui
teutl, _q.n._, macamo omatoni in teutl, _id est_, octli, ye choca cayamo
ynemac.

  4. Aia axalaco tecpanteutl, _q.n._, axala in tecpanteutl. Ye choca yn
omacoc, _id est_, octli axalatecpan, ye choca in omacoc, macamo omaco ni
ye choca cayamo ynemac.


_Hymn to Tezcatzoncatl Totochtin._

  1. Alas! alas! alas! alas! alas! alas!

  2. In the home of our ancestors this creature was a fearful thing.

  3. In the temple of Tezcatzoncatl he aids those who cry to him, he
gives them to drink; the god gives to drink to those who cry to him.

  4. In the temple by the water-reeds the god aids those who call upon
him, he gives them to drink; the god aids those who cry unto him.


_Notes._

Tezcatzoncatl was one of the chief gods of the native inebriating
liquor, the pulque. Its effects were recognized as most disastrous, as
is seen from his other names, _Tequechmecaniani_, "he who hangs people,"
and _Teatlahuiani_, "he who drowns people." Sahagun remarks, "They
always regarded the pulque as a bad and dangerous article." The word
_Totochtin_, plural of _tochtli_, rabbit, was applied to drunkards, and
also to some of the deities of special forms of drunkenness.

The first verse is merely a series of lamentations. The second speaks of
the sad effects of the pulque in ancient times. (On Colhuacan see Notes
to Hymn XIII.)




[Illustration: ATLAUA, SINGING AND DANCING. HYMN XVIII.]




XVIII. _Atlaua Icuic._


  1. Auia nichalmecatl, nichalmecatl, necaualcautla, necaualcautla, olya
quatonalla olya.

  2. Ueya, ueya, macxoyauh quilazteutl y tlapani macxoyauh.

  3. Nimitz acatecunotzaya, chimalticpao monecoya nimitzacatecunotzaya.

  4. Ayac nomiuh timalla aytolloca nacatl nomiuh aca xeliui timalla.

  5. Tetoma amo yolcana tlamacazquinte tometl, acan axcan ye
quetzaltototl, nic ya izcaltiquetla.

  6. Y yopuchi noteuh atlauaquetl, aca naxcan ye quetzaltototl, nic ya
izcaltiquetla.

  1. Necaualcactla. 2. Itlamani. 4. Aitollaca acatl. Timalli. 5. Tetonac
amo yolcana tlamacaz quin tetometl.


_Gloss._

  1. _Q.n._, ynichalmecatl, yn inecaualac oqixicauhteuac y nioholti, y
nioya, ixquatechimal iquatunal.

  2. _Q.n._, ma xiyauh ti quilazteutl, momactemi in macxoyauh.

  3. _Q.n._, iniquac onimitznotz, mochimalticpac timicoya.

  4. _Q.n._, atle nomiuh yc notimaloa, ca uel itoloc in acatl nomiuh, yn
acatl xeliui yc ninotimaloa.

  5. _Q.n._, oncan euac in tetuman nitlacochtetumetl. Auh inaxcan ye
quetzaltotol inic ni tlazcaltia.

  6. _Q.n._, tiacauh in oteuh in atlaua, auh inaxcan yuhqui quetzaltotol
in nitlazcaltia.


_The Hymn of Atlaua._

  1. I Chalmecatl, I Chalmecatl, I leave behind my sandles, I leave my
sandles and my helmet.

  2. Go ye forth and follow the goddess Quilaztli, follow her

  3. I shall call upon thee to arise when among the shields, I shall
call upon thee to arise.

  4. I boast of my arrows, even my reed arrows, I boast of my arrows,
not to be broken.

  5. Arrayed in priestly garb, take the arrow in thy hand, for even now
I shall arise and come forth like the quetzal bird.

  6. Mighty is my god Atlaua; truly I shall arise and come forth like
the quetzal bird.


_Notes._

_Atlaua_, mentioned by Olmos, who translates the word "Master of
waters," is a divinity of whom little is known. The derivation from
_atlatl_, arrow, would seem more appropriate to the words of this hymn.
_Chalmecatl_, used as a synonym in v. 1, appears to be from _chalania_,
to beat, to strike, as a drum.

On _Quilaztli_ see notes to Hymn XIII.




XIX. _Macuilxochitl Icuic._


  1. Ayya, yao, xochitlycaca umpan iuitza tlamacazecatla tlamocoyoalca.

  2. Ayya, yao, ayo intinotzicaya teumechaue oya, yao, tlauizcalac
yacallea tlamacazecatlo tlamocoyoualca.

  3. Tetzauhteutla notecuyo tezcatlipuca quinanquilican cinteutla, oay.

  4. Tezcatzonco moyolca ayyaquetl yya tochin quiyocuxquia noteuh,
niquiyatlacaz, niquiyamamaliz, mixcoatepetl colhoacan.

  5. Tozquixaya, nictzotzoniyao, yn tezcatzintli tezcatzintli
tezcaxocoyeua, tzoniztapaliati tlaoc xoconoctlia ho, a.

1. Tlamocoioaleua. 5. Tozquiuaia. Tzoniztapalatiati.


_Gloss._

  1. _Q.n._, ompa nochan in xochitlicacan in itlamacazqui ni
macuilxochitl.

  2. _Q.n._, motilinia in tinoci in ompa titlaecoltilozque umpa tochan
ez.

  3. _Q.n._, yn tetzauitl in tezcatlipoca ca oyaque auh ynic tiui umpa
titlananquilizque in centeotl.

  4. Tezcatzonco moyolcan, _q.n._, tezcatzonco oyol in tochtli ynic yaz,
oquiyocux, oquipic, y noteuh oquito nittlacaz, nicmamaliz, in
mixcoatepetl colhoacan, _id est_, nictepeuaz.

  5. Tozquixaya nictzotzomiao, _q.n._, nictzotzona, in tezcatzintli
oncan nexa in tezcatzonco, oncan oyol tzoniztapalatiati ocxoni ni octli.


_Hymn to Macuilxochitl._

  1. Yes, I shall go there to-night, to the house of flowers; I shall
exercise the priestly office to-night.

  2. We labor in thy house, our mother, from dawn unto night, fulfilling
the priestly office, laboring in the night.

  3. A dreadful god is our god Tezcatlipoca, he is the only god, he will
answer us.

  4. His heart is in the Tezcatzontli; my god is not timid like a hare
nor is he peaceable; I shall overturn, I shall penetrate the Mixcoatepec
in Colhuacan.

  5. I sing, I play on an instrument, I am the noble instrument, the
mirror; I am he who lifts the mirror; I cry aloud, intoxicated with the
wine of the tuna.


_Notes._

As before stated (Notes to Hymn VIII), Macuilxochitl is another title of
the flower-god Xochipilli.




XX. _Yacatecutli icuic._


  1. Anomatia aytoloc, anomatia aytoloc, tzocotzontla aytoloc,
tzocotzontla anomatia aytoloc.

  2. Pipitla aytoloc, pipitla anomatia aytoloc, cholotla aytoloc,
pipitla anomatia aytoloc.

  3. Tonacayutl nicmaceuh aca naxcan noquacuillo atliyollo,
nechualyauicatiaque xalli itepeuhya.

  4. Chalchiuhpetlacalco ni naxcan aca naxcan noquacuillo, atliyollo
nechualyauicatiaque xalli itepeuhya.


_Gloss._

  1. Anomatia, _q.n._, amo nixpan in omito yauyutl inic otepeualoc
tzocotzontla, amo nomatia in omito yauyutl.

  2. Pipitla aytoloc, _q.n._, ynic tepeualoc pipitla amo nicmati inic
omito yauyutl, in cholotla ic otepeualloc amo nixpan ynic oyautlatolloc.

  3. Tonacayutl nicmaceuh, _q.n._, yn tonacayutl inic onicmaceuh
ayaxcan, onechualhuicaque in oquacuiloan in xochayutl, in coqniayutl in
teuelteca, quimilhui in iquintonaz tlatuiz anoquacuiloan ayezque. Xalli
tepeuhya, _id est_, tlalocan. Quilmach chalchiuhpetlacalli in quitepeuh
inic tepeuh.

  4. Chalchiuhpetlacalco ninaxcan, _q.n._, onca ninotlati in chalchiuh
petlacalco. Ayaxcan ynechualhuicatiaque yn oquacuiloan atliyoloa in umpa
tlallocan.


_Hymn to Yacatecutli._
