Isaiah    Page


OUTLINE FOR STUDY OF PROPHETICAL BOOKS

1. Class.

2. Commission of Prophet.

3. Biographical Description of Prophet.

4. Title of Prophet.

5. Historical Place.

(a) Name of Kingdom.

(b) Names of Kings.

6. Outline of Contents.

7. Prophecies of Earthly Kings or Kingdoms.

8. Prophecies of Christ.

9. Prophecies of Christ's Kingdom.

10. Leading Phrases.

11. Leading Chapters.

12. Leading Teachings.

13. Questions.

14. Items of Special Interest.

15. Individual Finds.

EXPLANATION.--Under No. 1 name whether major or minor. Under No. 2
secure the points of the commission in references given. No. 3 is to be
gathered from the contents of the prophecy itself. Under No. 4 work out
from the prophet's life, character or message an appropriate title by
which he may be remembered. Under letter (a) of No. 5 state whether the
message is to Israel or Judah. Under letter (b) name the kings during
whose reigns the message was delivered. Topics 14 and 15 are the same as
in the Historical Outline.

NOTES.--The first prophecy to be taken up, that of Jonah, will be
studied by a series of questions. In the succeeding prophecies the
outline will be followed, though not so rigidly as in the case of the
Historical Outline.



JONAH

NOTE.--The study of this book is by questions.

1. Draw full-page map, locating Joppa, Nineveh, Tarshish and his native
place, Gath-hepher. See II Kings 14:25.

2. Name the three commands given to Jonah.

3. What two things did the sailors do when the storm was severe?

4. The waking of Jonah recalls what incident in the New Testament?

5. According to the sailors, what caused the tempest?

6. What plan was used to find the offender?

7. What words of Psalm 139 are recalled by Jonah's attempt to flee from
God?

8. What four things do we know about the boat?

9. Who suggested the plan for calming the sea?

10. Name three results of the calm upon the sailors.

11. Give a name to the second chapter.

12. In what direction did he pray and why?

13. What phrase in Psalm 42 did he use in his prayer?

14. Mention three things named in the book regarding the size of
Nineveh.

15. Name Jonah's message.

16. What four things did the king decree?

17. What quality did Jonah manifest at the repentance of Nineveh?

18. Name the petition of Jonah's prayer in Chapter 4.

19. How did the Lord answer this petition?

20. Explain the object lesson of the gourd.

21. What six things did Jehovah do, as narrated in the book?

22. In what two ways was Jonah a type of Christ? See Matt. 12:38-41.

23. Why _must_ we accept the story as true?

24. State four leading lessons of the book.



AMOS

I. _Class._

II. _Commission:_ 3:1-9; 7:15. Analyze, narrate, record.

III. _Biographical Description:_ 1:1; 7:14; 7:10-17.

IV. _Title._

V. _Historical Place:_ See Bible Dictionary. Also 1:1, 2.

VI. Omit.

VII. _Prophecies of Earthly Kingdoms:_ Chapters 1 and 2.

1. Draw full-page map, numbering in order and locating the eight cities
and countries against which prophecies are uttered.

2. Name the prophecy common to all.

3. Prophecies against Israel.

(a) Name three sins. 2:6-8.

(b) Name the class of people to whom the prophetic word is especially
directed. 3:11 and 15 and 5:11.

(c) Name three reasons why this people should obey God's law. 2:10;
2:11; 4:6-11.

(d) Name the punishment prophesied. 5:27.

VIII. _None._

IX. _Prophecies of Christ's Kingdom._ 9:11-15. Name four leading
predictions therein. The teacher should mention the three possible
interpretations of this prophecy.

X. _Striking Phrases:_

Find one in each of the third, fourth and sixth chapters.

XI and XII. _Omit._

XIII. _Questions:_

1. Name five things mentioned in Chapter 4 that God said He had done and
yet they had not returned.

2. What is meant by the expression "cleanness of teeth" in 4:6?

3. What three parts of their worship did the Lord say He despised in
5:21-23? Why did He despise them?

4. What is meant by the expression "flood of Egypt" in 8:8?

5. What kind of famine is prophesied to come upon them in 8:11 and 12?

6. How many times does Amos refer to David?

7. By what four names does Amos describe the Northern Kingdom?

XIV. _Items of Special Interest:_

Select five.

XV. _Individual Finds:_

Chapters 1, 2, 6.



ISAIAH


I. _Class._

II. _Commission:_ Chapter 6. Analyze carefully.

III. _Biography:_ 1:1; 8:1 and 3; 7:3; 20:2-4; II Chron. 26:22 and
32:32.

IV. _Title._

V. _Historical Place:_ 1:1. Add the lengths of the reigns.

VI. _Outline:_

1. Dark Prophecies regarding Earthly Kingdoms. 1 to 35.

2. History of an Earthly Kingdom. 36 to 39.

3. Bright Prophecies regarding Christ's Kingdom. 40 to 66.

VII. _Prophecies of Earthly Kingdoms:_ Babylon, Moab, Damascus, Egypt,
Tyre.

Name the vivid descriptions, the predictions, fulfillment.

VIII. _Prophecies of Christ:_ Name the predictions found in the
following references. If time permits, classify them under these heads:
(a) Genealogy. (b) Name. (c) Event. (d) Characteristic. (e) Work.

7:14; 9:2, 6, 7; 11:1-5 and 10; 28:16; 32:1; 40:11; 42:1-4; 49:2; 50:4,
5, 6; 52:14, 15. Three facts in the closing days of Christ's life in
Chapter 53.

IX. _Prophecies of Christ's Kingdom:_

Note three leading characteristics predicted:

1. Chapter 35.

2. Chapter 60:1-14.

3. Chapter 60:15-22.

X. _"Exceeding Great and Precious Promises":_

1. Complete Cleansing. 1:18.

2. Perfect Peace. 26:2.

3. Refuge. 32:2.

4. Abiding Strength. 40:29-31.

5. Fruitage of the Word. 55:10, 11.

XI. _Leading Chapters:_

23. Destruction of Tyre.

35. Transformation.

40. The Greatness of God and the Littleness of Man.

53. The Cross and Atonement.

55. The Gracious Invitation.

60. The Coming of the Nations to Christ.

XII. _Leading Teachings:_

1. The Incarnation of Christ. 7:14 and 9:6.

2. The Atonement by blood. 53:6, 5.

(Called by Luther "the little gospel." Note the four parts, by reading
verse 6 first, then verse 5.)

3. The Transforming Power of Christianity. Chapter 35.

XIII. _Items of Special Interest:_

Select fifteen.

XIV. _Individual Finds:_

Chapters 1, 5, 12, 35, 36, 61.




VI

THE KINGDOM IN CAPTIVITY

Jeremiah        Page

Lamentations    Page

Daniel          Page



JEREMIAH

I. _Class._

II. _Commission:_ 1:4-10 and 18; 17:19 and 20. Time; manner; to whom;
what to do; quality required; pledges given.

III. _Biographical Description:_ 1:1; 16:2; 20:2; 32:2 and 3; 37:11-16;
43:6 and 7.

IV. _Title._ See 9:1.

V. _Historical Place:_ State length of prophetical office.

VI. _Omit._

VII. _Prophecies of Earthly Kingdoms:_ Chapters 46 to 51. Name seven.

VIII. _Prophecies Regarding Christ:_ 23:5 and 6 Name three contained
therein. Why so few prophecies of Christ?

IX. _Omit._

X. _Leading Phrases:_

13:23. The question.

45:5: "Seekest thou great things for thyself? Seek them not."

XI. _Leading Chapters:_

29. Letter to the Captives.

35. The Rechabites and Strong Drink.

XII. _Omit._

XIII. _Questions:_

1. Name and explain the two object lessons in 18:1-6 and in 24.

2. Name five things the prophet in his letter commanded the captives in
Babylon to do.

3. Name the strangely-worded statement regarding Jehovah in 25:4.

4. Give the prophecy of the return in 29:10.

XIV. _Items of Special Interest:_

Select fifteen.

XV. _Individual Finds:_

Chapters 1, 13, 22, 36, 38.



LAMENTATIONS


I. _Author._

II. _Name._ "A Funeral Dirge."

III. _Literary Form._ See Dictionary.

IV. _General Contents._ See Dictionary.

V. _Outline of Contents:_

1. The Wail of a Widow. Chapter 1.

2. The Picture of Jerusalem's Calamity. Chapters 2 to 4.

3. A Prayer. Chapter 5.

VI. _Questions:_

1. Give two figures of speech in Chapter 1 that describe Jerusalem's
distress.

2. Select six consecutive words in 1:9 that declare the greatness of her
fall.

3. Select six expressions in Chapters 1 and 2 that indicate the decline
in religion.

4. Select six expressions in Chapters 4 and 5 that indicate the severity
of the famine.

5. Select six expressions in Chapter 5 that indicate the terrors of the
siege and the severity of the ruin.

6. Name the two requests in the Prayer chapter.

7. Explain the truth contained in 3:27.



DANIEL


I. _Outline:_

1. 1 to 6. History.

2. 7 to 12. Prophecy.

II. Name three things known of Daniel when brought a captive. 1:3 and 4.

III. _Leading Narratives._

Recite, but record only titles and references.

1. Chapter 1. Daniel and Drink.

2. Chapter 2. Daniel and the Dream.

3. Chapter 5. Daniel and the Handwriting.

4. Chapter 6. Daniel and the Lion's Den

IV. _Chart of Two Chief Visions of Earthly Kingdoms:_ Chapters 2 and 7.

+----------------------+----------------------+------------------------+
