speciall vertue for this effect. The very pictures of the fires, and
Martyrs, cannot but warme thee. If thou canst meete with any living
examples, follow them, as they follow Christ, frequent their company:
even _Saul_ amongst the Prophets, will prophesie. No bangling hawke,
but with a high flyer will mend her pitch: the poorest good companion,
will doe thee some good; when _Silas_ came, _Paul_ burnt in the spirit:
a lesser sticke may fire a billet; If thou findest none, let the
coldnesse of the times heat thee, as frosts doe the fire; Let every
indignation make thee zealous, as the dunstery of the Monkes, made
_Erasmus_ studious: one way to bee rich in times of dearth, is to
engrosse a rare commodity, such as zeale is: now, if ever, _they have
destroyed thy Law_; It is now high time to be zealous.

Consider and emulate the children of this generation, to see how eager
every _Demas_ is for worldly promotion. How did that worthy Bishop
disdaine to see an harlot, more curiously to adorne her body unto sinne
and death, then hee could his soule unto life everlasting. It angred
_Demosthenes_ to see a Smith earlier at his anvile, then he was at his
deske.

When thou hast thus heat thy selfe, take heede of catching colde
againe, as many have done, and brought their zeale to deaths doore.

[Sidenote: Zeales extinguishers.]

This fire may goe out divers wayes: first by subtraction of fewell; if a
man forbeare his accustomed meales, will not his naturall heat decay?
The _Levites_ that kept Gods watch in the Temple, were charged
expressely, morning & evening, if not oftner, to looke to the lights and
the fire. Hee that shall forget (at the least) with the _Curfeau-bell_
in the evening to rake uppe his zeale by prayer, and with the day-bell
in the morning to stirre up & kindle the same, if not oftner with
_Daniel_; I cannot conceive how hee can possibly keepe fire in his
heart. Will God blesse such, as bid him not so much as good-morrow and
good-even?

Hee that shall despise or neglect prophesie, must hee not needes quench
the spirit? have I not marked glorious professors, who for some farme
sake, or other commodities, have flitted from Jerusalem to Jericho;
where the situation was good, but the waters nought; and their zeale
hath perished, because vision hath failed?

Such as reade the Bible by fits upon rainy dayes, not eating the booke
with _John_, but tasting onely with the tippe of the tongue: Such as
meditate by snatches, never chewing the cud and digesting their meat,
they may happily get a smackering, for discourse and table-talke; but
not enough to keepe soule & life together, much lesse for strength and
vigour. Such as forsake the best fellowship, and wax strange to holy
assemblies, (as now the manner of many is) how can they but take colde?
Can one coale alone keepe it selfe glowing?

Though it goe not out for want of matter, yet may it bee put out by
sundry accidents; when it is newly kindled, it may be put out with
scoffes and reproaches, if _Peter_ take not heede, and fence himselfe
well against them; but if once throughly growne, such breath will but
spred and encrease it.

It is possible fire may bee oppressed with too much wood, and heat
suffocated with too much nourishment: over-much prayer, reading, and
study, may bee a wearinesse both to flesh and spirit: but it so rarely
happeneth, that I neede not mention it; and yet the soule hath its
satiety. There be some such perchance over-nice men in this sense also,
who have not learned that God will have them mercifull to themselves: It
is often smoothered for want of vent and exercise. Let such as use not
and expresse not their zeale, bragge of their good hearts; surely they
have none such, or not like to have them such. If _Nicodemus_ had not
buried Christ by day, we might have feared his zeale had gone out, for
all his comming by night.

Yet this is not so ordinary, as to extinguish it by the quench-coale of
sinne; grosse sinne every man knowes will waste the conscience, and make
shipwracke of zeale: but I say, the least known evill unrepented of, is
as a theefe in the candle, or an obstruction in the liver. I feare,
_David_ served God but reasonably, till hee published his repentance;
hee that steales his meat, though poverty tempt him, yet giveth thankes
but coldly: zeale and sinne, will soone expell the one or the other out
of their subject; Can you imagine in the same roofe, God and Beliall,
the Arke and Dagon? Lastly, and most commonly, forraine heat will
extract the inward, and adventicious heat consume the naturall.

The Sunne will put out the fire; and so will the love of the world, the
love of the Father, they cannot stand together in intense degrees, one
cannot serve both these matters with such affection as both would have.
Seldome seest thou a man make haste to bee rich, and thrive in religion.
Christs message to _John_ holds true; The poore are most forward in
receiving and following the Gospell: as thou lovest thy zeale, beware of
resolving to bee rich, lest gain proove thy godlinesse; take heede of
ambitious aspiring, lest Courts and great places, proove ill aires for
zeale, whither it is as easie to go zealous, as to returne wise:
_Peter_ whiles hee warmed his hands, cooled his heart; Not that
greatnesse and zeale cannot agree; but for that our weaknes many times
severs them. If thou beest willing to die poore in estate, thou mayest
the more easily live rich in grace. _Smyrna_, the poorest of the seven
Candle-stickes, hath the richest price upon it.

The diligent practise of these courses will make easie the practise of
this counsell, _Be zealous, &c_.


_The fift part._

[Sidenote: 1 Object.]

But heere mee thinke I heare the lukewarme worldling of our times, fume
& chafe, and aske what needs all this adoe for zeale, as if all Gods
people were not zealous enough.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Such as thinke they are, or can bee zealous enough, neede no other
conviction to bee poore, blinde, naked, wretched and pittifull
_Laodiceans_: Fire is ever climbing and aspiring higher; zeale is ever
aiming at that which is before; carried towards perfection; thinking
meanely of that which is past, and already attained, condemning his
unprofitable service, as _Calvin_ his last Will: this rule tries full
conceited Christians.

[Sidenote: 2 Object.]

What would you have us doe? wee professe, keepe our Church, heare
Sermons, as Christians ought to doe.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Affectionate friendship and service is not onely for publique shew and
pomp, upon festivall dayes, in Chambers of Presence; but for
domesticall, ordinary, and private use; to such holy-day and Church
retainers, God may well say, Let us have some of this zeale at home and
apart.

All affections are most passionate, without a witnesse. Such as whose
families, closets, fields, beds, walkes, doe testifie of their worship,
as well as temples & Synagogues, are right servitors: God much respects
their devotions; and they have strong proofe of the power of godlinesse.

[Sidenote: 3 Object.]

Wee would you should know, that wee are such as have prayer sayd or read
in our families and housholds; or else we say some to our selves at our
lying downe, and uprising and more then that, say you what you will, wee
holde more then needs.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

First, know that zeale knowes no such unmannerly courses, as to slubber
over a few prayers, whiles you are dressing and undressing your selves,
as most doe, halfe asleepe, halfe awake; know further, that such as hold
onely a certaine stint of daily duties, as malt-horses their pace, or
mill-horses their round, out of custome or forme, are far from that
mettle which is ever putting forward, growing from strength to strength,
and instant in duties, in season, out of season: and this sayes hard to
lazy Christians.

[Sidenote: 4 Object.]

May not wee goe too far on the right hand?

[Sidenote: Answer.]

It is true: but liberality baulkes, and feares covetousnesse and
niggardize, more a great deale then prodigallity; so does zeale
lukewarmnes and coldnesse, more then too much heate and forwardnesse;
the defect is more opposite and dangerous to some vertues, then the
excesse.

[Sidenote: 5 Object.]

Why? are not some thinke you, too straight laced, that dare not use
their Christian liberty in some recreations? sware by small oathes, or
lend money for reasonable use? hath not God left many things
indifferent, wherein some shew themselves more nice then wise?

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Zeale will cut of the right hand, if it cause to offend; much more to
pare the nayles and superfluities: it consumes the strongest, dearest
corruptions; much more will it singe off such haire and drosse as these:
If ought be praise worthy, it imbraceth such things; if any be
doubtfull, carrying shew of evill, of ill reporte, it dares not meddle
with them; it feares that some of these are as indifferent, as
fornication was among the heathen.

[Sidenote: 6 Object.]

There are but few such, no not of the better sort, as you speake of.

[Sidenote: Answer.]

Graunt there bee any, and zealous emulation culleth the highest
examples. Such as meane to excell in any Art, travell to find out the
rarest workemen, purchase the choysest Copies; hee that hath true zeale,
will strive to purge himselfe, as Christ is pure.
