
THE CONVERSION OF APOLLOS, HIS CHARACTER, AND THE
MINISTRY OF PAUL IN EPHESUS.

A.D. 54 TO A.D. 57.


The Apostle "took his leave" [115:1] of the Corinthian brethren in the
spring of A.D. 54, and embarking at the port of Cenchrea, about eight or
nine miles distant, set sail for Ephesus. The navigation among the
islands of the Greek Archipelago was somewhat intricate; and the voyage
appears to have not unfrequently occupied from ten to fifteen days.
[115:2] At Ephesus Paul "entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with
the Jews." [115:3] His statements produced a favourable impression, and
he was solicited to prolong his visit; but as he was on his way to
Jerusalem, where he was anxious to be present at the approaching feast
of Pentecost, he could only assure them of his intention to return, and
then bid them farewell. He left behind him, however, in this great city
his two Corinthian converts, Aquila and Priscilla, who carried on with
industry and success the work which he had commenced so auspiciously.
Among the first fruits of their pious care for the spread of
Christianity was the famous Apollos, an Alexandrian Jew, who now arrived
in the metropolis of the Proconsular Asia.

The seed of Abraham in the birthplace of Apollos spoke the Greek
language, and were in somewhat peculiar circumstances. They were free
from some of the prejudices of the Jews in Palestine; and, though living
in the midst of a heathen population, had advantages which were enjoyed
by very few of their brethren scattered elsewhere among the Gentiles. At
Alexandria their sumptuous synagogues were unequivocal evidences of
their wealth; they constituted a large and influential section of the
inhabitants; they had much political power; and, whilst their study of
the Greek philosophy had modified their habits of thought, they had
acquired a taste for the cultivation of eloquence and literature.
Apollos, the Jew "born at Alexandria," [116:1] who now became acquainted
with Aquila and Priscilla, was an educated and accomplished man. It is
said that "he was instructed in the way of the Lord, and being fervent
in the spirit, he spake and taught diligently the things of the Lord,
knowing only the baptism of John." [116:2] The influence of the
preaching of the Baptist may be estimated from this incidental notice;
for though the forerunner of our Saviour had now finished his career
about a quarter of a century, the Alexandrian Jew was only one of many
still living witnesses to testify that he had not ministered in vain. In
this case John had indeed "prepared the way" of his Master, as, under
the tuition of Aquila and Priscilla, Apollos was led without difficulty
to embrace the Christian doctrine. It is said of this pious couple that
"they took him unto them, and expounded unto him the way of God more
perfectly." [116:3] Priscilla was no less distinguished than her husband
[116:4] for intelligence and zeal; and though she was prevented, as
much, perhaps, by her native modesty, as by the constitution of the
Church, [116:5] from officiating as a public instructor, she was, no
doubt, "apt to teach;" and there must have been something most
interesting and impressive in her private conversation. It is a
remarkable fact that one of the ablest preachers of the apostolic age
was largely indebted to a female for his acquaintance with Christian
theology.

The accession, at this juncture, of such a convert as Apollos was of
great importance to the evangelical cause. The Church of Corinth, in the
absence of Paul, much required the services of a minister of superior
ability; and the learned Alexandrian was eminently qualified to promote
its edification. He was "an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures."
[117:1] After sojourning some time at Ephesus, it seems to have occurred
to him that he would have a more extensive sphere of usefulness at
Corinth; and "when he was disposed to pass into Achaia, the brethren
wrote exhorting the disciples to receive him." [117:2] It soon appeared
that his friends in Asia had formed no exaggerated idea of his gifts and
acquirements. When he reached the Greek capital, he "helped them much
which had believed through grace; for he mightily convinced the Jews,
and that publicly, shewing by the Scriptures that Jesus was Christ."
[117:3] His surpassing rhetorical ability soon proved a snare to some of
the hypercritical Corinthians, and tempted them to institute invidious
comparisons between him and their great apostle. Hence in the first
epistle addressed to them, the writer finds it necessary to rebuke them
for their folly and fastidiousness. "While one saith, I am of Paul, and
another, I am of Apollos, are ye," says he, "not carnal? Who then is
Paul, and who is Apollos, but ministers by whom ye believed, even as the
Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollos watered, but God gave
the increase." [117:4]

When Aquila and Priscilla were at Ephesus expounding "the way of God
more perfectly" to the Jew of Alexandria, Paul was travelling to
Jerusalem. Three years before, he had been there to confer with the
apostles and elders concerning the circumcision of the Gentiles; and he
had not since visited the holy city. His present stay seems to have been
short--apparently not extending beyond a few days at the time of the
feast of Pentecost,--and giving him a very brief opportunity of
intercourse with his brethren of the Jewish capital. He then "went down
to Antioch" [118:1]--a place with which from the commencement of his
missionary career he had been more intimately associated. "After he had
spent some time there, he departed and went over all the country of
Galatia and Phrygia in order, strengthening all the disciples." [118:2]
On a former occasion, after he had passed through the same districts, he
had been "forbidden of the Holy Ghost to preach the word in (the
Proconsular) Asia;" [118:3] but, at this time, the restriction was
removed, and in accordance with the promise made to the Jews at Ephesus
in the preceding spring, he now resumed his evangelical labours in that
far-famed metropolis. There must have been a strong disposition on the
part of many of the seed of Abraham in the place to attend to his
instructions, as he was permitted "for the space of _three months_" to
occupy the synagogue, "disputing and persuading the things concerning
the kingdom of God." [118:4] At length, however, he began to meet with
so much opposition that he found it expedient to discontinue his
addresses in the Jewish meeting-house. "When divers were hardened and
believed not, but spake evil of that way before the multitude, he
departed from them, and separated the disciples, disputing daily in the
school of one Tyrannus." [118:5] This Tyrannus was, in all probability,
a Gentile convert, and a teacher of rhetoric--a department of education
very much cultivated at that period by all youths anxious to attain
social distinction. What is here called his "school," appears to have
been a spacious lecture-room sufficient to accommodate a numerous
auditory.

About this time the Epistle to the Galatians was, in all likelihood,
written. The Galatians, as their name indicated, were the descendants of
a colony of Gaols settled in Asia Minor several centuries before; and,
like the French of the present day, seem to have been distinguished by
their lively and mercurial temperament. Paul had recently visited their
country for the second time, [119:1] and had been received by them with
the warmest demonstrations of regard; but meanwhile Humanizing zealots
had appeared among them, and had been only too successful in their
efforts to induce them to observe the Mosaic ceremonies. The apostle, at
Antioch, and at the synod of Jerusalem, had already protested against
these attempts; and subsequent reflection had only more thoroughly
convinced him of their danger. Hence he here addresses the Galatians in
terms of unusual severity. "I marvel," he exclaims, "that ye are so soon
removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto another
gospel"--"O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you that ye should not
obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set
forth, crucified among you!" [119:2] At the same time he proves that the
sinner is saved by faith alone; that the Mosaic institutions were
designed merely for the childhood of the Church; and that the disciples
of Jesus should refuse to be "entangled" with any such "yoke of
bondage." [120:1] His epistle throughout is a most emphatic testimony to
the doctrine of a free justification.

Some time after Paul reached Ephesus, on his return from Jerusalem, he
appears to have made a short visit to Corinth. [120:2] There is no doubt
that he encountered a variety of dangers of which no record is to be
found in the Acts of the Apostles; [120:3] and it is most probable that
many of these disasters were experienced about this period. Thus, not
long after this date, he says--"Thrice I suffered shipwreck, a night and
a day I have been in the deep." [120:4] There are good grounds for
believing that he now visited Crete, as well as Corinth; and it would
seem that these voyages exposed him to the "perils in the sea" which he
enumerates among his trials. [120:5] On his departure from Crete he left
Titus behind him to "set in order the things that were wanting, and to
ordain elders in every city;" [120:6] and in the spring of A.D. 57 he
wrote to the evangelist that brief epistle in which he points out, with
so much fidelity and wisdom, the duties of the pastoral office. [120:7]
The silence of Luke respecting this visit to Crete is the less
remarkable, as the name of Titus does not once occur in the book of the
Acts, though there is distinct evidence that he was deeply interested in
some of the most important transactions which are there narrated.
[120:8]

Paul, about two years before, had been prevented, as has been stated, by
a divine intimation, from preaching in the district called Asia; but
when he now commenced his ministrations in Ephesus, its capital, he
continued in that city and its neighbourhood longer than in any other
place he had yet visited. After withdrawing from the synagogue and
resuming his labours in the school of Tyrannus, he remained there "by
the space of _two years_; so that all they which dwelt in Asia heard the
word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks." [121:1] Meanwhile the
churches of Laodicea, Colosse, and Hierapolis appear to have been
founded. [121:2] The importance of Ephesus gave it a special claim to
the attention which it now received. It was the metropolis of the
district, and the greatest commercial city in the whole of Asia Minor.
Whilst it was connected by convenient roads with all parts of the
interior, it was visited by trading vessels from the various harbours of
the Mediterranean. But, in another point of view, it was a peculiarly
interesting field of missionary labour; for it was, perhaps, the most
celebrated of all the high places of Eastern superstition. Its temple of
Artemis, or Diana, was one of the wonders of the world. This gorgeous
structure, covering an area of upwards of two acres, [121:3] was
ornamented with columns one hundred and twenty-seven in number, each
sixty feet high, and each the gift of a king. [121:4] It was nearly all
open to the sky, but that part of it which was covered, was roofed with
cedar. The image of the goddess occupied a comparatively small apartment
within the magnificent enclosure. This image, which was said to have
fallen down from Jupiter, [121:5] was not like one of those pieces of
beautiful sculpture which adorned the Acropolis of Athens, but rather
resembled an Indian idol, being an unsightly female form with many
breasts, made of wood, and terminating below in a shapeless block.
[122:1] On several parts of it were engraved mysterious symbols, called
"Ephesian letters." [122:2] These letters, when _pronounced_, were
believed to operate as charms, and, when _written_, were carried about
as amulets. To those who sought an acquaintance with the Ephesian magic,
they constituted an elaborate study, and many books were composed to
expound their significance, and point out their application.

About this time the famous Apollonius of Tyana [122:3] was attracting
uncommon attention by his tricks as a conjuror; and it has been thought
not improbable that he now met Paul in Ephesus. If so, we can assign at
least one reason why the apostle was prevented from making his
appearance at an earlier date in the Asiatic metropolis. Men had thus an
opportunity of comparing the wonders of the greatest of magicians with
the miracles of the gospel; and of marking the contrast between the
vainglory of an impostor, and the humility of a servant of Jesus. The
attentive reader of Scripture may observe that some of the most
extraordinary of the mighty works recorded in the New Testament were
performed at this period; and it is not unreasonable to conclude that,
in a city so much given to jugglery and superstition, these genuine
displays of the power of Omnipotence were exhibited for the express
purpose of demonstrating the incomparable superiority of the Author of
Christianity. It is said that "God wrought _special miracles_ by the
hands of Paul, so that from his body were brought unto the sick
handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and the
evil spirits went out of them." [123:1] The disastrous consequences of
an attempt, on the part of the sons of a Jewish priest, to heal the
afflicted by using the name of the Lord Jesus as a charm, alarmed the
entire tribe of exorcists and magicians. "The man, in whom the evil
spirit was, leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against
them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded. And this
was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus, and _fear
fell on them all_, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified."
[123:2] The visit of Paul told upon the whole population, and tended
greatly to discourage the study of the "Ephesian letters". "Many of them
also which used curious arts brought their books together and burned
them before all men; and they counted the price of them, and found it
fifty thousand pieces of silver. [123:3] So mightily grew the word of
God and prevailed." [123:4]

Some time before the departure of Paul from Ephesus, he wrote the First
Epistle to the Corinthians. The letter contains internal evidence that
it was dictated in the spring of A.D. 57. [123:5] The circumstances of
the Corinthian disciples at this juncture imperatively required the
interference of the apostle. Divisions had sprung up in their community;
[123:6] the flagrant conduct of one member had brought dishonour on the
whole Christian name; [123:7] and various forms of error had been making
their appearance. [123:8] Paul therefore felt it right to address to
them a lengthened and energetic remonstrance. This letter is more
diversified in its contents than any of his other epistles; and presents
us with a most interesting view of the daily life of the primitive
Christians in a great commercial city. It furnishes conclusive evidence
that the Apostolic Church of Corinth was not the paragon of excellence
which the ardent and unreflecting have often pictured in their
imaginations, but a community compassed with infirmities, and certainly
not elevated, in point of spiritual worth, above some of the more
healthy Christian congregations of the nineteenth century.

Shortly after this letter was transmitted to its destination, Ephesus
was thrown into a ferment by the riotous proceedings of certain parties
who had an interest in the maintenance of the pagan superstition. Among
those who derived a subsistence from the idolatry of its celebrated
temple were a class of workmen who "made silver shrines for Diana,"
[124:1] that is, who manufactured little models of the sanctuary and of
the image which it contained. These models were carried about by the
devotees of the goddess in processions, and set up, in private
dwellings, as household deities. [124:2] The impression produced by the
Christian missionaries in the Asiatic metropolis had affected the
traffic in such articles, and those who were engaged in it began to
apprehend that their trade would be ultimately ruined. An individual,
named Demetrius, who appears to have been a master-manufacturer, did not
find it difficult, under these circumstances, to collect a mob, and to
disturb the peace of the city. Calling together the operatives of his
own establishment, "with the workmen of like occupation," [124:3] he
said to them--"Sirs, ye know, that by this craft we have our wealth.
Moreover, ye see and know, that not alone at Ephesus, but almost
throughout all Asia, this Paul hath persuaded and turned away much
people, saying that they be no gods which are made with hands--so that
not only this our craft is in danger to be set at nought, but also that
the temple of the great goddess Diana should be despised, and her
magnificence should be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world
worshipped." [125:1] This address did not fail to produce the effect
contemplated. A strong current of indignation was turned against the
missionaries; and the craftsmen were convinced that they were bound to
support the credit of their tutelary guardian. They were "full of wrath,
and cried out saying--Great is Diana of the Ephesians." [125:2] This
proceeding seems to have taken place in the month of May, and at a time
when public games were celebrated in honour of the Ephesian goddess,
[125:3] so that a large concourse of strangers now thronged the
metropolis. An immense crowd rapidly collected; the whole city was
filled with confusion; and it soon appeared that the lives of the
Christian preachers were in danger; for the mob caught "Gaius and
Aristech's, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel," and "rushed
with one accord into the theatre." [125:4] This edifice, the largest of
the kind in Asia Minor, is said to have been capable of containing
thirty thousand persons. [125:5] As it was sufficiently capacious to
accommodate the multitudinous assemblage, and as it was also the
building in which public meetings of the citizens were usually convened,
it was now quickly occupied. Paul was at first prompted to enter it, and
to plead his cause before the excited throng; but some of the
magistrates, or, as they are called by the evangelist, "certain of the
_chief of Asia_, which were his friends, sent unto him, desiring him
that he would not adventure himself" into so perilous a position.
[125:6] These _Asiarchs_ were persons of exalted rank who presided at
the celebration of the public spectacles. The apostle was now in very
humble circumstances, for even in Ephesus he continued to work at the
occupation of a tent-maker; [126:1] and it is no mean testimony to his
worth that he had secured the esteem of such high functionaries. It was
quickly manifest that any attempt to appease the crowd would have been
utterly in vain. A Jew, named Alexander, who seems to have been one of
the craftsmen, and who was, perhaps, the same who is elsewhere
distinguished as "the coppersmith," [126:2] made an effort to address
them, probably with the view of shewing that his co-religionists were
not identified with Paul; but when the mob perceived that he was one of
the seed of Abraham, they took it for granted that he was no friend to
the manufacture of their silver shrines; and his appearance was the
signal for increased uproar. "When they knew that he was a Jew, all with
one voice, _about the space of two hours_, cried out--Great is Diana of
the Ephesians." [126:3] At length the town-clerk, or recorder, of
Ephesus, contrived to obtain a hearing; and, by his prudence and
address, succeeded in putting an end to this scene of confusion. He told
his fellow-townsmen that, if Paul and his companions had transgressed
the law, they could be made amenable to punishment; but that, as their
own attachment to the worship of Diana could not be disputed, their
present tumultuary proceedings could only injure their reputation as
orderly and loyal citizens. "We are in danger," said he, "to be called
in question for this day's uproar, there being no cause whereby we may
give an account of this concourse." [127:1] The authority of the speaker
imparted additional weight to his suggestions, the multitude quietly
dispersed, and the missionaries escaped unscathed.

Even this tumult supplies evidence that the Christian preachers had
already produced an immense impression in this great metropolis. No more
decisive test of their success could be adduced than that here furnished
by Demetrius and his craftsmen; for a lucrative trade connected with the
established superstition was beginning to languish. The silversmiths,
and the other operatives whose interests were concerned, were obviously
the instigators of all the uproar; and it does not appear that they
could reckon upon the undivided sympathy even of the crowd they had
congregated. "Some cried one thing, and some another, for the assembly
was confused, and the _more part_ knew not wherefore they were come
together." [127:2] A number of the Asiarchs were decidedly favourable to
the apostle and his brethren; and when the town-clerk referred to their
proceedings his tone was apologetic and exculpatory. "Ye have," said he,
"brought hither these men who are neither profaners of temples, [127:3]
nor yet blasphemers of your goddess." [127:4] But here we see the real
cause of much of that bitter persecution which the Christians endured
for the greater part of three centuries. The craft of the imagemakers
was in danger; the income of the pagan priests was at stake; the secular
interests of many other parties were more or less affected; and hence
the new religion encountered such a cruel and obstinate opposition.





CHAPTER IX.

PAUL'S EPISTLES; HIS COLLECTION FOR THE POOR SAINTS AT JERUSALEM;
HIS IMPRISONMENT THERE, AND AT CAESAREA AND ROME.

A.D. 57 TO A.D. 63.


Paul had already determined to leave Ephesus at Pentecost, [128:1] and
as the secular games, at which the Asiarchs presided, took place during
the month of May, the disorderly proceedings of Demetrius and the
craftsmen, which occurred at the same period, do not seem to have
greatly accelerated his removal. Soon afterwards, however, he "called
unto him the disciples, and embraced them, and departed to go into
Macedonia." [128:2] When he reached that district, he was induced to
enter on new scenes of missionary enterprise; and now, "round about unto
Illyricum," he "fully preached the gospel of Christ." [128:3] Shortly
before, Timothy had returned from Greece to Ephesus, [128:4] and when
the apostle took leave of his friends in that metropolis, he left the
evangelist behind him to protect the infant Church against the
seductions of false teachers. [128:5] He now addressed the first epistle
to his "own son in the faith," [128:6] and thus also supplied to the
ministers of all succeeding generations the most precious instructions
on the subject of pastoral theology. [129:1] Soon afterwards he wrote
the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. This letter throws much light on
the private character of Paul, and enables us to understand how he
contrived to maintain such a firm hold on the affections of those among
whom he ministered. Though he uniformly acted with great decision, he
was singularly amiable and gentle, as well as generous and warm-hearted.
No one could doubt his sincerity; no one could question his
disinterestedness; no one could fairly complain that he was harsh or
unkind. In his First Epistle to the Corinthians he had been obliged to
employ strong language when rebuking them for their irregularities; but
now they exhibited evidences of repentance, and he is obviously most
willing to forget and forgive. In his Second Epistle to them he enters
into many details of his personal history unnoticed elsewhere in the New
Testament, [130:1] and throughout displays a most loving and
conciliatory spirit. He states that, when he dictated his former letter,
it was far from his intention to wound their feelings, and that it was
with the utmost pain he had sent them such a communication. "Out of much
affliction, and anguish of heart," said he, "I wrote unto you with many
tears, not that ye should be grieved, but that ye might know the love
which I have more abundantly unto you." [130:2] The Corinthians could
not have well resented an advice from such a correspondent.

When Paul had itinerated throughout Macedonia and Illyricum "he came
into Greece, [130:3] and there abode three months." [130:4] He now
visited Corinth for the third time; and, during his stay in that city,
dictated the Epistle to the Romans. [130:5] At this date, a Church
"spoken of throughout the whole world" [130:6] had been formed in the
great metropolis; some of its members were the relatives of the apostle;
[130:7] and others, such as Priscilla and Aquila, [130:8] had been
converted under his ministry. As he himself contemplated an early visit
to the far-famed city, [130:9] he sent this letter before him, to
announce his intentions, and to supply the place of his personal
instructions. The Epistle to the Romans is a precious epitome of
Christian theology. It is more systematic in its structure than,
perhaps, any other of the writings of Paul; and being a very lucid
exposition of the leading truths taught by the inspired heralds of the
gospel, it remains an emphatic testimony to the doctrinal defections of
the religious community now bearing the name of the Church to which it
was originally addressed.

The apostle had been recently making arrangements for another visit to
Jerusalem; and he accordingly left Greece in the spring of A.D. 58; but
the malignity of his enemies appears to have obliged him to change his
plan of travelling. "When the Jews laid wait for him as he was about to
sail" from Cenchrea, the port of Corinth, "into Syria," he found it
expedient "to return through Macedonia." [131:1] Proceeding, therefore,
to Philippi, [131:2] the city in which he had commenced his European
ministry, he passed over to Troas; [131:3] and then continued his
journey along the coast of Asia Minor. On his arrival at Miletus "he
sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the Church; and, when they
were come to him," he delivered to them a very pathetic pastoral
address, and bade them farewell. [131:4] At the conclusion, "he kneeled
down and prayed with them all, and they all wept sore, and fell on
Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the words which
he spake that they should see his face no more: and they accompanied him
unto the ship." [131:5] He now pursued his course to Jerusalem, and
after various delays, arrived at Caesarea. There, says Luke, "we entered
into the house of Philip, the evangelist, which was one of the seven,
and abode with him." [131:6] In Caesarea, as in other cities through
which he had already passed, he was told that bonds and afflictions
awaited him in the place of his destination; [131:7] but he was not thus
deterred from pursuing his journey. "When he would not be persuaded,"
says the sacred historian, "we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be
done, and after those days, having packed up, [131:8] we went up to
Jerusalem." [131:9] The apostle and his companions reached the holy city
about the time of the feast of Pentecost.

Paul was well aware that there were not a few, even among the Christians
of Palestine, by whom he was regarded with jealousy or dislike; and he
had reason to believe that the agitation for the observance of the
ceremonial law, which had disturbed the Churches of Galatia, had been
promoted by the zealots of the Hebrew metropolis. But he had a strong
attachment to the land of his fathers; and he felt deeply interested in
the well-being of his brethren in Judea. They were generally in indigent
circumstances; for, after the crucifixion, when the Spirit was poured
out on the day of Pentecost, those of them who had property "sold their
possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had
need;" [132:1] and, ever since, they had been harassed and persecuted by
their unbelieving countrymen. "The poor saints" that were in Jerusalem
[132:2] had, therefore, peculiar claims on the kind consideration of the
disciples in other lands; and Paul had been making collections for their
benefit among their richer co-religionists in Greece and Asia Minor. A
considerable sum had been thus provided; and that there might be no
misgivings as to its right appropriation, individuals chosen by the
contributors had been appointed to travel with the apostle, and to
convey it to Jerusalem. [132:3] The number of the deputies appears to
have been seven, namely, "Sopater of Berea; and of the Thessalonians,
Aristech's and Secundus; and Gaius of Derbe, and Timotheus; and of
Asia, Tychicus and Trophimus." [132:4] The apostle knew that he had
enemies waiting for his halting; and as they would willingly have seized
upon any apology for accusing him of tampering with this collection, he,
no doubt, deemed it prudent to put it into other hands, and thus place
himself above challenge. But he appears to have had a farther reason for
suggesting the appointment of these commissioners. He was, in all
likelihood, desirous that his brethren in Judea should have a favourable
specimen of the men who constituted "the first fruits of the Gentiles;"
and as all the deputies selected to accompany him to Jerusalem seem to
have been persons of an excellent spirit, he probably reckoned that
their wise and winning behaviour would do much to disarm the hostility
of those who had hitherto contended so strenuously for the observance of
the Mosaic ceremonies. Solomon has said that "a man's gift maketh room
for him;" [133:1] and if Gentile converts could ever expect a welcome
reception from those who were zealous for the law, it was surely when
they appeared as the bearers of the liberality of the Gentile Churches.

When the apostle and his companions reached the Jewish capital, "the
brethren received them gladly." [133:2] Paul was, however, given to
understand that, as he was charged with encouraging the neglect of the
Mosaic ceremonies, he must be prepared to meet a large amount of
prejudice; and he was accordingly recommended to endeavour to pacify the
multitude by giving some public proof that he himself "walked orderly
and kept the law." [133:3] Acting on this advice, he joined with four
men who had on them a Nazaritic vow; [133:4] and, "purifying himself
with them, entered into the temple." [133:5] When there, he was observed
by certain Jews from Asia Minor, who had probably become acquainted with
his personal appearance during his residence in Ephesus; and as they had
before seen him in the city with Trophimus, one of the seven deputies
and a convert from paganism, whom they seem also to have known, [134:1]
they immediately concluded that he had now some Gentile companions along
with him, and that he was encouraging the uncircumcised to pollute with
their presence the sacred court of the Israelites. A tumult forthwith
ensued; the report of the defilement of the holy place quickly
circulated through the crowd; "all the city was moved;" [134:2] the
people ran together; and Paul was seized and dragged out of the temple.
[134:3] The apostle would have fallen a victim to popular fury had it
not been for the prompt interference of the officer who had the command
of the Roman garrison in the tower of Antonia. This stronghold
overlooked the courts of the sanctuary; and, no doubt, some of the
sentinels on duty immediately gave notice of the commotion. The chief
captain, whose name was Claudius Lysias, [134:4] at once "took soldiers
and centurions," and running down to the rioters, arrived in time to
prevent a fatal termination of the affray; for, as soon as the military
made their appearance, the assailants "left beating of Paul." [134:5]
"Then the chief captain came near, and took him, and commanded him to be
bound with two chains, and demanded who he was, and what he had done.
And some cried one thing, some another, among the multitude, and when he
could not know the certainty for the tumult, he commanded him to be
carried into the castle." [134:6] In proceeding thus, the commanding
officer acted illegally; for, as Paul was a Roman citizen, he should
not, without a trial, have been deprived of his liberty, and put in
irons. But Lysias, in the hurry and confusion of the moment, had been
deceived by false information; as he had been led to believe that his
prisoner was an Egyptian, a notorious outlaw, who, "before these days,"
had created much alarm by leading "out into the wilderness four thousand
men that were murderers." [135:1] He was quite astonished to find that
the individual whom he had rescued from such imminent danger was a
citizen of Tarsus in Cilicia who could speak Greek; and as it was now
evident that there existed much misapprehension, the apostle was
permitted to stand on the stairs of the fortress, and address the
multitude. When they saw him preparing to make some statement, the noise
subsided; and, "when they heard that he spake to them in the Hebrew
tongue," that is, in the Aramaic, the current language of the country,
"they kept the more silence." [135:2] Paul accordingly proceeded to give
an account of his early life, of the remarkable circumstances of his
conversion, and of his subsequent career; but, when he mentioned his
mission to the Gentiles, it was at once apparent that the topic was most
unpopular, for his auditors lost all patience. "They gave him audience
unto this word, and then lifted up their voices and said, Away with such
a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live. And as
they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and threw dust into the air,
the chief captain commanded him to be brought into the castle." [135:3]

The confinement of Paul, which now commenced at the feast of Pentecost
in A.D. 58, continued about five years. It may be enough to notice the
mere outline of his history during this tedious bondage. In the first
place, for the purpose of ascertaining the exact nature of the charge
against him, he was confronted with the Sanhedrim; but when he informed
them that "of the hope and resurrection of the dead" he was called in
question, [136:1] there "arose a dissension between the Pharisees and
the Sadducees" [136:2] constituting the council; and the chief captain,
fearing lest his prisoner "should have been pulled in pieces of them,
commanded the soldiers to go down, and to take him by force from among
them, and to bring him into the castle." [136:3] Certain of the Jews,
about forty in number, now entered into a conspiracy binding themselves
"under a curse, saying, that they would neither eat nor drink till they
had killed Paul;" [136:4] and it was arranged that the bloody vow should
be executed when, under pretence of a new examination, he should be
brought again before the Sanhedrim; but their proceedings meanwhile
became known to the apostle's nephew; the chief captain received timely
information; and the scheme thus miscarried. [136:5] Paul, protected by
a strong military escort, was now sent away by night to Caesarea; and,
when there, was repeatedly examined before Felix, the Roman magistrate
who at this time, under the title of Procurator, had the government of
Judea. The historian Tacitus says of this imperial functionary that "in
the practice of all kinds of cruelty and lust, he exercised the power of
a king with the mind of a slave;" [136:6] and it is a remarkable proof,
as well of the intrepid faithfulness, as of the eloquence of the
apostle, that he succeeded in arresting the attention, and in alarming
the fears of this worthless profligate. Drusilla, his wife, a woman who
had deserted her former husband, [136:7] was a Jewess; and, as she
appears to have been desirous to see and hear the great Christian
preacher who had been labouring with so much zeal to propagate his
principles throughout the Empire, Paul, to satisfy her curiosity, was
brought into her presence. But an interview, which seems to have been
designed merely for the amusement of the Procurator and his partner,
soon assumed an appearance of the deepest solemnity. As the grave and
earnest orator went on to expound the faith of the gospel, and "as he
reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, Felix
trembled." [137:1] His apprehensions, however, soon passed away, and
though he was fully convinced that Paul had not incurred any legal
penalty, he continued to keep him in confinement, basely expecting to
obtain a bribe for his liberation. When disappointed in this hope, he
still perversely refused to set him at liberty. Thus, "after two years,"
when "Porcius Festus came into Felix' room," the ex-Procurator, "willing
to shew the Jews a pleasure, left Paul bound." [137:2]

The apostle was soon required to appear before the new Governor. Festus
has left behind him the reputation of an equitable judge; [137:3] and
though he was obviously most desirous to secure the good opinion of the
Jews, he could not be induced by them to act with palpable injustice.
After he had brought them down to Caesarea, and listened to their
complaints against the prisoner, he perceived that they could convict
him of no violation of the law; but he proposed to gratify them so far
as to have the case reheard in the holy city. Paul, however, well knew
that they only sought such an opportunity to compass his assassination,
and therefore peremptorily refused to consent to the arrangement. "I
stand," said he, "at Caesar's judgment-seat, where I ought to be judged.
To the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well knowest. For if I be
an offender, or have committed anything worthy of death, I refuse not to
die; but if there be none of these things whereof these accuse me, no
man may deliver me unto them. _I appeal unto Caesar._" [138:1]

The right of appeal from the decision of an inferior tribunal to the
Emperor himself was one of the great privileges of a Roman citizen; and
no magistrate could refuse to recognise it without exposing himself to
condign punishment. There were, indeed, a few exceptional cases of a
flagrant character in which such an appeal could not be received; and
Festus here consulted with his assessors to ascertain in what light the
law contemplated that of the apostle. It appeared, however, that he was
at perfect liberty to demand a hearing before the tribunal of Nero.
"Then," says the evangelist, "when Festus had conferred with the
council, he answered, Hast thou appealed unto Caesar? Unto Caesar shalt
thou go." [138:2]

The Procurator was now placed in a somewhat awkward position; for, when
sending Paul to Rome, he was required at the same time to report the
crimes imputed to the prisoner; but the charges were so novel, and
apparently so frivolous, that he did not well know how to embody them in
an intelligible document. Meanwhile King Agrippa and his sister Bernice
came to Caesarea "to salute Festus," [138:3] that is, to congratulate
the new Governor on his arrival in the country; and the royal party
expressed a desire to hear what the apostle had to say in his
vindication. Agrippa was great-grandson of that Herod who reigned in
Judea when Jesus was born in Bethlehem, and the son of the monarch of
the same name whose sudden and awful death is recorded in the twelfth
chapter of the Acts. On the demise of his father in A.D. 44, he was only
seventeen years of age; and Judea, which was then reduced into the form
a Roman province with Caesarea for its capital, had remained ever since
under the government of Procurators. But though Agrippa had not been
permitted to succeed to the dominions of his father, he had received
various proofs of imperial favour; for he had obtained the government,
first of the principality of Chalcis, and then of several other
districts; and he had been honoured with the title of King. [139:1] The
Gentile Procurators could not be expected to be very minutely acquainted
with the ritual and polity of Israel; but as Agrippa was a Jew, and
consequently familiar with the customs and sentiments of the native
population, he had been entrusted with the care of the temple and its
treasures, as well as with the appointment of the high priest. Festus,
no doubt, felt that in a case such as that of Paul, the advice of this
visitor should be solicited; and hoped that Agrippa would be able to
supply some suggestion to relieve him out of his present perplexity. It
was accordingly arranged that the apostle should be permitted to plead
his cause in the hearing of the Jewish monarch. The affair seems to have
created unusual interest; the public appear to have been partially
admitted on the occasion; and seldom, or, perhaps, never before, had
Paul enjoyed an opportunity of addressing such an influential and
brilliant auditory. "Agrippa came, and Bernice, _with great pomp_, and
entered into the place of hearing, with the chief captains, and
principal men of the city." [139:2] Paul, still in bonds, made his
appearance before this courtly throng; and though it might have been
expected that a two years' confinement would have broken the spirit of
the prisoner, he displayed powers of argument and eloquence which
astonished and confounded his judges. The Procurator was quite
bewildered by his reasoning, for he appealed to "the promise made unto
the fathers," [139:3] and to things which "Moses and the prophets did
say should come;" [140:1] and as Festus could not appreciate the lofty
enthusiasm of the Christian orator (for he had never, when at Rome, been
accustomed to hear the advocates of heathenism plead so earnestly in its
defence), he "said with a loud voice--Paul, thou art beside thyself;
much learning doth make thee mad." [140:2] But the apostle's
self-possession was in nowise shaken by this blunt charge. "I am not
mad, most noble Festus," he replied, "but speak forth the words of truth
and soberness;" and then, turning to the royal stranger, vigorously
pressed home his argument. "King Agrippa," he exclaimed, "believest thou
the prophets? I know that thou believest." [140:3] The King, thus
challenged, was a libertine; and at this very time was believed to be
living in incestuous intercourse with his sister Bernice; and yet he
seems to have been staggered by Paul's solemn and pointed interrogatory.
"Almost," said he, "thou persuadest me to be a Christian." [140:4] It
has been thought by some that these words were uttered with a sneer; but
whatever may have been the frivolity of the Jewish King, they elicited
from the apostle one of the noblest rejoinders that ever issued from
human lips, "And Paul said, I would to God that not only thou, but also
all that hear me this day, were both almost and altogether such as I am,
except these bonds." [140:5]

The singularly able defence now made by the apostle convinced his judges
of the futility of the charges preferred against him by the Sanhedrim.
But at this stage of the proceedings it was no longer practicable to
quash the prosecution. When Paul concluded his address "the king rose
up, and the governor, and Bernice, and they that sat with them. And when
they were gone aside, they talked between themselves, saying--This man
doeth nothing worthy of death or of bonds. Then said Agrippa unto
Festus--This man might have been set at liberty, if he had not appealed
unto Caesar." [141:1]

At first sight it may appear extraordinary that so eminent a missionary
in the meridian of his usefulness was subjected to so long an
imprisonment. But "God's ways are not as our ways, nor His thoughts as
our thoughts." When thus, to a great extent, laid aside from official
duty, he had ample time to commune with his own heart, and to trace out,
with adoring wonder, the glorious grace and the manifold wisdom of the
work of redemption. Having himself partaken largely of affliction, and
experienced the sustaining power of the gospel so abundantly, he was the
better prepared to comfort the distressed; and hence his letters,
written at this period, are so full of consolation. [141:2] And apart
from other considerations, we may here recognise the fulfilment of a
prophetic announcement. When Paul was converted, the Lord said to
Ananias--"He is a chosen vessel unto me to bear my name before the
Gentiles, and _kings_, and the children of Israel, for I will shew him
_how great things he must suffer_ for my name's sake." [141:3] During
his protracted confinement he exhibited alike to Jew and Gentile an
illustrious specimen of faith and constancy; and called attention to the
truth in many quarters where otherwise it might have remained unknown.
Though he was chained to a soldier, he was not kept in very rigorous
custody, so that he had frequent opportunities of proclaiming the great
salvation. He was peculiarly fitted by his education and his genius for
expounding Christianity to persons moving in the upper circles of
society; and had he remained at liberty he could have expected to gain
access very rarely to such auditors. But already, as a prisoner, he had
pleaded the claims of the gospel before no inconsiderable portion of the
aristocracy of Palestine. He had been heard by the chief captain in
command of the garrison in the castle of Antonia, by the Sanhedrim, by
Felix and Drusilla, by Festus, by King Agrippa and his sister Bernice,
and probably by "the principal men" of both Caesarea and Jerusalem. In
criminal cases the appeals of Roman citizens were heard by the Emperor
himself, so that the apostle was about to appear as an ambassador for
Christ in the presence of the greatest of earth's potentates. Who can
tell but that some of that splendid assembly of senators and nobles who
surrounded Nero, when Paul was brought before his judgment-seat, will
have reason throughout all eternity to remember the occasion as the
birth-day of their blessedness!

The apostle and "certain other prisoners" embarked for Rome in the
autumn of A.D. 60. The compass was then unknown; in weather, "when
neither sun nor stars in many days appeared," [142:1] the mariner was
without a guide; and, late in the season, navigation was peculiarly
dangerous. The voyage proved disastrous; after passing into a second
vessel at Myra, [142:2] a city of Lycia, Paul and his companions were
wrecked on the coast of the island of Malta; [142:3] when they had
remained there three months, they set sail once more in a corn ship of
Alexandria, the Castor and Pollux; [142:4] and at length in the early
part of A.D. 61, reached the harbour of Puteoli, [143:1] then the great
shipping port of Italy.

The account of the voyage from Caesarea to Puteoli, as given in the Acts
of the Apostles, is one of the most curious passages to be found in the
whole of the sacred volume. Some may think it strange that the inspired
historian enters so much into details, and the nautical terms which he
employs may puzzle not a few readers; but these features of his
narrative attest its authenticity and genuineness. No one, who had not
himself shared the perils of the scene, could have been expected to
describe with so much accuracy the circumstances of the shipwreck. It
has been remarked that, after the lapse of eighteen hundred years, the
references of the evangelist to prevailing winds and currents, to the
indentations of the coast, to islands, bays, and harbours, may still be
exactly verified. Recent investigators have demonstrated that the
sailors, in the midst of danger, displayed no little ability, and that
their conduct in "undergirding the ship," [143:2] and in casting "four
anchors out of the stern," [143:3] evidenced their skilful seamanship.
Luke states that, after a long period of anxiety and abstinence, "about
midnight the shipmen deemed that they drew near to some country."
[143:4] The headland they were approaching is very low, and in a stormy
night is said to be invisible even at the distance of a quarter of a
mile; [143:5] but the sailors could detect the shore by other
indications. Even in a storm _the roar of breakers_ can be distinguished
from other sounds by the practised ear of a mariner; [144:1] and it can
be shewn that, with such a gale as was then blowing, the sea still
dashes with amazing violence against the very same point of land off
which Paul and his companions were that night labouring. In the depth of
the water at the place there is another most remarkable coincidence. We
are told that the sailors "sounded and found it _twenty fathoms_, and
when they had gone a little farther, they sounded, and found it _fifteen
fathoms_." [144:2] "But what," observes a modern writer, "are the
soundings at this point? They are now _twenty fathoms_. If we proceed a
little farther we find _fifteen fathoms_. It may be said that this, in
itself is nothing remarkable. But if we add that the fifteen-fathom
depth is _in the direction of the vessel's drift_ (W. by N.) from the
twenty-fathom depth, the coincidence is startling." [144:3] It may be
stated also that the "creek with a shore" [144:4] or sandy beach, and
the "place where two seas met," [144:5] and where "they ran the ship
aground" may still be recognised in what is now called St Paul's Bay at
Malta. [144:6] Even in the nature of the submarine strata we have a most
striking confirmation of the truth of the inspired history. It appears
that the four anchors cast out of the stern retained their hold, and it
is well known that the ground in St Paul's Bay is remarkably firm; for
in our English sailing directions it is mentioned that "while the cables
hold, there is no danger, as the anchors will never start." [144:7] Luke
reports that when the ship ran aground, "the fore-part stuck fast and
remained unmoveable" [144:8]--a statement which is corroborated by the
fact that "the bottom is mud graduating into tenacious clay"
[145:1]--exactly the species of deposit from which such a result might
be anticipated.

When Paul landed at Puteoli, he must have contemplated with deep emotion
the prospect of his arrival in Rome. The city to which he now approached
contained, perhaps, upwards of a million of human beings. [145:2] But
the amount of its inhabitants was one of the least remarkable of its
extraordinary distinctions. It was the capital of the mightiest empire
that had ever yet existed; one hundred races speaking one hundred
languages were under its dominion; [145:3] and the sceptre which ruled
so many subject provinces was wielded by an absolute potentate. This
great autocrat was the high priest of heathenism--thus combining the
grandeur of temporal majesty with the sacredness of religious elevation.
Senators and generals, petty kings and provincial governors, were all
obliged to bow obsequiously to his mandates. In this vast metropolis
might be found natives of almost every clime; some engaged in its trade;
some who had travelled to it from distant countries to solicit the
imperial favour; some, like Paul, conveyed to it as prisoners; some
stimulated to visit it by curiosity; and some attracted to it by the
vague hope of bettering their condition. The city of the Caesars might
well be described as "sitting upon many waters;" [145:4] for, though
fourteen or fifteen miles from the mouth of the Tiber, the mistress of
the world was placed on a peninsula stretching out into the middle of a
great inland sea over which she reigned without a rival. In the summer
months almost every port of every country along the shores of the
Mediterranean sent forth vessels freighted with cargoes for the
merchants of Rome. [146:1] The fleet from Alexandria laden with wheat
for the supply of the city was treated with peculiar honour; for its
ships alone were permitted to hoist their topsails as they approached
the shore; a deputation of senators awaited its arrival; and, as soon as
it appeared, the whole surrounding population streamed to the pier, and
observed the day as a season of general jubilee. But an endless supply
of other articles in which the poor were less interested found their way
to Rome. The mines of Spain furnished the great capital with gold and
silver, whilst its sheep yielded wool of superior excellence; and, in
those times of Roman conquest, slaves were often transported from the
shores of Britain. The horses and chariots and fine linen of Egypt, the
gums and spices and silk and ivory and pearls of India, the Chian and
the Lesbian wines, and the beautiful marble of Greece and Asia Minor,
all met with purchasers in the mighty metropolis. [146:2] As John
surveyed in vision the fall of Rome, and as he thought of the almost
countless commodities which ministered to her insatiable luxury, well
might he represent the world's traffic as destroyed by the catastrophe;
and well might he speak of the merchants of the earth as weeping and
mourning over her, because "no man buyeth their merchandise any more."
[146:3]

Paul had often desired to prosecute his ministry in the imperial city;
for he knew that if Christianity could obtain a firm footing in that
great centre of civilisation and of power, its influence would soon be
transmitted to the ends of the earth: but he now appeared there under
circumstances equally painful and discouraging. And yet even in this
embarrassing position he was not overwhelmed with despondency. At
Puteoli he "found brethren," [146:4] and through the indulgence of
Julius, the centurion to whose care he was committed, he was courteously
allowed to spend a week [147:1] with the little Church of which they
were members. He now set out on his way to the metropolis; but the
intelligence of his arrival had travelled before him, and after crossing
the Pomptine marshes, he was, no doubt, delighted to find a number of
Christian friends from Rome assembled at Appii Forum to tender to him
the assurances of their sympathy and affection. The place was
twenty-seven miles from the capital; and yet, at a time when travelling
was so tedious and so irksome, they had undertaken this lengthened
journey to visit the poor, weather-beaten, and tempest-tossed prisoner.
At the Three Taverns, ten miles nearer to the city, he met another party
of disciples [147:2] anxious to testify their attachment to so
distinguished a servant of their Divine Master. These tokens of respect
and love made a deep impression upon the susceptible mind of the
apostle; and it is accordingly stated that, when he saw the brethren,
"he thanked God and took courage." [147:3]

The important services he had been able to render on the voyage gave him
a claim to particular indulgence; and accordingly, when he reached Rome,
and when the centurion delivered the prisoners to the Praetorian
Prefect, or the commander-in-chief of the Praetorian guards, [147:4]
