Bishop of Rome, that these things are spoken by his own minions? or
understandeth he not he hath such champions to fight for him?  Let him
hearken then how holily and how godly one Hosius writeth of this matter,
a bishop in Polonia, as he testifieth of himself; a man doubtless well
spoken and not unlearned, and a very sharp and stout maintainer of that
side.  One will marvel, I suppose, how a good man could either conceive
so wickedly or write so despitefully of those words which he knew
proceeded from God's mouth, and specially in such sort as he would not
have it seem his own private opinion alone, but the common opinion of all
that band.  He dissembleth, I grant you indeed, and hideth what he is,
and setteth forth the matter so, as though it were not he and his side,
but the Zuenckfeldian heretics that so did speak.  "We," saith he, "will
bid away with the same Scriptures, whereof we see brought not only divers
but also contrary interpretations; and we will hear God speak, rather
than we will resort to the naked elements, and appoint our salvation to
rest in them.  It behoveth not a man to be expert in the law and
Scripture, but to be taught of God.  It is but lost labour that a man
bestoweth in the Scriptures.  For the Scripture is a creature, and a
certain bare letter."  This is Hosius' saying, uttered altogether with
the same spirit and the same mind wherewith in times past Montane and
Marcion were moved, who, as men report, used to say, when with a contempt
they rejected the Holy Scriptures, that themselves knew many more and
better things than either Christ or the Apostles ever knew.

What then shall I say here, O ye principal posts of religion, O ye arch-
governors of Christ's Church!  Is this that your reverence which ye give
to God's Word?  The Holy Scriptures, which, St. Paul saith, came by the
inspiration of God, which God did commend by so many miracles, wherein
are the most perfect prints of Christ's own steps, which all the holy
fathers, Apostles, and Angels, which Christ Himself the Son of God, as
often as was needful, did allege for testimony and proof; will ye, as
though they were unworthy for you to hear, bid them avaunt away?  That
is, will ye enjoin God to keep silence, who speaketh to you most clearly
by His own mouth in the Scriptures? or that Word, whereby alone, as Paul
saith, we are reconciled to God, and which the prophet David saith, is
"holy and pure, and shall last for ever;" will ye call that "but a bare
and dead letter?" or will ye say that all our labour is lost which is
bestowed in that thing which Christ hath commanded us diligently to
search, and to have evermore before our eyes?  And will ye say that
Christ and the Apostles meant with subtlety to deceive the people when
they exhorted them to read the Holy Scriptures, that thereby they might
flow in all wisdom and knowledge?  No marvel at all though these men
despise us and all our doings, which set so little by God Himself and His
infallible sayings.  Yet was it but want of wit in them, to the intend
they might hurt us, to do so extreme injury to the Word of God.

But Hosius will here make exclamation, saying we do him wrong, and that
these be not his own words, but the words of the heretic Zuenckfeldius.
But how then, if Zuenckfeldius make exclamation on the other side, and
say, that the same very words be not his, but Hosius' own words?  For
tell me where hath Zuenckfeldius ever written them? or, if he have
written them, and Hosius have judged the same to be wicked, why hath not
Hosius spoken so much as one word to confute them?  Howsoever the matter
goeth, although Hosius peradventure will not allow of those words, yet he
doth not disallow the meaning of the words For well near in all
controversies, and namely touching the use of the holy "communion under
both kinds," although the words of Christ be plain and evident, yet doth
Hosius disdainfully reject them, as no better than "cold and dead
elements;" and commandeth us to give faith to certain new lessons,
appointed by the Church, and to I wot not what revelations of the Holy
Ghost.  And Pighius saith: "Men ought not to believe, no not the most
clear and manifest words of the Scriptures, unless the same be allowed
for good by the interpretation and authority of the Church."

And yet, as though this were too little, they also burn the Holy
Scriptures, as in times past wicked King Aza did, or as Antiochus or
Maximinus did, and are wont to name them heretics' books.  And out of
doubt, to see too, they would fain do as Herod in old time did in Jewry,
that he might with more surety keep still his dominion: who being an
Idumaean born, and a stranger to the stock and kindred of the Jews, and
yet coveting much to be taken for a Jew, to the end he might establish to
him and his posterity the kingdom of that country, which he had gotten of
Augustus Caesar, he commanded all the genealogies and pedigrees to be
burnt, and made out of the way, so that there should remain no record
whereby he might be known to them that came after that he was an alien in
blood: whereas even from Abraham's time these monuments had been safely
kept amongst the Jews, and laid up in their treasury; because in them it
might easily and most assuredly be found of what lineage everyone did
descend.  So (in good faith) do these men, when they would have all their
own doings in estimation, as though they had been delivered to us even
from the Apostles, or from Christ Himself: to the end there might be
found nowhere anything able to convince such their dreams and lies,
either they burn the Holy Scriptures, or else they craftily convey them
from the people surely.

Very rightly and aptly doth Chrysostom write against these men.
"Heretics," saith he, "shut up the doors against the truth: for they know
full well, if the door were open, the Church should be none of theirs."
Theophylact also: "God's Word," saith he, "is the candle whereby the
thief is espied."  And Tertullian saith, "The Holy Scripture manifestly
findeth out the fraud and theft of heretics."  For why do they hide, why
do they keep under the Gospel which Christ would have preached aloud from
the housetop?  Why whelm they that light under a bushel which ought to
stand on a candlestick?  Why trust they more to the blindness of the
unskilful multitude, and to ignorance, than to the goodness of their
cause?  Think they their sleights are not already perceived, and that
they can walk now unespied, as though they had Gyges' ring, to go
invisibly by, upon their finger?  No, no.  All men see now well and well
again, what good stuff is in that chest of the "Bishop of Rome's bosom."
This thing alone of itself may be an argument sufficient that they work
not uprightly and truly.  Worthily ought that matter seem suspicious
which flieth trial, and is afraid of the light.  "For he that doeth
evil," as Christ saith, "seeketh darkness, and hateth the light."  A
conscience that knoweth itself clear cometh willingly into open show,
that the works which proceed of God may be seen.  Neither be they so very
blind but they see this well enough, that their own kingdom straightway
is at a point if the Scriptures once have the upper hand: and that, like
as men say, the idols of devils in times past, of whom men in doubtful
matters were then wont to receive answers, were suddenly stricken dumb at
the sight of Christ, when He was born and came into the world: even so
they see that now all their subtle practices will soon fall down headlong
upon the sight of the Gospel.  For Antichrist is not overthrown but by
the brightness of Christ's coming.

As for us, we run not for succour to the fire, as these men's guise is,
but we run to the Scriptures; neither do we reason with the sword, but
with the Word of God: and therewith, as saith Tertullian "do we feed our
faith; by it do we stir up our hope, and strengthen our confidence."  For
we know that the "Gospel of Jesus Christ is the power of God unto
salvation;" and that therein consisteth eternal life.  And as Paul
warneth us, "We do not hear, no, not an Angel of God coming from Heaven,
if he go about to pull us from any part of this doctrine."  Yea, more
than this, as the holy martyr Justin speaketh of himself, we would give
no credence to God Himself, if He should teach us any other Gospel.

For where these men bid the Holy Scriptures away, as dumb and fruitless,
and procure us to come to God Himself rather, who speaketh in the Church
and in councils, which is to say, to believe their fancies and opinions;
this way of finding out the truth is very uncertain and exceeding
dangerous, and in manner a fantastical and mad way, and by no means
allowed of the holy fathers.  Chrysostom saith, "There be many oftentimes
which boast themselves of the Holy Ghost; but truly whoso speak of their
own head do falsely boast they have the Spirit of God.  For like as
(saith he) Christ denied He spake of Himself, when He spake out of the
law and Prophets, even so now, if anything be pressed upon us in the Name
of the Holy Ghost, save the Gospel, we ought not to believe it.  For as
Christ is the fulfilling of the law and Prophets, so is the Holy Ghost
the fulfilling of the Gospel."  Thus far goeth Chrysostom.



PART V.


But here I look they will say, though they have not the Scriptures, yet
may chance they have the ancient doctors and the holy fathers with them.
For this is a high brag they have ever made, how that all antiquity and a
continual consent of all ages doth make on their side; and that all our
cases be but new, and yesterday's work, and until these few late years
were never heard of.  Questionless, there can nothing be more spitefully
spoken against the religion of God than to accuse it of novelty, as a new
come up matter.  For as there can be no change in God Himself, so ought
there to be no change in His religion.

Yet, nevertheless, we wot not by what means, but we have ever seen it
come so to pass from the first beginning of all, that as often as God did
give but some light, and did open His truth unto men, though the truth
were not only of greatest antiquity, but also from everlasting; yet of
wicked men and of the adversaries was it called new-fangled and of late
devised.  That ungracious and bloodthirsty Haman, when he sought to
procure the king Assuerus' displeasure against the Jews, this was his
accusation to him: "Thou hast here (saith he) a kind of people that useth
certain new laws of their own, but stiff-necked and rebellious against
all thy laws."  When Paul also began first to preach and expound the
Gospel at Athens he was called a tidings-bringer of new gods, as much to
say as of a new religion; "for" (said the Athenians) "may we not know of
thee what new doctrine this is?"  Celsus likewise, when he of set purpose
wrote against Christ, to the end he might more scornfully scoff out the
Gospel by the name of novelty: "What!" saith he, "hath God after so many
ages now at last and so late bethought Himself?"  Eusebius also writeth
that Christian religion from the beginning for very spite was called
[Greek text], that is to say, new and strange.  After like sort, these
men condemn all our matters as strange and new; but they will have their
own, whatsoever they are, to be praised as things of long continuance.
Doing much like to the enchanters and sorcerers now-a-days, which working
with devils, use to say they have their books and all their holy and hid
mysteries from Athanasius, Cyprian, Moses, Abel, Adam, and from the
archangel Raphael; because that their cunning, coming from such patrons
and founders, might be judged the more high and holy.  After the same
fashion these men, because they would have their own religion, which they
themselves, and that not long since, have brought forth into the world,
to be the more easily and rather accepted of foolish persons, or of such
as cast little whereabouts they or other do go, they are wont to say they
had it from Augustine, Hierom, Chrysostom, from the Apostles, and from
Christ Himself.

Full well know they that nothing is more in the people's favour, or
better liketh the common sort, than these names.  But how if the things,
which these men are so desirous to have seem new, be found of greatest
antiquity?  Contrariwise, how if all the things well-nigh which they so
greatly set out with the name of antiquity, having been well and
thoroughly examined, be at length found to be but new, and devised of
very late?  Soothly to say, no man that hath a true and right
consideration would think the Jews' laws and ceremonies to be new, for
all Haman's accusation.  For they were graven in very ancient tables of
most antiquity.  And although many did take Christ to have swerved from
Abraham and the old fathers, and to have brought in a certain new
religion in His own Name, yet answered He them directly, "If ye believed
Moses, ye would believe Me also," for My doctrine is not so new as you
make it: for Moses, an author of greatest antiquity, and one to whom ye
give all honour, "hath spoken of Me."  Paul likewise, though the Gospel
of Jesus Christ be of many counted to be but new, yet hath it (saith he)
the testimony most old both of the law and Prophets.  As for our doctrine
which we may rightly call Christ's catholic doctrine, it is so far off
from new that God, who is above all most ancient, and the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, hath left the same unto us in the Gospel, in the
Prophets' and Apostles' works, being monuments of greatest age.  So that
no man can now think our doctrine to be new, unless the same think either
the Prophets' faith, or the Gospel, or else Christ Himself to be new.

And as for their religion, if it be of so long continuance as they would
have men ween it is, why do they not prove it so by the examples of the
primitive Church, and by the fathers and councils of old times?  Why
lieth so ancient a cause thus long in the dust destitute of an advocate?
Fire and sword they have had always ready at hand, but as for the old
councils and the fathers, all mum--not a word.  They did surely against
all reason to begin first with these so bloody and extreme means, if they
could have found other more easy and gentle ways.  And if they trust so
fully to antiquity, and use no dissimulation, why did John Clement, a
countryman of ours, but few years past, in the presence of certain honest
men and of good credit, tear and cast into the fire certain leaves of
Theodoret--the most ancient father and a Greek bishop--wherein he plainly
and evidently taught that the nature of bread in the Communion was not
changed, abolished, or brought to nothing?  And this did he of purpose,
because he thought there was no other copy thereof to be found.  Why
saith Albertus Pighius that the ancient father Augustine had a wrong
opinion of original sin? and that he erred and lied and used false logic,
as touching the case of matrimony concluded after a vow made, which
Augustine affirmeth to be perfect matrimony, indeed, and cannot be undone
again?  Also when they did of late put in print the ancient father
Origen's work upon the Gospel of John, why left they quite out the whole
sixth chapter?  Wherein it is likely, yea, rather, of very surety, that
the said Origen had written many things concerning the sacrament of the
Holy Communion contrary to these men's minds; and would put forth that
book mangled rather than full and perfect, for fear it should reprove
them and their partners of their error.  Call ye this trusting to
antiquity, when ye rent in pieces, keep back, maim, and burn the ancient
fathers' works?

It is a world to see, how well-favouredly and how towardly touching
religion these men agree with the fathers of whom they use to vaunt that
they be their own good.  The old Council Eliberine made a decree that
nothing that is honoured of the people should be painted in the churches.
The old father Epiphanius saith:--"It is a horrible wickedness, and a sin
not to be suffered, for any man to set up any picture in the Church of
the Christians, yea, though it were the picture of Christ Himself."  Yet,
these men store all their temples, and each corner of them, with painted
and carved images, as though without them religion were nothing worth.

The old fathers Origen and Chrysostom exhort the people to read the
Scriptures, to buy them books, to reason at home betwixt themselves of
divine matters--wives with their husbands, and parents with their
children.  These men condemn the Scriptures as dead elements, and--as
much as ever they may--bar the people from them.  The ancient fathers,
Cyprian, Epiphanius, and Hierom, say, for one who, perchance, hath made a
vow to lead a sole life, and afterwards liveth unchastely, and cannot
quench the flames of lust, "it is better to marry a wife, and to live
honestly in wedlock."  And the old father Augustine judgeth the selfsame
marriage to be good and perfect, and that it ought not to be broken
again.  These men, if a man have once bound himself by a vow, though
afterwards he burn, keep queans, and defile himself with never so sinful
and desperate a life, yet they suffer not that person to marry a wife; or
if he chance to marry, they allow it not for marriage.  And they commonly
teach it is much better and more godly to keep a concubine and harlot,
than to live in that kind of marriage.

The old father Augustine complained of the multitude of ceremonies,
wherewith he even then saw men's minds and consciences overcharged.  These
men, as though God regarded nothing else but their ceremonies, have so
out of measure increased them, that there is now almost none other thing
left in their churches and places of prayer.

Again, that old father Augustine denieth it to be lawful for a monk to
spend his time slothfully and idly, and, under a pretended and
counterfeit holiness, to live all upon others.  And whoso thus liveth,
the old father Apollonius likeneth him to a thief.  These men have, I wot
not whether to name them droves or herds of monks, who for all they do
nothing, nor yet once intend to bear any show of holiness, yet live they
not only upon others, but also riot lavishly of other folks' labours.

The old council of Rome decreed that no man should come to the service
said by a priest well known to keep a concubine.  These men let to farm
concubines to their priests, and yet constrain men by force against their
will to hear their cursed paltry service.

The old canons of the Apostles command that bishop to be removed from his
office, which will both supply the place of a civil magistrate, and also
of an ecclesiastical person.  These men, for all that, both do and will
needs serve both places.  Nay, rather, the one office which they ought
chiefly to execute, they once touch not, and yet nobody commandeth them
to be displaced.

The old Council Gangrense commandeth that none should make such
difference between an unmarried priest and a married priest, as he ought
to think the one more holy than the other for single life's sake.  These
men put such a difference between them, that they straightway think all
their holy service to be defiled if it be done by a good and honest man
that hath a wife.

The ancient emperor Justinian commanded that, in the holy administration,
all things should be pronounced with a clear, loud, and treatable voice,
that the people might receive some fruit thereby.  These men, lest the
people should understand them, mumble up all their service, not only with
a drowned and hollow voice, but also in a strange and barbarous tongue.

The old council at Carthage commanded that nothing should be read in
Christ's congregation but the canonical Scriptures.  These men read such
things in their churches as themselves know of a truth to be stark lies
and fond fables.

But if there be any that think these above-rehearsed authorities be but
weak and slender, because they were decreed by emperors and certain petit
bishops, and not by so full and perfect councils, taking pleasure rather
in the authority and name of the Pope, let such a one know that Pope
Julius doth evidently forbid that the priest, in ministering the
Communion, should dip the bread in the cup.  These men, contrary to Pope
Julius' decree, divide the bread, and dip it in the wine.

Pope Clement saith it is not lawful for a bishop to deal with both
swords: "For if thou wilt have both," said he, "thou shalt deceive both
thyself and those that obey thee."  Nowadays, the Pope challengeth to
himself both swords, and useth both.  Wherefore, it ought to seem less
marvel if that have followed which Clement saith, that is, "that he hath
deceived both his own self and those which have given ear unto him."

Pope Leo saith, "Upon one day it is lawful to say but one mass in one
church."  These men say daily in one church commonly ten masses, twenty,
thirty, yea, oftentimes more.  So that the poor gazer on can scant tell
which way he were best to turn him.

Pope Gelasius saith, "It is a wicked deed and sibb to sacrilege in any
man to divide the Communion, and when he hath received one kind to
abstain from the other."  These men, contrary to God's Word, and contrary
to Pope Gelasius, command that one kind only of the Holy Communion be
given to the people, and by so doing they make their priests guilty of
sacrilege.

But if they will say that all these things are worn out of ure and nigh
dead, and pertain nothing to these present times, yet to the end all folk
may understand what faith is to be given to these men, and upon what hope
they call together their general councils, let us see in few words what
good heed they take to the selfsame thing, which they themselves these
very last years (and the remembrance thereof is yet new and fresh), in
their own general council that they had by order called, have decreed and
commanded to be devoutly kept.  In the last council at Trent, scant
fourteen years past, it was ordained by the common consent of all
degrees, "that one man should not have two benefices at one time."  What
is become now of that ordinance?  Is the same too soon worn out of mind,
and clean consumed?  For these men, ye see, give to one man not two
benefices only, but sundry abbeys many times, sometimes also two
bishoprics, sometimes three, sometimes four.  And that not only to an
unlearned man, but oftentimes also even to a man of war.

In the said council a decree was made that all bishops should preach the
Gospel.  These men neither preach nor once go up into the pulpit, neither
think they it any part of their office.  What great pomp and crake then
is this they make of antiquity?  Why brag they so of the names of the
ancient fathers, and of the new and old councils?  Why will they seem to
trust to their authority whom when they list they despise at their
pleasure?

But I have a special fancy to commune a word or two rather with the
Pope's good holiness, and to say these things to his own face.  Tell us,
I pray you, good holy father, seeing ye do crake so much of all
antiquity, and boast yourself that all men are bound to you alone, which
of all the fathers hath at any time called you by the name of the
"highest prelate," the "universal bishop," or the "head of the Church"?
Which of them ever said "that both the swords were committed unto you?"
Which of them ever said "that you have authority and right to call
councils?"  Which of them ever said "the whole world is but your
diocese?"  Which of them "that all bishops have received of your
fulness?"  Which of them "that all power is given to you as well in
heaven as in earth?"  Which of them "that neither kings, nor the whole
clergy, nor yet all the people together, are able to be judges over you?"
Which of them "that kings and emperors, by Christ's commandment and will,
do receive authority at your hands?"  Which of them with so precise and
mathematical limitation hath surveyed and determined you to be "seventy
and seven times greater than the mightiest kings?"  Which of them that
more ample authority is given to you than to the residue of the
patriarchs?  Which of them that you are the "Lord God"? or that you are
"not a mere natural man, but a certain substance made and grown together
of God and man"?  Which of them that you are the only "headspring of all
laws"?  Which of them that you have "power over purgatories?"  Which of
them that you are able to "command the angels of God" as you list
yourself?  Which of them that ever said that you are "lord of lords" and
the "king of kings"?  We can also go further with you in like sort.  What
one amongst the whole number of the old bishops and fathers ever taught
you either to say private mass while the people stared on, or to "lift up
the Sacrament" over your head (in which point consisteth now all your
religion), or else to "mangle Christ's Sacraments," and to bereave the
people of the one part, contrary to Christ's institution and plain
express words?  But that we may once come to an end, what one is there of
all the fathers which hath taught you to distribute Christ's blood and
the holy martyrs' merits, and to sell openly as merchandises your pardons
and all the rooms and lodgings of purgatory?

These men are wont to speak much of a certain secret doctrine of theirs,
and of their manifold and sundry readings.  Then let them bring forth
somewhat now, if they can, that it may appear they have at least read or
do know somewhat.  They have often stoutly noised in all corners where
they went how all the parts of their religion be very old, and have been
approved not only of the multitude, but also by the consent and continual
observation of all nations and times.  Let them, therefore, once in their
life show this their antiquity.  Let them make appear at eye that the
