praised, gathers up sin thereby in his mouth.--Kokaliya-sutta.

The member of Buddha's order should abstain from theft, even of a
blade of grass.--Mahavagga.

From bribery, cheating, fraud, and (all other) crooked ways he
abstains.--Tevijja-sutta.

The Scripture moveth us, therefore, rather to cut off the hand than to
take anything which is not ours.--Sha-mi-lu-i-yao-lio.

Let him not, even though irritated, speak harsh
words.--Sariputta-sutta.

From this day forth, ... although much be said against me, I will not
feel spiteful, angry, enraged, or morose, nor manifest anger and
hatred.--Anguttara-Nikaya.

Upright, conscientious and of soft speech, gentle and not
proud.--Metta-sutta.

    Even as the lily lives upon and loves the water,
    So Upatissa and Kolita likewise,
    Joined by closest bond of love,
    If by necessity compelled to live apart,
    Were overcome by grief and aching heart.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

(The true friend) forsakes you not in trouble; he will lay down his
life for your sake.--Sigalovada-sutta.

    In grief as well as in joy we are united,
    In sorrow and in happiness alike.
           *       *       *       *
    That which your heart rejoices in as good,
    That I also rejoice in and follow.
    It were better I should die with you,
    Than ... attempt to live where you are not.

--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

    When first I undertook to obtain wisdom,
    Then also I took on me to defend (the weak).
    All living things of whatsoever sort
    Call forth my compassion and pity.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Fault is not to be found unnecessarily--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Judge not thy neighbor.--Siamese Buddhist Maxim.

What is it to you ... whether another is guilty or guiltless? Come,
friend, atone for your own offense.--Mahavagga.

Even a king may be full of trouble; but a common man, who is holy, has
rest everlasting.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

This world is afflicted with death and decay; therefore the wise do
not grieve, knowing the terms of the world.--Salla-sutta.

Who that clings to Righteousness should be in fear of
death?--Jatakamala.

Ye, then, my followers, ... give not way ... to sorrow; ... aim to
reach the home where separation cannot come.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Loving and merciful towards all.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Filled with universal benevolence.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

A friend to all creatures in the world.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Bent on promoting the happiness of all created beings.--Lalita
Vistara.

Conquer thy greediness for sensual pleasures.--Jatukannimanavapuccha.

Therefore should we encourage small desire, that we may have to give
to him who needs.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Justly I seek for riches, and having sought for riches justly, I give
of my ... justly acquired wealth to one, to two, to three, ... to a
hundred.--Magha-sutta.

They sought their daily gain righteously; no covetous, money-loving
spirit prevailed; with pious intent they gave liberally; there was not
a thought of any reward.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

There is in charity a proper time and a proper
mode.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Better would it be to swallow a red-hot iron ball than that a bad,
unrestrained fellow should live on the charity of the land.--Dhammapada.

Our duty to do something, not only for our own benefit, but for the
good of those who shall come after us.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Have respect for the aged as though they were thy father and mother;
love the young as thy children or younger brethren.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

All the people were bound close in family love and
friendship.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Happy ... is the man that honors his father: he also that honors his
mother is happy.--Udanavarga.

How should I be capable of leaving thee in thy calamity?... Whatever
fate may be thine I am pleased with it.--Jatakamala.

He is my husband. I love and revere him with all my heart, and
therefore am determined to share his fate. Kill me first, ... and
afterwards do to him as you list.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

A heart bound by affection does not mind imminent peril. Worse than
death to such a one is the sorrow which the distress of a friend
inflicts.--Jatakamala.

This good man, moved by pity, gives up his life for another, as though
it were but a straw.--Nagananda.

Sprinkle water on the seeds of virtue.--Story of Pratiharyya.

The fool thinks himself alone and commits sin. But I know of no lonely
place at all.... Of a bad action my "Self" is a witness far more
sharp-sighted than any other person.--Jatakamala.

What has been designated "name" and "family" ... is but a
term.--Vasettha-sutta.

Reverence ... is due to righteous conduct.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The wise man ... regards with reverence all who deserve reverence,
without distinction of person.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

For if virtue flags and folly rules, what reverence can there be ...
for a high name or boast of prowess, inherited from former
generations?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Fools of little understanding have themselves for their greatest
enemies, for they do evil deeds which cannot but bear bitter
fruit.--Dhammapada.

There is not a spot upon earth, neither in the sky, neither in the
sea, neither ... in the mountain-clefts, where an (evil) deed does not
bring trouble (to the doer).--Udanavarga.

Surely if living creatures saw the consequence of all their evil
deeds, ... with hatred would they turn and leave them, fearing the
ruin following.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Exercising love towards the infirm.--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

Ever inspired by pity and love to men.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He lived for the good of mankind.--Jatakamala.

Whatsoever living beings there are, feeble or strong, small or large,
seen or not seen, may all creatures be happy-minded.--Metta-sutta.

Yield not (one moment) to the angry impulse.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Overcome anger by love.--Dhammapada.

A wise man never resents with passion the abuse of the
foolish--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

In agreement with all men, and hurting nobody, ... he, as far as
possible, does good to all.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

   Reverently practicing the four gracious acts--
   Benevolence, charity, humanity, love;
   Doing all for the good of men, and that they in turn may benefit others.

--Phu-yau-king.

   They also,[2] resigning the deathless bliss within their reach,
   Worked the welfare of mankind in various lands.
   What man is there who would be remiss in doing good to mankind?

--Quoted by Max Muller.

[Footnote 2: Buddhist missionaries.]

He identified himself with all beings--Jatakamala.

    Because the dove fears the hawk,
    With fluttering pennons she comes to seek my protection.
    Though she cannot speak with her mouth,
    Yet through fear her eyes are moist.
    Now, therefore, I will extend (to this poor creature)
    My own protection and defense.

--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

How indifferent he was to his own welfare!...

How intolerant of the suffering of others!--Jatakamala. In every
condition, high or low, we find folly and ignorance (and men), carelessly
following the dictates of ... passion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Neither is it right to judge men's character by outward
appearances.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

The body may wear the ascetic's garb, the heart be immersed in worldly
thoughts: ... the body may wear a worldly guise, the heart mount high
to things celestial.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Full of truth and compassion and mercy and long-suffering.--Jataka.

Uprightness is his delight.--Tevijja-sutta.

Making ... virtue always his first aim.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

An example for all the earth.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

What he hears he repeats not there, to raise a quarrel against the
people here.--Tevijja-sutta.

He injures none by his conversation.--Samanna-phala-sutta.

Walk in the path of duty, do good to your brethren, and work no evil
towards them.--Avadana Sataka.

Aiming to curb the tongue, ... aiming to benefit the
world.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Intent upon benefiting your fellow-creatures.--Katha Sarit Sagara.

Health is the greatest of gifts, contentment the best of
riches.--Dhammapada.

If thou be born in the poor man's hovel, yet have wisdom, then wilt
thou be like the lotus-flower growing out of the mire.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

He that is rich but is not contented endures the pain of
poverty.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The words of Buddha, even when stern, yet ... as full of pity as the
words of a father to his children.--Questions of King Milinda.

Overcoming all enemies by the force (of his
love).--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

How great his pity and his love toward those who opposed his claims,
neither rejoicing in their defeat, nor yet exulting in his own
success!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The Buddha has mercy even on the meanest thing.--Cullavagga.

He that ... would wait upon me,[3] let him wait on the
sick.--Mahavagga.

[Footnote 3: Buddha.]

The Buddha, O king, magnifies not the offering of gifts to himself,
but rather to whosoever ... is deserving.--Questions of King Milinda.

If you desire to honor Buddha, follow the example of his patience and
long-suffering.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

    Radiant with heavenly pity, lost in care
    For those he knew not, save as fellow-lives.

--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Who that hears of him, but yearns with love?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

       *       *       *       *       *
