do wrong, from any well-calculated motives, or wholesome and pleasant
emotions.  But they have not as yet heard whether there be any Holy
Spirit.

We can only answer, Just so.  This Holy Spirit in Whom we believe defies
all analysis, all definition whatsoever.  His nature can be brought under
no terms derived from human emotions or motives.  He is literally
invisible; as invisible to the conception of the brain as He is to the
bodily eye.  His presence is proved only by its effects.  The Spirit
bloweth whither it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but thou
canst not tell whence it cometh, nor whither it goeth.

Such words must sound as dreams to those analytical philosophers who
allow nothing in man below the sphere of consciousness, actual or
possible; who have dissected the human mind till they find in it no
personal will, no indestructible and spiritual self, but a character
which is only the net result of innumerable states of consciousness; who
hold that man's outward actions, and also his inmost instincts, are all
the result either of calculations about profit and loss, pleasure and
pain, or of emotions, whether hereditary or acquired.  Ignoring the deep
and ancient distinction, which no one ever brought out so clearly as St
Paul, between the flesh and the spirit, they hold that man is flesh, and
can be nothing more; that each person is not really a person, but is the
consequence of his brain and nerves; and having thus, by logical
analysis, got rid of the spirit of man, their reason and their conscience
quite honestly and consistently see no need for, or possibility of, a
Spirit of God, to ennoble and enable the human spirit.  Why need there
be, if the difference between an animal and a man be one of degree alone,
and not of kind?

We answer: That there is a flesh in man, brain and nerves, emotions and
passions, identical with that of animals, we do not deny.  We should be
fools if we did deny it; for the fact is hideously and shamefully patent.
None knew that better than St Paul, who gave a list of the works of the
flesh, the things which a man does who is the slave of his own brain and
nerves--and a very ugly list it is--beginning with adultery and ending
with drunkenness, after passing through all the seven deadly sins.  And
neither St Paul nor we deny, that in this fleshly, carnal and animal
state the vast majority of the human race has lived, and lives still, to
its own infinite misery and confusion; and that it has a perpetual
tendency, whenever lifted out of that state, to fall back into it again,
and perish.

But St Paul says, and we say: That crushed under this animal nature there
is in man a spirit.  We say: That below all his consciousness lies a
nobler element; a divine spark, or at least a divine fuel, which must be
kindled into life by the divine Spirit, the Spirit of God.  And we say
that in proportion as that Spirit of God kindles the spirit of man, he
begins to act after a fashion for which he can give no logical reason;
that by instinct, and without calculation of profit or loss, pleasure or
pain, he begins to act on what he calls duty, honour, love,
self-sacrifice.  But what these are he cannot analyse.  Mere words cannot
define them.  He can only obey that which prompts him, he knows not what
nor whence; and say with Luther of old: "I can do no otherwise.  God help
me."

And we say that such men and women are the salt of the earth, who keep
society from rotting; that by such men and women, and by their example
and influence, direct and indirect, has Christendom been raised up out of
the accursed slough into which Europe and, indeed, the whole known world,
had fallen during the early Roman Empire; and that to this influence, and
therefore to the Holy Spirit of God alone, and not to any prudential
calculations, combined experiences, or so-called philosophies of men, is
owing all which keeps Europe from being a hell on earth.  And we say,
moreover, that those who deny this, and dream of a morality and a
civilization without The Spirit of God, are unconsciously throwing down
the ladder by which they themselves have climbed, and sawing off the very
bough to which they cling.

Duty, honour, love, self-sacrifice--these are the fruits of The Spirit;
unknown to, and unobeyed by, the savage, or by the civilized man who--as
has too often happened--as is happening now in too many lands, on both
sides of the Atlantic, is sinking back into inward savagery, amid an
outward and material civilization.

Moreover--and this appears to us a fair experimental proof that our old-
fashioned belief in A Spirit of God, which acts upon the spirit of man,
is a true belief--moreover, I say: It is a patent fact, that wherever and
whenever there has been a revival of the Christian religion; whenever,
that is, amid whatsoever confusions and errors, men have begun to feel
the need of the Holy Spirit of God, and to pray for that Spirit, a moral
revival has accompanied the religious one.  Men and women have not only
become better themselves; and that often suddenly and in very truth
miraculously better: but the yearning has awoke in them to make others
better likewise.  The grace of God, as they have called it, has made them
gracious to their fellow-creatures; and duty, honour, love,
self-sacrifice, call it by what name we will, has said to them, with a
still small voice more potent than all the thunders of the law: Go, and
seek and save that which is lost.

In no case has this instinctive tendency to practical benevolence been
more striking, than in the case of that great religious revival
throughout England at the beginning of this century, which issued in the
rise of the Evangelical school: a school rightly so called, because its
members did try to obey the precepts of the Gospel, according to their
understanding of them, in spirit and in truth.

The doctrines which they held are a matter not for us, but for God and
their own souls.  The deeds which they did are matter for us, and for all
England; for they have left their mark on the length and breadth of the
land.  They were inspired--cultivated, highborn, and wealthy folk many of
them--with a strange new instinct that God had bidden them to feed the
hungry, to clothe the naked, to visit the prisoner and the sick, to bind
up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and to preach
good tidings to the meek.  A strange new instinct: and from what cause,
save from the same cause as that which Isaiah assigned to his own like
deeds?--Because "The Spirit of the Lord was upon him."

Yes, if those gracious men, those gracious women, did not shew forth the
Spirit and grace of God with power, then there is either no Spirit of
God, no grace of God; or those who deny to them the name of saints forget
the words of Him Who said: By their fruits ye shall know them; of Him Who
said, too: That the unpardonable sin, the sin which shewed complete moral
perversion, the sin against the Holy Spirit of God, was to attribute good
deeds to bad motives, and say: He casteth out devils by Beelzebub, the
prince of the devils.

Yes, that old Evangelical School may now have passed its prime.  It may
now be verging toward old age; and other schools, younger and stronger,
with broader and clearer knowledge of dogma, of history, civil and
ecclesiastical, of the value of ceremonial, of the needs of the human
intellect and emotions, may have passed it in a noble rivalry, and
snatched, as it were, from the hands of the old Evangelical School the
lamp of truth, to bear it further forward in the race.  But God forbid
that the spiritual children should be ungrateful to their spiritual
parents, though God may have taught them things which their parents did
not know.

And they were our spiritual parents, those old Evangelicals.  No just and
well-informed man who has passed middle age, but must confess, that to
them we owe whatsoever vital religion exists at this moment in any school
or party of the Church of England; that to them we owe the germs at
least, and in many cases the full organization and the final success, of
a hundred schemes of practical benevolence and practical justice, without
which this country, in its haste to grow rich at all risks and by all
means, might have plunged itself ere now into anarchy and revolution.  And
he must confess, too, if he is one who has seen much of his
fellow-creatures and their characters, that that school numbered among
its disciples--and, thank God, they are not all yet gone home to their
rest--some of the loveliest human souls, whose converse has chastened and
ennobled his own soul.  Ah, well--

   The old order changeth, giving place to the new;
   And God fulfils Himself in many ways,
   Lest one good custom should corrupt the world.

And new methods and new institutions have arisen, and will yet arise, for
seeking and saving that which is lost.  God's blessing on them all, to
whatsoever party, church, or sect they may belong!  Whosoever cast out
devils in Christ's name, Christ has forbidden us to forbid them, whether
they follow us or not.  But yet shall we not still honour and love the
old Evangelical School, and many an Institution which it has left behind,
as heirlooms to some of us, at least, from our mothers, or from women to
whom we owed, in long past years, our earliest influences for good, our
earliest examples of a practical Christian life, our earliest proofs that
there was indeed a Spirit of God, a gracious Spirit, Who gave grace to
the hearts, the deeds, the very looks and voices of those in whom He
dwelt; Institutions, which are too likely some of them to die, simply
from the loss of old friends?

The loss of old friends.  Yes, so it is always in this world.  The old
earnest hearts go home one by one to their rest; and the young earnest
hearts--and who shall blame them?--go elsewhere; and try new fashions of
doing good, which are more graceful and more agreeable to them.  For the
religious world, like all other forms of the world, has its fashions; and
of them too stands true the saying of the apostle: That this world and
the fashion thereof pass away.  Many a good work, which once was somewhat
fashionable in its way, has become somewhat unfashionable, and something
else is fashionable in its place; and five-and-twenty years hence
something else will have become fashionable; and our children will look
back on our ways of doing good with pity, if not with contempt, as narrow
and unenlightened, just as we are too apt to look back on our fathers'
ways.  And all the while, what can they teach worth teaching, what can we
teach worth teaching, save what our fathers and mothers taught, what the
Spirit of God taught them, and has taught to all who would listen since
the foundation of the world, "shewing man what was good:" and what was
that--"What doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?"

Ah! why do we, even in religious and moral matters, even in the doing
good to the souls and bodies of our fellow-creatures, allow ourselves to
be the puppets of fashions?  Of fashions which even when harmless, even
beautiful, are but the garments, or rather stage-properties, in which we
dress up the high instincts which God's Spirit bestows on us, in order to
make them agreeable enough for our own prejudices, or pretty enough for
our own tastes.  How little do we perceive our own danger--so little that
we yield to it every day--the danger of mistaking our fashion of doing
good for the good done; aye, for the very Spirit of God Who inspires that
good; mistaking the garment for the person who wears it, the outward and
visible sign for the inward and spiritual grace; and so in our hearts
falling actually into that very error of transubstantiation, of which we
repudiate the name!

Why, ah why, will we not take refuge from fashions in Him in Whom are no
fashions--even in the Holy Spirit of God, Who is unchangeable and eternal
as the Father and the Son from Whom He proceeds; Who has spoken words in
sundry and divers manners to all the elect of God; Who has inspired every
good thought and feeling which was ever thought or felt in earth or
heaven; but Whose message of inspiration has been, and will be, for ever
the same--"Do justly, love mercy, walk humbly with thy God"?

Could we but utterly trust Him, and utterly believe in His presence: then
we should welcome all truth, under whatever outward forms of the mere
intellect it was uttered; then we should bless every good deed, by
whomsoever and howsoever it was done; then we should rise above all party
strifes, party cries, party fashions and shibboleths, to the
contemplation of the One supreme good Spirit--the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever; and hold to the One Fashion of
Almighty God, which never changes, for it is eternal by the necessity of
His own eternal character; namely,--To be perfect, even as our Father in
Heaven is perfect; because He causes His sun to shine on the evil and on
the good, and His rain to fall on the just and on the unjust.




SERMON VII.  CONFUSION.


PSALM CXIX. 31.

   I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord, confound me not.

What is the meaning of this text?  What is this which the Psalmist and
prophets call being confounded; being put to shame and confusion of face?
What is it?  It is something which they dread more than death; which they
dread as much as hell.  Nay, it seems in the mind of some of them to be
part and parcel of hell itself; one of the very worst things which could
happen to them after death: for what is written in the Book of the
Prophet Daniel?--"Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall
awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt."

And we Christians are excusable if we dread it likewise.  How often does
St Paul speak of shame as an evil to be dreaded; just as he speaks, even
more often, of glory and honour as a thing to be longed for and striven
after.  That one word, "ashamed," occurs twelve times and more in the New
Testament, beside St John's warning, which alone is enough to prove what
I allege, "that we have not to be ashamed before Christ at his coming."

And how does the Te Deum--the noblest hymn written by man since St John
finished his Book of Revelations--how does that end, but with the same
old cry as that of the Psalmist in the 119th Psalm--

"O Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded"?

Now it is difficult to tell men what being confounded means; difficult
and almost needless; for there are those who know what it means without
being told; and those who do not know what it means without being told,
are not likely to know by my telling, or any man's telling.  No, not if
an angel from heaven came and told them what being confounded meant would
they understand him, at least till they were confounded themselves; and
then they would know by bitter experience--perhaps when it was too late.

And who are they?  What sort of people are they?

First, silly persons; whom Solomon calls fools--though they often think
themselves refined and clever enough--luxurious and "fashionable" people,
who do not care to learn, who think nothing worth learning save how to
enjoy themselves; who call it "bad form" to be earnest, and turn off all
serious questions with a jest.  These are they of whom Wisdom says--"How
long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and the scorners delight
in their scorning, and fools hate knowledge?  I also will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear cometh."

Next, mean and truly vulgar persons; who are shameless; who do not care
if they are caught out in a lie or in a trick.  These are they of whom it
is written that outside of God's kingdom, in the outer darkness wherein
are weeping and gnashing of teeth, are dogs, and whosoever loveth and
maketh a lie.

And next, and worst of all, self-conceited people.  These are they of
whom Solomon says, "Seest thou a man who is wise in his own conceit?
There is more hope of a fool than of him."  They are the people who will
not see when they are going wrong; who will not hear reason, nor take
advice, no, nor even take scorn and contempt; who will not see that they
are making fools of themselves, but, while all the world is laughing at
them, walk on serenely self-satisfied, certain that they, and they only,
know what the world is made of, and how to manage the world.  These are
they of whom it is written--"He that being often reproved, hardeneth his
neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy."  Then they
will learn, and with a vengeance, what being confounded means by being
confounded themselves, and finding themselves utterly wrong, where they
thought themselves utterly right.  Yet no.  I do not think that even that
would cure some people.  There are those, I verily believe, who would not
confess that they were in the wrong even in the bottomless pit, but, like
Satan and his fallen angels in Milton's poem, would have excellent
arguments to prove that they were injured and ill-used, deceived and
betrayed, and lay the blame of their misery on God, on man, on anything
but their own infallible selves.

Who, then, are the people who know what being confounded means; who are
afraid, and terribly afraid, of being brought to shame and confusion
efface?

I should say, all human beings in proportion as they are truly human
beings, are not brutal; in proportion, that is, as they are good or have
the capacity of goodness in them; that is, in proportion as the Spirit of
God is working in them, giving them the tender heart, the quick feelings,
the earnestness, the modesty, the conscientiousness, the reverence for
the good opinion of their fellow-men, which is the beginning of eternal
life.  Do you not see it in the young?  Modesty, bashfulness,
shame-facedness--as the good old English word was--that is the very
beginning of all goodness in boys and girls.  It is the very material out
of which all other goodness is made; and those who laugh at, or torment,
young people for being modest and bashful, are doing the devil's work,
and putting themselves under the curse which God, by the mouth of Solomon
the wise, pronounced against the scorners who love scorning, and the
fools who hate knowledge.

This is the rule with dumb animals likewise.  The more intelligent, the
more high-bred they are, the more they are capable of feeling shame; and
the more they are liable to be confounded, to lose their heads, and
become frantic with doubt and fear.  Who that has watched dogs does not
know that the cleverer they are, the more they are capable of being
actually ashamed of themselves, as human beings are, or ought to be?  Who
that has trained horses does not know that the stupid horse is never
vicious, never takes fright?  The failing which high-bred horses have of
becoming utterly unmanageable, not so much from bodily fear, as from
being confounded, not knowing what people want them to do--that is the
very sign, the very effect, of their superior organization: and more
shame to those who ill-use such horses.  If God, my friends, dealt with
us as cruelly and as clumsily as too many men deal with their horses, He
would not be long in driving us mad with terror and shame and confusion.
But He remembers our frame; He knoweth whereof we are made, and
remembereth that we are but dust: else the spirit would fail before Him,
and the souls which He hath made.  And to Him we can cry, even when we
know that we have made fools of ourselves--Father who made me, Christ who
died for me, Holy Spirit who teachest me, have patience with my stupidity
and my ignorance.  Lord, in thee have I trusted, let me never be
confounded.

But some will tell us--It is a sign of weakness to feel shame.  Why
should you care for the opinion of your fellow-men?  If you are doing
right, what matter what they say of you?

Yes, my friends, if you are doing right.  But if you are not doing
right--What then?

If you have only been fancying that you are doing right, and suspect
suddenly that you have been very likely doing wrong--What then?

When a man tells me that he does not care what people think of him; that
they cannot shame him: in the first place, I do not quite believe that he
is speaking truth; and in the next place, I hope he is _not_ speaking
truth.  I hope--for his own sake--that he does care what people think of
him: or else I must suspect him of being very dull or very conceited.

And if he tells me that the old prophets, and holy, and just, and heroic
men in all ages, never cared for people's laughing at them and despising
them, provided they were doing right according to their own conscience: I
answer--That he knows nothing about the matter; that he has not honestly
read the writings of these men.  I say that the Psalmist who wrote Ps.
119, was a man, on his own shewing, intensely open to the feeling of
shame, and felt intensely what men said of him; felt intensely slander
and insult.  We talk of independent and true patriots now-a-days.  I will
tell you of four of the noblest patriots the world ever saw, who were men
of that stamp.  I say that Isaiah was such a man; that Jeremiah was such
a man; that Ezekiel was such a man; that their writings shew that they
felt intensely the rebukes and the contempt which they had to endure from
those whom they tried to warn and save.  I say again that St Paul, as may
be seen from his own epistles, was such a man; a man who was intensely
sensitive of what men thought and said of him; yearning after the love
and approbation of his fellow-men, and above all of his
fellow-countrymen, his own flesh and blood; and that that feeling in him,
which may have been hurtful to him before he was converted, was of the
greatest use to him after his conversion; that it enabled him to win all
hearts, because he felt with men and for men; and gained him over the
hearts of men such a power as no mere human being ever had before or
since.

And I say that of all men the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of Man, had that
feeling; that longing for the love and appreciation of men--and above
all, for the love and appreciation of His countrymen according to the
flesh, the Jews, He had--strange as it may seem, yet there it is in the
Gospels, written for ever and undeniable--that capacity of shame which is
the mark of true nobleness of soul.

He endured the cross, despising the shame.  Yes: but there are too many
on earth who endure shame with brazen faces, just because they do not
feel it.  If He had not felt the shame, what merit in despising it?  It
was His glory that He felt the shame; and yet conquered the shame, and
crushed it down by the might of His love for fallen man.

Do you fancy that in His agony in the garden, when His sweat was as great
drops of blood, that it was only bodily fear of pain and death which
crushed Him for the moment?  He felt that, I doubt not; as He had to
taste death for every man, and feel all human weakness, yet without sin.
But it was a deeper, more painful, and yet more noble feeling than mere
fear which then convulsed His sacred heart; even the feeling of shame--the
mockery of the crowd--the--But I dare not enlarge on anything so awful;
at least I will say this--That he had to cry as none ever cried before or
since, "O God, in thee have I trusted, let me never be confounded;" for
he had, it seems, actually, at one supreme moment, to feel confounded;
and to say, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"  That was the
highest and most precious jewel of all his self-sacrifice.  Of it let us
only say--

Our Lord and Saviour stooped to be confounded for a moment, that we might
not be confounded to all eternity.

And therefore our blessed Lord is to us an example.  As he did, so must
we try to do.  He entered into glory, by suffering shame, and yet
despising it.  He submitted to be confounded before men, that He might
not be confounded in the sight of God His Father.  And so must we,
sometimes, at least.  Every man who makes up his mind to do right and to
be good, must expect ridicule now and then.  Rich or poor, boy or man, if
you try to keep your hands clean, and your path straight, the world will
think you a fool, and will be ready enough to tell you so; for it is
cruel and insolent enough.  And the more tender your heart; the more you
wish for the love and approbation of your fellow-men; the more of noble
and modest self-distrust there is in you, the more painful will that be
to you; the more you will be tempted to obey man, and not God, and to
follow after the multitude to do evil, merely to keep the peace, and live
a quiet life, and not be laughed at and tormented.  And thus the fear of
man brings a snare; and naught can deliver you out of that snare, save
the opposite fear--the fear of God, which is the same as trust in God.

Joseph of old feared God when he was tempted; and said, "How can I do
this great wickedness, and sin against God?"  But I doubt not there were
plenty in Egypt who would have called him a fool for his pains.  There
are hundreds of gay youths in any great city--there may be a few in this
Abbey now for aught I know--who would have laughed loudly enough at
Joseph for throwing away the opportunity of what certain foolish French
have learnt to call, as its proper name, a "bonne fortune"--a piece of
good luck.--As if breaking the 7th Commandment could be aught but bad
fortune, and the cause of endless miseries in this life and the life to
come.

And it may be, as Joseph was all but confounded and brought to shame, at
least from man, when he found that all that he gained by fearing God
was--a false accusation, the very shame and contempt from which he most
shrank, danger of death, imprisonment in a dungeon.

But he was true to God, and God was true to him.  He trusted in God; and
therefore he feared God: for he trusted that God's laws were just and
good, and worth obeying; and therefore he was afraid to break them.  He
trusted in God; and therefore he hoped in God; for he trusted that God
