of Christ to be meek and lowly: Your humility will exalt Him, and will
also exalt you at the last: "Be faithful to the death and you shall
receive a crown of life:" Those that have eternal life in their eye, and
depend upon Christ alone for salvation, they have laid a sure
foundation. All other foundations will come to nothing; they are founded
in time, and in time they will come to moulder away: But that city that
God is the builder and maker of, that Abraham had in his eye, will never
decay, nor moulder away: Let us have this always in our eye, that
nothing may intercept our view. "We have here (saith the Apostle) no
continuing city; we seek one that is to come." In this world we are as
sheep among wolves: "Fear not, little flock, (saith our Saviour,) it is
your Father's good pleasure to give you a kingdom." If we be the sheep
of Christ, we shall follow him: "For his sheep follow him, and know his
voice, and a stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him,
for they know not the voice of a stranger." "My sheep (saith Christ)
hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my hands." Here is encouragement for us to labour abundantly in
the work of the Lord; "for our labour shall not be in vain in the Lord."
Let us, with Moses, "choose rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season;" and "esteem
the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; and
have respect to the recompense of reward."

Friends, I beseech you, in the fear of God, "look up unto Jesus, the
GREAT MEDIATOR of the new covenant, the author and finisher of your
faith; that by patient continuance in well doing, you may seek for
glory, honour, immortality, and eternal life:" Which you shall obtain,
if you persevere to the end: "For he that endureth unto the end shall be
saved."

"Be not weary of well doing; for in due time you shall reap if you faint
not." He that hath appeared, as a God of salvation, and a mighty
preserver of his people in all ages of the world, and hath been so both
to the primitive christians, and to all our christian friends, that are
gone before us to an eternal rest, if you faint not, but follow them,
who through faith and patience do inherit the promises, you shall lay
down your heads in peace in him, when you come to die; And when time
shall be no more, you shall be for ever with the Lord.

To God be praise, honour, and glory, who hath stretched forth his mighty
arm to save: Who is the arm of the Lord but Christ Jesus, the redeemer
of souls? When we had undone ourselves, and lost ourselves, in wandering
and departing from the Lord, the true and living God, into darkness and
the shadow of death, He stretched forth his almighty arm, to gather us,
and to bring us into the paradise of God again, when we were driven out
by our own sin, from the face and presence of the Lord. Christ Jesus,
the great and good shepherd of his sheep, came to seek and to save them
that were lost: The lost sheep that have wandered from him, he will take
them on his shoulder, and bring them to his fold: and he will make them
lie down in green pastures, and lead them by the still waters, and
satisfy them with the rivers of pleasure that are at God's right hand
for evermore. He hath promised, "That he will feed his flock like a
shepherd, and gather his lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom:" I hope CHRIST JESUS, the GREAT SHEPHERD, will find some here
this day, that have gone astray, and gather them with his divine arm,
and keep them by his mighty power, through faith unto salvation. To him
be all praise, honour, glory, dominion, and thanksgiving: For He alone
is worthy, who is GOD over all, blessed for ever and ever.--_Amen._


BANCKS AND CO., PRINTERS, MANCHESTER.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Sermon Preached at the Quaker's
Meeting House, in Gracechurch-Street, London, Eighth Month 12th, 1694., by William Penn

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PENN SERMON 1694 ***

***** This file should be named 20534.txt or 20534.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/0/5/3/20534/

Produced by Bryan Ness and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This book was
produced from scanned images of public domain material
from the Google Print project.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

