into four classes.

I. (1). _Zahir_, or obvious, the meaning of which is so clear that he who
hears it at once understands its meaning {50} without seeking for any
explanation. This kind of sentence may be abrogated. Unless abrogated,
action in accordance with it is to be considered as the express command of
God. All penal laws and the rules regulating the substitution of one
religious act for another, _e.g._ almsgiving instead of fasting, must be
based on this, the clearest of the obvious sentences.

(2). _Nass_, a word commonly used for a text of the Quran, but in its
technical meaning here expressing what is meant by a sentence, the meaning
of which is made clear by some word which occurs in it. The following
sentence illustrates both Zahir and Nass: "Take in marriage of such other
women as please you, two, three, four." This sentence is Zahir, because
marriage is here declared lawful; it is Nass, because the words "one, two,
three, four," which occur in the sentence, show the unlawfulness of having
more than four wives.

(3). _Mufassir_, or explained. This is a sentence which needs some word in
it to explain it and make it clear. Thus: "And the angels prostrated
themselves, all of them with one accord, save Iblis (Satan)." Here the
words "save Iblis," show that he did not prostrate himself. This kind of
sentence may be abrogated.

(4). _Mukham_, or perspicuous. This is a sentence as to the meaning of
which there can be no doubt, and which cannot be controverted, thus: "God
knoweth all things." This kind of sentence cannot be abrogated. To act on
such sentences without departing from the literal sense is the highest
degree of obedience to God's command.

The difference between these sentences is seen when there is a real or
apparent contradiction between them. If such should occur, the first must
give place to the second, and so on. Thus Mukham cannot be abrogated or
changed by any of the preceding, or Mufassir by Nass, &c.

The other great division of sentences is that of

II. (1). _Khafi_ or hidden. Such are those sentences in {51} which other
persons or things are hidden beneath the plain meaning of a word or
expression contained therein, as: "as for a thief, whether male or female,
cut ye off their hands in recompense for their doings." (Sura v. 42). The
word for thief is "Sariq," and in this passage it is understood to include
highwaymen, pickpockets, plunderers of the dead, &c. These meanings are
Khafi or hidden under it.

(2). _Muskhil_, or ambiguous, The following is given as an illustration:
"And (their attendants) shall go round about them with vessels of silver
and goblets. The bottles shall be bottles of silver." The difficulty here
is that bottles are not made of silver, but of glass. The commentators say,
however, that glass is dull in colour, though it has some lustre, whilst
silver is white, and not so bright as glass. Now it may be, that the
bottles of Paradise will be like glass bottles as regards their lustre, and
like silver as regards their colour. But anyhow, it is very difficult to
ascertain the meaning.

(3.) _Mujmal._ These are, first, sentences which may have a variety of
interpretations, owing to the words in them being capable of several
meanings; in that case the meaning which is given to the sentence in the
Traditions relating to it should be acted on and accepted. Secondly, the
sentence may contain some very rare word, and thus its meaning may be
doubtful, as: "Man truly is by creation hasty." (Sura lxx. 19.) In this
verse the word "halu'"--hasty--occurs. It is very rarely used, and had it
not been for the following words, "when evil toucheth him, he is full of
complaint; but when good befalleth him, he becometh niggardly," its meaning
would not have been at all easy to understand.

The following is an illustration of the first kind of _Mujmal_ sentences:
"Stand for prayer (salat) and give alms," (zakat.) Both salat and zakat are
'Mushtarik' words. The people, therefore, did not understand this verse, so
they applied to Muhammad for an explanation. He explained to them that
"salat" might mean the ritual of public prayer, {52} standing to say the
words "God is great," or standing to repeat a few verses of the Quran; or
it might mean private prayer. The primitive meaning of "zakat" is growing.
The Prophet, however, fixed the meaning here to that of "almsgiving," and
said, "Give of your substance one-fortieth part."

(4.) _Mutashabih._ These are sentences so difficult that men cannot
understand them, a fact referred to in Sura iii. 3. (Ante. p. 49), nor will
they do so until the day of resurrection. The Prophet, however, knew their
meaning. Such portions are the letters A, L, M; A, L, R; Y, A at the
commencement of some of the Suras.[53] Such expressions also as "God's
hand," "The face of God," "God sitteth," &c., come under this category.

The next point to be considered is the _use_ of words in the Quran, and
here again the same symmetrical division into four classes is found,
_viz_:--

(1.) _Haqiqat_, that is, words which are used in their literal meaning, as
"ruku'," a prostration, and "salat" in the sense of prayer.

(2.) _Majaz_, or words which are used in a figurative sense, as "salat" in
the sense of "namaz" a liturgical service.

(3.) _Sarih_, or words the meaning of which is quite evident, as, "Thou art
_divorced_," "Thou art _free_."

(4.) _Kinayah_, or words which, being used in a metaphorical sense, require
the aid of the context to make their meaning clear, as: "Thou art
separated," which may, as it {53} stands alone, mean "Thou art divorced."
This class also includes all pronouns the meaning of which is only to be
known from the context, _e.g._ one day the Prophet not knowing who knocked
at his door said, "Who art thou?" The man replied, "It is I." Muhammad
answered, "Why dost thou say I, I? Say thy name that I may know who thou
art." The pronoun "I" is here 'kinayah.'

The most important and most difficult branch of exegesis is "istidlal," or
the science of deducing arguments from the Quran. This too is divided into
four sections, as follows:--

(1.) _Ibarat_, or the plain sentence. "Mothers, after they are divorced,
shall give suck unto their children two full years, and the father shall be
obliged to maintain them and clothe them according to that which is
reasonable." (Sura ii. 233.) From this verse two deductions are made.
First, from the fact that the word "them" is in the feminine plural, it
must refer to the mothers and not to the children; secondly, as the duty of
supporting the mother is incumbent on the father, it shows that the
relationship of the child is closer with the father than with the mother.
Penal laws may be based on a deduction of this kind.

(2.) _Isharat_, that is, a sign or hint which may be given from the order
in which the words are placed.

(3.) _Dalalat_, or the argument which may be deduced from the use of some
special word in the verse, as: "say not to your parents, "Fie" (Arabic
"uff") (Sura xvii. 23). From the use of the word "uff," it is argued that
children may not beat or abuse their parents. Penal laws may be based on
"dalalat," thus: "Their aim will be to abet disorder on the earth; but God
loveth not the abettors of disorder." (Sura v. 69.) The word translated
"aim" is in Arabic literally yasa'una, "they run." From this the argument
is deduced that as highwaymen wander about, they are included amongst those
whom "God loveth not," and that, therefore, the severest punishment may be
given to {54} them, for any deduction that comes under the head of
"dalalat" is a sufficient basis for the formation of the severest penal
laws.

(4.) _Iqtiza._ This is a deduction which demands certain conditions:
"whosoever killeth a believer by mischance, shall be bound to free a
believer from slavery." (Sura iv. 94). As a man has no authority to free
his neighbour's slave, the condition here required, though not expressed,
is that the slave should be his own property.

The Quran is divided into:--

(1). _Harf_ (plural _Huruf_), letters. The numbers given by different
authorities vary. In one standard book it is said that there are 338,606
letters.

(2). _Kalima_ (plural _Kalimat_), words, stated by some to amount to
79,087; by others to 77,934.

(3). _Ayat_ (plural _Ayat_), verses. Ayat really means a sign, and was the
name given by Muhammad to short sections or verses of the Quran. The end of
a verse is determined by the position of a small circle (.). The early
Quran Readers did not agree as to the position of these circles, and so
five different ways of arranging them have arisen. This accounts for a
variation in the number of verses in various editions. The varieties are:--

(1). _Kufa_ verses. The Readers in the city of Kufa say that they followed
the custom of 'Ali. Their way of reckoning is generally adopted in India.
They reckon 6,239 verses.

(2). _Basra_ verses. The Readers of Basra follow 'Asim bin Hajjaj, a
Companion. They reckon 6,204.

(3). _Shami_ verses. The Readers in Syria (Sham) followed Abd-ullah bin
'Umr, a Companion. They reckon 6,225 verses.

(4). _Mecca_ verses. According to this arrangement there are 6,219 verses.

(5). _Madina_ verses. This way of reading contains 6,211 verses.

{55}

In each of the above varieties the verse "Bismillah" (in the name of God)
is not reckoned. It occurs 113 times in the Quran.

This diversity of punctuation does not generally affect the meaning of any
important passage. The third verse of the third Sura is an important
exception. The position of the circle (.), the symbol denoting a full stop,
in that verse is of the highest importance in connection with the rise of
scholasticism ('Ilm-i-kalam) in Islam.

Most of the cases, however, are like the following:--

In Sura xxvii. an account is given of the Queen of Sheba's receiving a
letter from King Solomon. Addressing her nobles she said: "Verily, Kings,
when they enter a city (by force) waste the same, and abase the most
powerful of the inhabitants hereof: and so will (these) do (with us)." Many
Readers put the full stop after the word "hereof," and say that God is the
speaker of the words "and so will they do."

(4). _Sura_, or chapter. The word Sura means a row or series, such as a
line of bricks arranged in a wall, but it is now exclusively used for
chapters in the Quran. These are one hundred and fourteen in number. The
Suras are not numbered in the original Arabic, but each one has some
approximate name, (as Baqr--the cow, Nisa--women, &c.,) generally taken
from some expression which occurs in it. They are not arranged in
chronological order, but according to their length. As a general rule, the
shorter Suras which contain the theology of Islam, belong to the Meccan
period of the Prophet's career,[54] and the longer ones relating chiefly to
social duties and relationships, to the organisation of Islam as a civil
polity, to the time when he was consolidating his power at Madina. The best
way, therefore, to {56} read the Quran, is to begin at the end. The attempt
to arrange the Suras in due order, is a very difficult one, and, after all,
can only be approximately correct.[55] Carlyle referring to the confused
mass of "endless iterations, long windedness, entanglement, most crude,
incondite" says: "nothing but a sense of duty could carry any European
through the Quran." When re-arranged the book becomes more intelligible.
The chief tests for such re-arrangement are the style and the matter. There
is a very distinct difference in both of these respects between the earlier
and later Suras. The references to historical events sometimes give a clue.
Individual Suras are often very composite in their character, but, such as
they are, they have been from the beginning. The recension made by Zeid, in
the reign of the Khalif Osman, has been handed down unaltered in its form.
The only variations (qira'at) now to be found in the text have been already
noticed. They in no way affect the arrangements of the Suras.

5. _Sipara_ a thirtieth portion. This is a Persian word derived from _si_,
thirty, and _para_, a portion. The Arabs call each of these divisions a
_Juz_. Owing to this division, a pious man can recite the whole Quran in a
month, taking one Sipara each day. Musalmans never quote the Quran as we do
by Sura and Ayat, but by the Sipara and Ruku', a term I now proceed to
explain.

6. _Ruku'_ (plural _Rukuat_). This word literally means a prostration made
by a worshipper in the act of saying the prayers. The collection of verses
recited from the Quran, ascriptions of praise offered to God, and various
ritual acts connected with these, constitute one act of worship called a
"rak'at." After reciting some verses in this form of prayer, the worshipper
makes a _Ruku'_, or prostration, the {57} portion then recited takes the
name of _Ruku'_. Tradition states that the Khalif Osman, when reciting the
Quran during the month of Ramazan, used to make twenty rak'ats each
evening. In each rak'at he introduced different verses of the Quran,
beginning with the first chapter and going steadily on. In this way he
recited about two hundred verses each evening; that is, about ten verses in
each rak'at. Since then, it has been the custom to recite the Quran in this
way in Ramazan, and also to quote it by the ruku', _e.g._, "such a passage
is in such a Sipara and in such a ruku'."

The following account of a rak'at will make the matter plain. When the
Faithful are assembled in the mosque, the Imam, or leader, being in front
facing the Qibla, the service commences thus:--Each worshipper stands and
says the Niyyat (literally "intention"), a form of words declaring his
intention to say his prayers. He then says: "God is great." After this,
looking downwards, he says: "Holiness to Thee, O God! and praise be to
Thee, Great is Thy name, Great is Thy greatness, there is no deity but
Thee." Then follows: "I seek from God refuge from cursed Satan." Then the
Tasmiyah is repeated: "In the name of God, the Compassionate and Merciful."
Then follows the Fatiha, that is, the short chapter at the commencement of
the Quran. After this has been recited, the Imam proceeds, on the first
night of the month Ramazan, with the first verse of the second chapter.[56]
After saying a few verses, he makes a ruku'; that is, he bends his head and
body down, and places his hands on his knees. In this position he says:
"God is great." Then he repeats three times the words: "I extol the
holiness of my Lord, the Great." He then stands up and says: "God hears him
who praises Him." To this the people respond: "O Lord, thou art praised."
Again, falling on his knees, the worshipper says: "God is great." Then he
puts first his nose, and then his forehead on the {58} ground and says
three times: "I extol the holiness of my Lord, the Most High." Then sitting
on his heels, he says: "God is great;" and again repeats as before: "I
extol, etc." He then rises and says: "God is great." This is one rak'at. On
each night in the month of Ramazan this is gone through twenty times, the
only variation being that after the Fatiha and before the first
prostration, fresh verses of the Quran are introduced. The whole is, of
course, done in Arabic, in whatever country the worshippers may be. The
name of the prostration (ruku') has been transferred to the portion of the
Quran recited just before it is made. There are altogether 557 Rukuat.

(7). The other divisions are not important. They are, a _Sumn_, _Ruba'_,
_Nisf_, _Suls_, that is one-eighth, one-fourth, one-half, one-third of a
Sipara respectively.

In reciting the Quran the worshipper must be careful to say the "Takbir,"
_i.e._ "God is great," after the several appointed places. Such a place is
after the recital of the 93rd Sura. The custom arose in this way. The
hypocrites came to the Prophet and asked him to relate the story of the
"Seven Sleepers." He said: "I will tell you to-morrow;" but he forgot to
add the words "if God will." By way of warning, God allowed no inspiration
to descend upon him for some days. Then the hypocrites began to laugh and
say: "God has left him." As it was not God's purpose to put his messenger
to ridicule, the Sura entitled "The brightness" (xciii) was immediately
brought by the ever-ready Gabriel. It begins: "By the brightness of the
morning, and by the night when it groweth dark, _thy Lord hath not forsaken
thee_, neither doth He hate thee." In remembrance of this signal
interposition of Providence on his behalf, the Prophet always concluded the
recital of this Sura with the words: "God is great." The practice thus
became a "Sunnat" obligation; that is, it should be done because the
Prophet did it.

The doctrine of abrogation is a very important one in {59} connection with
the study of the Quran. It is referred to in the verses: "Whatever verses
we cancel or cause thee to forget, we give thee better in their stead, or
the like thereof." (Sura ii. 100). This is a Madina Sura. "What He pleaseth
will God abrogate or confirm; for with Him is the source of revelation."
(Sura xiii. 39). Some verses which were cancelled in the Prophet's
life-time are not now extant. Abdullah Ibn Masud states that the Prophet
one day recited a verse, which he immediately wrote down. The next morning
he found it had vanished from the material on which it had been written.
Astonished at this, he acquainted Muhammad with the fact, and was informed
that the verse in question had been revoked. There are, however, many
verses still in the Quran, which have been abrogated. It was an exceedingly
convenient doctrine, and one needed to explain the change of front which
Muhammad made at different periods of his career. Certain rules have been
laid down to regulate the practice. The verse which abrogates is called
_Nusikh_, and the abrogated verse _Mansukh_. _Mansukh_ verses are of three
kinds:--first, where the words and the sense have both been abrogated;
secondly, where the letter only is abrogated and the sense remains;
thirdly, where the sense is abrogated though the letter remains. Imam Malik
gives as an instance of the first kind the verse: "If a son of Adam had two
rivers of gold, he would covet yet a third; and if he had three he would
covet yet a fourth. Neither shall the belly of a son of Adam be filled, but
with dust. God will turn unto him who shall repent." The Imam states that
originally this verse was in the Sura (ix.) called Repentance. The verse,
called the "verse of stoning" is an illustration of the second kind. It
reads: "Abhor not your parents for this would be ingratitude in you. If a
man and woman of reputation commit adultery, ye shall stone them both; it
is a punishment ordained by God; for God is mighty and wise." The Khalif
Omar says this verse was extant in Muhammad's life-time but that it {60} is
now lost. But it is the third class which practically comes into
'Ilm-i-usul. Authorities differ as to the number of verses abrogated. Sale
states that they have been estimated at two hundred and twenty-five. The
principal ones are not many in number, and are very generally agreed upon.
I give a few examples. It is a fact worthy of notice that they occur
chiefly, if not almost entirely, in Suras delivered at Madina. There, where
Muhammad had to confront Jews and Christians, he was at first politic in
his aim to win them over to his side, and then, when he found them
obstinate, the doctrine of abrogation came in conveniently. This is seen
plainly in the following case. At Mecca Muhammad and his followers did not
stand facing any particular direction when at prayer, a fact to which the
following passage refers:--"To God belongeth the east and west; therefore,
whithersoever ye turn yourselves to pray there is the face of God." (Sura
ii. 109). When Muhammad arrived at Madina, he entered into friendship with
the Jews and tried to win them to his side. The Qibla (sanctuary) towards
which the worshippers now invariably turned at prayer was Jerusalem. This
went on for a while, but when Muhammad claimed to be not merely a Prophet
for the Arabs, but the last and the greatest of all the Prophets, when he
asserted that Moses had foretold his advent, and that his revelations were
the same as those contained in their own Scriptures, they utterly refused
allegiance to him. In the first half of the second year of the Hijra the
