     8. Juzam.[56]
     9. Salaba.[57]
     10. Abdul Kays.[58]
     11. Bani Tamim.[59]
     12. Bani Asad.[60]

[Footnote 51: The Bani Ash-ar inhabited Jedda. They were of the
Kahlanite stock, the descendants of Al-Azd.]

[Footnote 52: The Bani Khushain were a clan of Kozaa, of Himiarite
stock.]

[Footnote 53: The Bani Dous belong to the Azdite tribe of the stock of
Kahtan. They lived at some distance south of Mecca. They had joined
Mohammad at Khyber.]

[Footnote 54: These were the sub-tribes of Ghatafan of the Meccan stock.
The chief families of Ghatafan were the Bani Ashja, Zobian, and the Bani
Abs. Murra and Fezara were the branches of Zobian. They all inhabited
Najd. Uyenia, the chief of the Bani Fezara, had committed an inroad upon
Medina in A.H. 6. In the same year the Bani Fezara had waylaid a Medina
caravan and plundered it.]

[Footnote 55: The Bani Suleim, a branch of the Bani Khasafa and a sister
tribe to Hawazin, who lived near Mecca, and in whose charge, Mohammad,
when but an infant, was placed, were also a tribe of the Meccan stock
descended through Khasafa from Mozar and Moadd. Bani Suleim, like Bani
Murra and Fezara, branches of Ghatafan, had long continued to threaten
Mohammad with attacks. The Bani Suleim having joined Aamir bin Tofeil,
chief of Bani Aamir, a branch of the tribe of Hawazin with their clans
Usseya, Ril, and Zakawan, had cut to pieces a party of Moslem
missionaries at Bir Mauna, invited by Abu Bera Amr ibn Malik, a chief of
the Bani Aamir, who had pledged for their security. The Bani Suleim had
joined also the Koreish army at the siege of Medina. In the seventh
year, they had slain another body of Moslem missionaries sent to them.]

[Footnote 56: The Bani Ozra were a tribe of Kozaa, like Joheina. They,
together with the Bani Bali and Juzam, inhabited the north of Arabia in
the part of the territory belonging to Ghassan. The family of Himyar,
descendants from Kahtan in Yemen, had flourished through the line of
Kozaa, the Bani Ozza, Joheina and other important tribes to the north of
the Peninsula on the border of Syria. It has been quoted by Sir W. Muir
from Katib Wakidi that the chief of the Bani Juzam carried back to them
a letter from Mohammad to this tenor: "Whoever accepteth the call of
Islam, he is among the confederates of the Lord; whoever refuseth the
same, a truce of two months is allowed for him for consideration."
(Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 107, _foot-note_). The words "for
consideration" are not in the original Arabic.--_Vide_ Ibn Hisham, p.
963. It is not clear what was meant by the two months' truce he was
advised to give them, to make terms before he could commence
hostilities, if the tradition for which there is no authority be true.
This has nothing to do with their compulsory conversions.]

[Footnote 57: Salaba was a branch of the Zobian.]

[Footnote 58: The Bani Abd-ul-Kays are a Moaddite tribe, the descendants
of Rabia. They inhabited Bahrein on the Persian Gulf.]

[Footnote 59: The Bani Tamim were branch of Tabikha, a tribe of the
Moaddite stock of Mecca and a sister tribe of Mozeina. They are famous
in the history of Najd, a province north-east of Medina, from the
confines of Syria to Yemen. Some of these branches were with Mohammad at
the expeditions to Mecca and Honain. All the branches of the tribes that
had not yet embraced Islam were now converted.]

[Footnote 60: The Bani Asad ibn Khozeima were a powerful tribe residing
near the hill of Katan in Najd. They were of the Moaddite tribe of the
Meccan stock. Tuleiba, their chief, had assembled a force of cavalry and
rapid camel-drivers to make a raid upon Medina in A.H. 4. They were
dispersed by the Moslems. In the next year they joined the Koreish in
the siege of Medina.]


[Sidenote: Surrender of Mecca. A.H., 8.]

27. The position of Islam at Mecca was greatly strengthened since the
truce in A.H. 6, by increase in the number of Moslems, influential and
leading, as well as of persons of minor note and importance there,
consequently the advocates of Islam, peace and compromise were growing
in number and confidence. Among the idolatrous Koreish there were no
chiefs of marked ability or commanding influence left at Mecca; almost
all of them had gone over to the cause of Islam. In the meantime the
infraction of the terms of the truce by the Bani Bakr and Koreish caused
the surrender of Mecca without bloodshed.


[Sidenote: The Meccans not compelled to believe.]

28. Though Mecca had surrendered, all its inhabitants had not already
become converts to Islam. Mohammad did not take any compulsory means to
convert the people: "Although the city had cheerfully accepted his
supremacy," writes Sir W. Muir, "all its inhabitants had not yet
embraced the new religion, or formally acknowledged his prophetical
claim. Perhaps he intended to follow the course he had pursued at Medina
and leave the conversion of the people to be gradually accomplished
without compulsion."[61]

[Footnote 61: The Life of Mahomet, by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, page 136.
Those who had newly joined the Moslem Camp at Mecca to repel the
threatening gathering of Hawazin, and those of them who preferred
submission to the authority of Mohammad, are called by Sir W. Muir "his
new converts." (IV., 149). But in fact they were not called believers.
They are called simply _Muallafa Qolubohum_ in the Koran (IX., 60) which
means whose hearts are to be won over.]


[Sidenote: The wholesale conversion of the remaining tribes in A.H., 9
& 10.]

29. Now it was more than twenty years that the Koran had been constantly
preached to the surrounding tribes of Arabs at Mecca at the time of
fairs[62] and at the annual pilgrimage gatherings,[63] by Mohammad, and
by special missionaries of Islam from Medina, and through the reports of
the travellers and merchants coming and going from Mecca and Medina to
all parts of Arabia. The numbers of different distant tribes, clans and
branches had spread the tidings of Islam. There were individual converts
in most of the tribes. Those tribes already not brought over to Islam
were ready to embrace it under the foregoing circumstances. Idolatry,
simple and loathsome, had no power against the attacks of reason
displayed in the doctrines of the Koran. But the idolatrous Koreish
opposed and attacked Islam with persecution and the sword, and
strengthened idolatry with earthly weapons. The distant pagan tribes on
the side of the Koreish, geographically or genealogically, were
prevented by them from embracing the new faith. As soon as the
hostilities of the Koreish were suspended at the truce of Hodeibia, the
Arabs commenced to embrace Islam as already described, and no sooner
they surrendered and Kaaba[64] stripped of its idols--and the struggle
of spiritual supremacy between idolatry and Islam was practically
decided--all the remaining tribes on the south and east who had not
hitherto adhered to Islam hastened to embrace it hosts after hosts
during the 9th and 10th year of the Hegira.

[Footnote 62: Okaz between Tayif and Nakhla. Mujanna in the vicinity of
Marr-al Zahran, and Zul-Majaz behind Arafat, both near Mecca.]

[Footnote 63: "From time immemorial, tradition represents Mecca as the
scene of a yearly pilgrimage from _all_ quarters of Arabia:--from Yemen,
Hadhramaut and the shores of the Persian Gulph, from the deserts of
Syria, and from the distant environs of Hira and Mesopotamia."--Muir, I,
ccxi.]

[Footnote 64: Sir W. Muir thinks: "The possession of Mecca now imparted
a colour of right to his pretensions; for Mecca was the spiritual centre
of the country, to which the tribes from every quarter yielded a
reverential homage. The conduct of the annual pilgrimage, the custody of
the holy house, the intercalation of the year, the commutation at will
of the sacred months,--institutions which affected all Arabia,--belonged
by ancient privilege to the Coreish and were now in the hands of
Mahomet.... Moreover, it had been the special care of Mahomet artfully
to interweave with the reformed faith all essential parts of the ancient
ceremonial. The one was made an inseparable portion of the other."--The
Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 169. But the remaining tribes who had not
hitherto embraced Islam, and the chiefs of the Southern and Eastern
Arabia, did not adopt Islam, because Mohammad possessed Mecca, a
position of no political supremacy. No paramount authority throughout
the Peninsula had ever been vested in the chief who possessed Mecca.
Mohammad on the surrender of Mecca had abolished all the idolatrous
institutions which might have served as political or social inducements
to the Pagan Arabs to embrace Islam. The intercalation of the year and
commutation of the sacred months were cancelled for ever in the plain
words of the Koran: "Verily, twelve months is the number of months with
God, according to God's book, _since_ the day when He created the
Heavens and the earth, of these, four are sacred; this is the right
usage." ... "To carry over _a sacred month to another_ is an increase of
unbelief only. They who do not believe are led into error by it. They
allow it one year and forbid it another, that they may make good the
number of _months_ which God hath hallowed, and they allow that which
God hath prohibited. The evil of their deeds hath been prepared for them
_by Satan_; for God guideth not the people who do not believe."--Sura
IX, verses 36, 37. The custody of the house was no more an office of
honour or privilege. The ancient ceremonial of pilgrimage was not
interwoven with the reformed faith. The rites of Kaaba were stripped of
every idolatrous tendency. And the remaining and essential part of the
pilgrimage was depreciated. "By no means can their flesh reach unto God,
neither their blood; but piety on your part reacheth Him."--Sura XXII,
verse 38. And after all the idolaters were not allowed to enter it. "It
is not for the votaries of other gods with God, witnesses against
themselves of infidelity, to visit the temples of God."--Sura IX, verse
28. Sir W. Muir himself says regarding Mohammad: "The rites of Kaaba
were retained, but stripped by him of every idolatrous tendency; and
they still hang, a strange unmeaning shroud, around the living theism of
Islam."--Vol. I, Intro., p. ccxviii.]


[Sidenote: The various deputations and embassies in the 9th and 10th
year of the Hegira.]

30. During these two years deputations of conversion to Islam were
received by Mohammad at Medina from the most distant parts of the
Peninsula, from Yemen and Hazaramaut from Mahra Oman and Bahrein in the
south, and from the borders of Syria and the outskirts of Persia. Many
of the chiefs and princes of Yemen and Mahra, of Oman, Bahrein and
Yemama--christians and pagans--intimated by letter or by embassy their
conversion to Islam. The Prophet used to send teachers with deputations
and embassies, where they were not already sent, to instruct the newly
converted people the duties of Islam and to see that every remnant of
idolatry was obliterated.


[Sidenote: List of the deputations of conversion received by Mohammad at
Medina during A.H. 9 and 10.]

31. Here is a list of the important deputations and embassies as well as
the conversion of notable personages during these two years arranged in
alphabetical order with geographical and genealogical notes.[65] Sir W.
Muir thinks it "tedious and unprofitable" to enumerate them all,[66]
while he takes notice of every apocryphal tradition and devours with
eagerness all fictions unfavourable to the cause of Islam.

     Bani Aamir.[67]
     Bani Abd-ul-Kays.[68]
     Bani Ahmas.[69]
     Bani Anaza.[70]
     Bani Asad.[71]
     Bani Azd (Shanovah).[72]
     Bani Azd (Oman).[73]
     Bani Bahila.[74]
     Bani Bahra.[75]
     Bani Bajila.[76]
     Bani Baka.[77]
     Bani Bakr bin Wail.[78]
     Bani Bali.[79]
     Bani Bariq.[80]
     Bani Daree.[81]
     Farwa.[82]
     Bani Fezara.[83]
     Bani Ghafiq.[84]
     Bani Ghanim.[85]
     Bani Ghassan.[86]
     Bani Hamadan.[87]
     Bani Hanifa.[88]
     Bani Haris of Najran.[89]
     Bani Hilal bin Aamir bin Saasaa.[90]
     Bani Himyar.[91]
     Bani Jaad.[92]
     Bani Jaafir bin Kelab bin Rabia.[93]
     Jeifer bin al Jalandi.[94]
     Bani Joheina.[95]
     Bani Jufi.[96]
     Bani Kalb.[97]
     Bani Khas-am bin Anmar.[98]
     Bani Khaulan.[99]
     Bani Kilab.[100]
     Bani Kinana.[101]
     Bani Kinda.[102]
     Bani Mahrah.[103]
     Bani Moharib.[104]
     Bani Morad.[105]
     Bani Muntafiq.[106]
     Bani Murrah.[107]
     Bani Nakha.[108]
     Bani Nohd.[109]
     Bani Ozra.[110]
     Bani Raha.[111]
     Bani Rawasa.[112]
     Bani Saad Hozeim.[113]
     Bani Sadif.[114]
     Bani Sadoos.[115]
     Bani Sahim.[116]
     Bani Sakeef.[117]
     Bani Salamani.[118]
     Bani Shaiban.[119]
     Bani Sodaa.[120]
     Bani Taghlib.[121]
     Bani Tajeeb.[122]
     Bani Tamim.[123]
     Bath Tay.[124]
     Bani Zobeid.[125]

[Footnote 65: For these deputations see Ibn Is-hak (died 151), Hishamee
(died 213), Ibn Sad (died 213), Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, Chap.
30th, Seerat Shami (died 942), and Halabi (died 1044). For the
genealogies of these tribes consult Qalqashandi's Dictionary of Tribes,
and Ibn Khaldun's History. Regarding the geographical positions of these
tribes the reader is referred to the most valuable map of Arabia in Sir
W. Muir's Annals of Early Caliphate, London 1882.]

[Footnote 66: The Life of Mahomet by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, pp. 181 and
226.]

[Footnote 67: A branch of Hawazin and sister tribe of the Sakeef
inhabited the province of Najd and were of the Moaddite stock. The tribe
had taken little share with the rest of the Bani Hawazin at the battle
of Honain against the Moslems A.H. 8. The famous poet Lebid, author of
one of the Moallakas, belonged to that tribe. [See the Life of Lebid
from Ketab-ul-Aghani, in an article on the Moallaqah by Lebid, by C.J.
Lyall, C.S., in the Journals of the Asiatic Society, Bengal, No. 1,
1877, pp. 62-76: Calcutta.]]

[Footnote 68: Bani Abd-ul-Kays from Bahrein. The tribe has been
described at page 47. There were many persons in the embassy. They were
Christians before they embraced Islam.]

[Footnote 69: Descended from Anmar of the Kahtanite stock of Yemen.]

[Footnote 70: A sub-tribe of Asad, descendants of Rabia of the Moaddite
stock. These are the Aneze of Burkhardt.]

[Footnote 71: Already described at p. 47. The rest of them now embraced
Islam. It is said that Sura xlix, 17, refers to them.]

[Footnote 72: Bani Azd (Shanovah) from Yemen. This tribe was a portion
of the Azdite tribe left at Yemen at the time of the northern emigration
of Azd. They were a branch of Kahtan of the Kahtanite stock. In their
emigration northward from Yemen they resided a long time in Hijaz at
Batn Murr near Mecca. In their journey further on to the north of Syria,
leaving Kozaa, they changed their name to Ghassan from their long
residence, by the way, near a fountain of that name. The tribes Aus and
Khazraj had separated afterwards from these Ghassanides, and settled at
Yathrib, afterwards known as Medina. One Surad was the chief of the
embassy of Azd from Yemen to Mohammad at Medina. Sir W. Muir says: "This
person was recognized by Mahomet as the ruler of his clan, and
commission was given to him to war against the heathen tribes in his
neighbourhood." (The Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, page 219.) The Arabic
word "_yojahid_," in the original biographies, only means "to strive,"
and does not mean "to make war," as understood by Sir W. Muir. He has
himself translated the same word as "striving" in Vol. III, page 32. At
page 265 of the same volume he translates it by "to do utmost." I have
discussed the subject in full in Appendix A. of this work.]

[Footnote 73: Another branch of the Azd described above.]

[Footnote 74: Bani Bahila, otherwise called Saad Manat, descendants of
Ghatafan of the Moaddite stock.]

[Footnote 75: Bani Bahra (bin Amr bin Al-Haf bin Kozaa), who were a
branch of the Kozaa of the Himyarite stock, had emigrated to the north,
and settled in the Ghassanide territory.]

[Footnote 76: Bani Bajila, a sister of Khas-am and descendants of Anmar
bin Nizar of the Kahtanite stock. They inhabited Yemen. The Bajila after
professing Islam had destroyed the famous image of Kholasa.]

[Footnote 77: A branch of Bani Aamir bin Saasaa in the centre of
Arabia.]

[Footnote 78: They lived about Yemama and the shores of the Persian
Gulf. They were one of the Moaddite tribes. The war of Basus between
Bani Bakr and their sister tribe Bani Taghlib had lasted for forty
years. There have been famous poets in the Bani Bakr tribe, among whom
are Tarafa, Haris bin Hiliza, and Maimun Al-Asha. The Bani Bakr and Bani
Tamim were constantly at war, which was abandoned under the influence of
Islam, when both the parties were converted to it during the lifetime of
Mohammad.]

[Footnote 79: They were a branch of the Kozaa from the Himyarite stock,
the descendants of Kahtan, and had settled in the north of Arabia in the
Ghassanide territory on the borders of Syria.]

[Footnote 80: A sub-tribe of Kozaa.]

[Footnote 81: A clan of the tribe of Lakhm.]

[Footnote 82: An Arab of the Bani Juzam in the north of Arabia and
Governor of Amman in the Ghassanide territory announced his conversion
to Mohammad by a despatch in A.H. 8.]

[Footnote 83: They have already been described at page 46. Their
deputation waited upon Mohammad on his return from Tabuk.]

[Footnote 84: Descendants of Anmar of the Kahtanite stock.]

[Footnote 85: A sub-tribe of Azd at Yemen.]

[Footnote 86: Already described under Bani Azd.]

[Footnote 87: Bani Hamadan of the Kahtanite descent. An important tribe
in the east of Yemen.]

[Footnote 88: A Christian branch of the Bani Bakr who inhabited Yemama.

"The account of the embassy of the Bani Hanifa is more decidedly
unfavourable to Christianity, but its details appear of doubtful
authority. Moseilama, the false Prophet, was among the number, and there
are some unlikely anticipations of his sacrilegious claims.

"As the embassy were departing, Mahomet gave them a vessel in which were
the leavings of the water with which he had performed his lustration;
and he said,--'_When you reach your country, break down your church, and
sprinkle its sight with this water, and make in its place a mosque_'....

"The story appears to me improbable, because nowhere else is Mahomet
represented as exhibiting such antagonism to Christians and their
churches when they submitted themselves to him."--Muir's Life of
Mahomet, Vol. II, pp. 303-4, _footnote_. The author changes his opinion
in the fourth volume of his work and says: "I have there stated (in Vol.
II) the story to be improbable. But I am now inclined to think that
during the last year or two of Mahomet's life, there was quite enough of
antagonistic feeling against Christianity as it presented itself in the
profession of the Arab and Syrian tribes to support the
narrative."--Life of Mahomet by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, page 218,
_footnote_.

This is a mere presumption on the part of the writer, and there is no
proof of Mohammad's antagonism towards Christianity at any period of his
life except against those who waged war with him. The following verse of
the Koran will show how far I am true:--

"Verily they who believe (Moslems), and they who follow the Jewish
religion, and the Christians and Sabeites, whoever of those believeth in
God and the Last Day, and doth that which is right shall have their
reward with their Lord: Fear shall not come upon them, neither shall
they be grieved."]

[Footnote 89: Also a Christian tribe in Yemen descended from the
Kahtanite stock of the Bani Madhij, and collateral therefore with Bani
Kinda. Two of the embassy, one of them being Akil or Abd-ul-Masih, the
chief of the deputation, adopted Islam. The rest returned with a full
guarantee from Mohammad for the preservation of their social and
religious liberty. Further information regarding the Bani Haris of
Najran will be found at pp. 48 and 106 of this book.

"_Katib al Wackidi_, p. 69. The subsequent history of the Najran
Christians is there traced. They continued in possession of their lands
and rights under the treaty during the rest of Mohammad's life and the
whole of Abu Bakr's Caliphate. Then they were accused of taking usury,
and Omar expelled them from the land, and wrote as follows:--

"The despatch of Omar, the Commander of the Faithful, to the people of
Najran. Whoever of them emigrates is under the guarantee of God. No
Moslem shall injure them;--to fulfil that which Mahomet and Abu Bakr
wrote unto them.

"Now to whomsoever of the chiefs of Syria and Irac they may repair, let
such chiefs allot them lands, and whatever they cultivate therefrom
shall be theirs; it is an exchange for their own lands. None shall
injure or maltreat them; Moslems shall assist them against oppressors.
Their tribute is remitted for two years. They will not be troubled
except for evil deeds.

"Some of them alighted in Irac, and settled in Najrania near to Cufa.

"That the offence of usury is alleged in justification of this measure
appears to me to disprove the common tradition that a command was said
to have been given by Mahomet on his deathbed for the Peninsula to be
swept clear of all other religions but Islam."--Muir's Life of Mahomet,
Vol. II, pp. 301-2.]

[Footnote 90: Descendants of the great Ghatafan tribe already
described.]

[Footnote 91: Bani Himyar from Yemen. The Himyarites are too well-known
to be described. The Himyarite princes of Ro-en, Mu-afir, Hamadan and
Bazan, all of the Christian faith in Yemen, embraced Islam and announced
their conversion by letter sent to Mohammad through their emissaries
which reached him after his return from Tabuk.]

[Footnote 92: Either a clan of Lakhm, or a branch of Bani Aamir.]

[Footnote 93: A sub-tribe of the Bani Aamir bin Saasaa already
described.]

