

CHAPTER III

THE EPICS, AND LATER

I. VISHNU-KRISHNA


We now enter upon an age in which the old gods, Indra and Brahma,
retire to the background, while Vishnu and Siva stand in the forefront
of the stage.

The Hindus are of the same opinion as the Latin poet: _ferrea nunc
aetas agitur_. We are now living in an Iron Age, according to them;
and it began in the year 3102 B.C., shortly after the great war
described in the Mahabharata. The date 3102, I need hardly remark, is
of no historical value, being based merely upon the theories of
comparatively late astronomers; but the statement as a whole is
important. The Great War marks an epoch. It came at the end of what
may be called the pre-historic period, and was followed by a new age.
To be strictly correct, we must say that the age which followed the
Great War was not new in the sense that it introduced any startling
novelties that had been unknown previously; but it was new in the
sense that after the Great War India speedily became the India that we
know from historical records. A certain fusion of different races,
cultures, and ideals had to take place in order that the peculiar
civilisation of India might unfold itself; and this fusion was
accomplished about the time of the Great War, and partly no doubt by
means of the Great War, some ten centuries before the Christian era.

The story of the Great War is told with a wild profusion of mythical
and legendary colouring in the Mahabharata, an epic the name of which
means literally "The Great Tale of the Bharata Clan." It relates how
the blind old King Dhritarashtra of Hastinapura had a hundred sons,
known as the Kuru or Kaurava princes, the eldest of whom was
Duryodhana, and Dhritarashtra's brother Pandu had five sons, the
Pandava brethren; how the Pandavas were ousted by the Kauravas from
the kingdom, the eldest Pandava prince Yudhishthira having been
induced to stake the fortunes of himself and his brethren on a game of
dice, in which he was defeated; how the five Pandavas, with their
common wife Draupadi (observe this curious and ugly feature of
polyandry, which is quite opposed to standard Hindu morals, but is by
no means unparalleled in early Indian literature[20]) retired into
exile for thirteen years, and then came back with a great army of
allies, and after fierce and bloody battles with the Kauravas and
their supporters in the plain of Kurukshetra at last gained the
victory, slew the Kauravas, and established Yudhishthira as king in
Hastinapura. Among the Pandavas the leading part is played by the
eldest, Yudhishthira, and the third, Arjuna; of the others, Bhima, the
second, is a Hercules notable only for his strength, courage, and
fidelity, while the twins Nakula and Sahadeva are colourless figures.
Krishna plays an important part in the story; for on the return of
the Pandavas to fight the Kauravas he accompanies Arjuna as his
charioteer, and on the eve of the first battle delivers to him a
discourse on his religion, the Bhagavad-gita, or Lord's Song, which
has become one of the most famous and powerful of all the sacred books
of India.

[Footnote 20: See H. Raychaudhuri, _Materials for the Study of the
Early History of the Vaishnava Sect, p. 27_.]

Now if the Mahabharata were as homogeneous even as the Iliad and
Odyssey, which give us a fairly consistent and truthful picture of a
single age, we should be in a very happy position. Unfortunately this
is not the case. Our epic began as a Bharata, or Tale of the Bharata
Clan, probably of very moderate bulk, not later than 600 B.C., and
perhaps considerably earlier; and from that time onward it went on
growing bigger and bigger for over a thousand years, as editors
stuffed in new episodes and still longer discourses on nearly all the
religious and philosophic doctrines admitted within the four walls of
Hinduism, until it grew to its present immense bulk, which it claims
to amount to 100,000 verses. Thus it pictures the thought not of one
century but of more than ten, and we cannot feel sure of the date of
any particular statement in it. Nevertheless we can distinguish in a
general way between the old skeleton of the story, in which the theme
is treated in simple epic fashion, society is far freer than in later
days and no one objects to eating beef, from the additional matter, in
which the tale is recast in a far more grandiose vein and is padded
out with enormous quantities of moral, religious, and philosophic
sermons. The religion too is different in the different parts. In the
older portions the gods who are most popular are Indra, Agni, and
Brahma--not the neuter abstract Brahma, but the masculine Brahma, the
Demiurge, who corresponds more or less to Prajapati of the Brahmanas
and is represented in classical art as a four-headed old man reciting
the Vedas--and Krishna seems to figure only as a hero or at best as a
demigod; but the later parts with fine impartiality claim the
supremacy of heaven variously for Siva, Brahma, and Vishnu; and
Vishnu, as we have seen, is sometimes identified with Krishna, notably
in the chapters known as the Bhagavad-gita.

The gods have changed somewhat since earlier days. Indra has settled
down in the constitutional monarchy of Paradise assigned to him by
the Brahmanas; he now figures as the prototype of earthly kings,
leading the armies of the gods to war against the demons when occasion
requires, and passing the leisure of peace in the enjoyment of
celestial dissipation. His morals have not improved: he is a debonair
debauchee. Brahma the Creator, a more popular version of Prajapati, is
still too impersonal to have much hold on the popular imagination; the
same is the case with Agni the Fire-god. Plainly there was a vacancy
for a supreme deity whose character was powerful enough to move men's
souls, either through awe or love; and for this vacancy there were two
strong candidates, Vishnu and Siva, who in course of time succeeded to
the post and divided the supremacy between them.

Vishnu has altered immensely since last we met him. First, after an
extraordinary change in his own character, he has been identified with
Narayana, and then both of them have been equated with Krishna. The
development is so portentous that it calls for a little study.

We have seen that in the Vedas Vishnu appears to be, and in the
Brahmanas certainly is, the embodied Spirit of the Sacrifice, and that
ritual mysticism has invented for him a supreme home in the highest
heaven. But in the Epics he has developed into a radiant and gracious
figure of ideal divinity, an almighty saviour with a long record of
holy works for the salvation of mankind, a god who delights in moral
goodness as well as in ritual propriety, and who from time to time
incarnates himself in human or animal form so as to maintain the order
of righteousness. Symbolism has further endowed him with a consort,
the goddess Sri or Lakshmi, typifying fortune; sometimes also he is
represented with another wife, the Earth-goddess. The divine hawk or
kite Garuda, who seems to have been originally the same as the eagle
who in the Rigvedic legend carried off the soma for Indra, has been
pressed into his service; he now rides on Garuda, and bears his figure
upon his banner. I have already suggested a possible explanation of
this evolution (above, p. 41): owing to his close association with
Indra, the most truly popular of Rigvedic deities, the laic
imagination transfused some of the live blood of Indra into the veins
of the priestly abstraction Vishnu. To the plain man Indra was very
real; and as he frequently heard tales of Indra being aided in his
exploits by Vishnu, he came to regard Vishnu as a very present helper
in trouble. The friend of Indra became the friend of mankind. The post
of Indra had already been fixed for him by the theologians; but the
functions of Vishnu, outside the rituals, were still somewhat vaguely
defined, and were capable of considerable expansion. Here was a great
opportunity for those souls who were seeking for a supreme god of
grace, and were not satisfied to find him in Siva; and they made full
use of it, and wholly transformed the personality of Vishnu.

One of the stages in this transformation was the absorption of
Narayana in Vishnu. Narayana was originally a god of a different kind.
The earliest reference to him is in a Brahmana which calls him Purusha
Narayana, which means that it regards him as being the same as the
Universal Spirit which creates from itself the cosmos; it relates that
Purusha Narayana pervaded the whole of nature (SB. XII. iii. 4, 1),
and that he made himself omnipresent and supreme over all beings by
performing a _pancha-ratra sattra_, or series of sacrifices lasting
over five days (ib. XIII. vi. 1, 1). Somewhat later we find prayers
addressed to Narayana, Vasudeva, and Vishnu as three phases of the
same god (Taitt. Aran. X. i. 6). But was Narayana in origin merely a
variety of the Vedic Purusha or our old acquaintance Prajapati? His
name must give us pause. The most simple explanation of it is that it
is a family name: as Karshnayana means a member of the Krishna-family
and Ranayana a man belonging to the family of Rana, so Narayana would
naturally denote a person of the family of Nara. But Nara itself
signifies a _man_: is the etymology therefore reduced to absurdity?
Not at all: Nara is also used as a proper name, as we shall see.[21]
Probably the name really means what naturally it would seem to mean,
"a man of the Nara family"; that Narayana was originally a divine or
deified saint, a _rishi_, as the Hindus would call him; and that
somehow he became identified with Vishnu and the Universal Spirit.

[Footnote 21: It must be admitted that ancient writers give different
etymologies of the name: thus, a poet in the Mahabharata (III.
clxxxix. 3) derives it from _narah_, "waters," and _ayanam_, "going,"
understanding it to mean "one who has the waters for his
resting-place"; Manu (I. 10, with Medhatithi's commentary), accepting
the same etymology, interprets it as "the dwelling-place of all the
Naras"; and in the Mahabharata XII. cccxli. 39, it is also explained
as "the dwelling-place of mankind." But these interpretations are
plainly artificial concoctions.]

This theory really is not by any means as wild as at first sight it
may seem to be. Divine saints are sometimes mentioned in the Rig-veda
and Brahmanas as being the creators of the universe[22]; and they
appear again and again in legend as equals of the gods, attaining
divine powers by their mystic insight into the sacrificial lore. But
there is more direct evidence than this.

[Footnote 22: RV. X. cxxix. 5, SB. VI. i. 1, 1-5. Cf. Charpentier,
_Suparnasage_, p. 387.]

In the Mahabharata there are incorporated two documents of first-rate
importance for the doctrines of the churches that worshipped Vishnu.
One of these is the Bhagavad-gita, or Lord's Song (VI. xxv.-xlii.);
the other is the Narayaniya, or Account of Narayana (XII.
cccxxxvi.-cccliii.). Their teachings are not the same in details,
though on most main points they agree; for they belong to different
sections of the one religious body. Leaving aside the Bhagavad-gita
for the moment, we note that the Narayaniya relates a story that there
were born four sons of Dharma, or Righteousness, viz. Nara, Narayana,
Hari or Vishnu, and Krishna. In other places (I. ccxxx. 18, III. xii.
45, xlvii. 10, V. xlviii. 15, etc.) we are plainly told that Nara is a
previous incarnation of Arjuna the Pandava prince, and Narayana is, of
course, the supreme Deity, who in the time of Arjuna was born on earth
as Krishna Vasudeva, and that in his earlier birth Nara and Narayana
were both ascetic saints. This tradition is very important, for it
enables us to see something of the early character of Narayana. He was
an ancient saint of legend, who was connected with a hero Nara, just
as Krishna was associated with Arjuna; and the atmosphere of
saintliness clings to him obstinately. Tradition alleges that he was
the _rishi_, or inspired seer, who composed the Purusha-sukta of the
Rig-veda (X. 90), and represents him by choice as lying in a
_yoga-nidra_, or mystic sleep, upon the body of the giant serpent
Sesha in the midst of the Ocean of Milk. Thus the worship of Vishnu,
like the worship of Siva, has owed much to the influence of live yogis
idealised as divine saints; though it must be admitted that the yogis
of the Vaishnava orders have usually been more agreeable and less
ambiguous than those of the Saiva community.

We must briefly consider now the religious teachings of the
Bhagavad-gita and the Narayaniya, and then turn to the inscriptions
and contemporary literature to see whether we can find any sidelights
in them. We begin with the Bhagavad-gita, or The Lord's Song.

The Bhagavad-gita purports to be a dialogue between the Pandava prince
Arjuna and Krishna, who was serving him as his charioteer, on the eve
of the great battle. In order to invent a leading motive for his
teaching, the poet represents Arjuna as suddenly stricken with
overwhelming remorse at the prospect of the fratricidal strife which
he is about to begin. "I will not fight," he cries in anguish. Then
Krishna begins a long series of arguments to stimulate him for the
coming battle. He points out, with quotations from the Upanishads,
that killing men in battle does not destroy their souls; for the soul
is indestructible, migrating from body to body according to its own
deserts. The duty of the man born in the Warrior-caste is to fight;
fighting is his caste-duty, his _dharma_, and as such it can entail
upon him no guilt if it be performed in the right spirit. But how is
this to be done? The answer is the leading motive of Krishna's
teaching. For the maintenance of the world it is necessary that men
should do the works of their respective castes, and these works do not
operate as _karma_ to the detriment of the future life of their souls
if they perform them not from selfish motives but as offerings made in
perfect unselfishness to the Lord. This is the doctrine of
_Karma-yoga_, discipline of works, which is declared to lead the soul
of the worshipper to salvation in the Lord as effectually as the
ancient intellectualism preached in the Upanishads and the Samkhya
philosophy. But there is also a third way to salvation, the way
through loving devotion, or _bhakti_, which is as efficacious as
either of the other two; the worshippers of Siva had already preached
this for their own church in the Svetasvatara Upanishad. Besides
treating without much consistency or method of many incidental
questions of religious theory and practice, Krishna reveals himself
for a few instants to Arjuna in his form as Viraj, the universal being
in which all beings are comprehended and consumed. Finally Arjuna is
comforted, and laying the burden of all his works upon Krishna, he
prepares in quiet faith for the coming day of battle.

There are four main points to notice in this teaching. (1) The Supreme
God, superior to Brahma, he who rules by grace and comprehends in his
universal person the whole of existence, is Vishnu, or Hari,
represented on earth for the time being by Krishna Vasudeva. The
author makes no attempt to reconcile the fatalism implied in the old
theory of _karma-samsara_ with his new doctrine of special and general
grace: he allows the two principles to stand side by side, and leaves
for future generations of theologians the delicate task of harmonising
them. (2) Three roads to salvation are recognised in principle, the
intellectual gnosis of the old Upanishads and the Samkhya, the "way of
works" or performance of necessary social duties in a spirit of
perfect surrender to God, and the "way of devotion," continuous loving
worship and contemplation of God. In practice the first method is
ignored as being too severe for average men; the second and third are
recommended, as being suitable for all classes. (3) The way of
salvation is thus thrown open directly to men and women of all castes
and conditions. The Bhagavad-gita fully approves of the orthodox
division of society into castes; but by its doctrine that the
performance of caste-duties in a spirit of sacrifice leads to
salvation it makes caste an avenue to salvation, not a barrier. (4)
The Bhagavad-gita has nothing to say for the animal-sacrifices of the
Brahmans. It recognises only offerings of flowers, fruits, and the
like. The doctrine of _ahimsa_, "thou shalt do no hurt," was making
much headway at the time, and the wholesale animal-sacrifices of the
Brahmans roused general disgust, of which the Buddhists and Jains
took advantage for the propagation of their teachings.

I have previously spoken of the solitary passage in the Chhandogya
Upanishad in which Krishna's name is mentioned, as receiving the
teachings of Ghora Angirasa, and it will now be fitting to see how far
these teachings are reflected in the Bhagavad-gita. Ghora compares the
functions of life to the ceremonies of the _diksha_ (see above, p.68):
and this is at bottom the same idea as the doctrine of _karma-yoga_
preached again and again in the Bhagavad-gita. "Whatever be thy work,
thine eating, thy sacrifice, thy gift, thy mortification, make of it
an offering to me," says Krishna (IX. 27); all life should be regarded
as a sacrifice freely offered. Then Ghora continues: "In the hour of
death one should take refuge in these three thoughts: 'Thou art the
Indestructible, Thou art the Unfailing, Thou art instinct with
Spirit.' On this there are these two verses of the Rig-veda:

    Thus upward from the primal seed
    From out the darkness all around
    We, looking on the higher light,
    Yea, looking on the higher heaven,
    Have come to Surya, god midst gods,
    To him that is the highest light, the highest light."

In the Bhagavad-gita (IV. 1 ff.) Krishna announces that he preached
his doctrine to Vivasvan the Sun-god, who passed it on to his son the
patriarch Manu; elsewhere in the Mahabharata (XII. cccv. 19) the
Satvata teaching is said to have been announced by the Sun. Ghora in
his list of moral virtues enumerates "mortification, charity,
uprightness, harmlessness, truthfulness"; exactly the same attributes,
with a few more, are said in the Bhagavad-gita to characterise the man
who is born to the gods' estate (XVI. 1-3). Ghora's exhortation to
think of the nature of the Supreme in the hour of death is balanced by
