radically changed as by a lightning touch. This is the most striking
illustration of all. No man so reveals in himself the tremendous
transforming power there is in the sight of the Christ as does this
high-strung son of the Hebrew race.

But--words are such lame things. They cannot tell the story here. They
are all one has to use. Yet they'll never be understood except as the
light of experience shines upon them. When any one attempts to talk of
such a thing as this of seeing God or Christ, his words seem so poor and
lame and under the mark by the man who has had something of the vision.
And they either are meaningless and uninteresting, or else they seem
overstated, and quite beyond the mark to one who has had no inkling in
experience of the thing itself.

I recall distinctly the experience of a Danish friend in Copenhagen. She
had been trying to read in English a certain devotional book, but said
she couldn't seem to grasp the meaning of the English words. They eluded
her, and so the book didn't help her much.

Then she went through a time of sore stress of spirit in the sickness
and death of her mother. A new experience of the nearness of God came to
her. And then happening--as it seemed--to pick up the English book again
she was amazed and delighted to find how much better and more quickly
she knew the words and sensed the meaning.

It is only as the heart is fired that the brain awakens. Experience
gives the meaning to language. Without experience it is a dead language
in meaning even though it be one's own mother tongue. Only the man who
has caught something of the vision of Christ's face can understand the
strong words used in talking of such a vision.

It is most striking to notice that even when the glory of God's presence
was hidden beneath human wrappings in Jesus it still could be _felt_.
Men felt that presence though they knew not just what it was they felt,
nor why. When the glory came yet closer in the coming of Jesus, it must
be well covered up for the sake of men's eyes, that they might not go
blind at once; but its power of attraction could not be wholly hid.

So really human was Jesus in the outer circumstance of His life that His
brothers of the home couldn't believe he was essentially different from
themselves. But the attraction of that presence was felt constantly even
through the human hiding of it.

John of the Wilderness instinctively recognized that here was more than
the man he saw, and so obeyed His word. The crowds gathered eagerly in
the Jordan bottoms in even greater numbers than to hear John, drawn by a
power they felt they must yield to, and did yield to gladly.

From the first the crowds gathered thick about Him, Jewish aristocrat,
Samaritan half-breed and sinful outcast jostling elbows in their
eagerness to hear, drawn by a power they could feel, but could not
understand any more than they could withstand it. The children loved his
presence and touch.

The bad in life were as resistlessly drawn up to a new life as the
Greeks were drawn from clear beyond the blue waters of the Hellespont
into His presence. The crowds were irresistibly drawn to follow on that
last eventful journey to Jerusalem even while they felt "afraid."

It was the sight of the glory on the Mount that drew faithful John in
_with_ Jesus, and held him steady that awful night in palace and
courtyard, and that later brought poor blasphemous Peter back for
forgiveness. The two walking to Emmaus found their hearts all aflame,
though they supposed it was only the chance stranger of the roadway they
listened to.

Even those who hated Him were compelled to recognize the wondrous power
of His presence. The Nazareth hands that itched to seize Him were
restrained by His presence as He passed through their midst. Ten times
did the Jerusalem crowds attempt his life, and ten times were they
restrained by a power in Him that they could neither understand nor
withstand.

The men officially empowered to arrest Him return empty-handed,
confessing the overawing power of His words. That last week the leaders
that were hotly plotting His death felt the strange restraint of His
presence while He quietly sat in their very midst, and swayed the
crowds.

In the garden soldiers and priests alike were felled to the ground by
the power of His presence. So it always has been. No one has ever had a
sight of that Face, and gotten used to it, or gotten over it.


A Fresh Vision Needed.

But the thing we are specially needing to-day is a sight of Christ _as
He is now_. It seems a bit strange that we don't get this more. One
historic Church has Him fastened to a cross, never freed from the old
fastenings. Another has Him set in picture frame, behind glass. And the
multitudes prostrate themselves and reverently kiss the glass.

In widely differing Churches He seems quite covered up out of sight by
classical ritual, beautiful music, and impressive stately service. The
crowds gather and listen and bow low in hushed stillness. But,
apparently, _Him they see not_, else how different their conduct as they
come out, and their lives.

And yet as I have mingled with the worshippers in Catholic Churches in
the south of Europe, in Greek Churches in Russia, and in congregations
of the Church of England classed as "high," I have been caught by faces
here and there in the crowd that clearly were reaching out hungrily for
_Him_, and were having some sort, some real sort, of touch with Him,
too. Yet it seemed to be in spite of surroundings. The insistence of
their hunger pierces through these to Him. He seems hidden from the
crowd by them.

Scholarly orthodox theologians talk learnedly about Him, but Himself as
He walked among us and as He is now, Him it would seem that they see
not, at least not enough to burn through and burn out and burn up and
send men out aflame with the Jesus-passion. Philosophies about Him that
are classed as "liberal" and put attractively, yet have nothing of the
burn in them that reveals Himself.

The more modern Church of the more western world seems to have gotten a
new lease of aggressiveness in service, a new intensity in activities so
numerous as to be a bit bewildering sometimes. The wheels whir busily
and noisily. You feel them. But Him, the unseen presence that makes you
reverently wrap your face up out of sight, and stand with awed heart to
listen, _Him_ we seem not to see.

The wondrous quiet Voice that makes your heart burn within you with a
burning that cleanses and mellows and melts down, _that_ we seem to hear
only by getting away from the noise of the whirring wheels into some
quiet corner.

There are in every Church and nation those who seem to have the close
personal touch with Himself. Their faces and daily lives show the marks.
Their lips may not say so much, for they who see most can say least of
what they see. But the marks in the life are unmistakable.

Yet even here the sight of Christ emphasizes chiefly the personal side,
what He is personally to them. And what a blessed side that is only they
who know it know. They think of Him as a personal Saviour, and the heart
glows. They see Him at the Father's right hand interceding, and
gratefully remember that He will forget no name where there is a
trusting heart. They think of the Holy Spirit, the other Jesus, Jesus'
other self, always "alongside to help," alongside _in_side. And they
practise letting Him work out the Christ-likeness within themselves.

And all this is blessed, only blessed. They see Him in His personal
relation to themselves. But there's something more than this. No one
knew more of this blessed personal part than John. But John saw more
than this on Patmos. He saw Christ _as He is now_.

This is clearly a new sight of Christ. It was new to John. It would seem
to be new to us. It is new in the pages of this book. It is something
different from any sight seen before. In the Gospels we see Jesus the
_Man_. In carpenter shop and little whitewashed stone cottage, in the
ministering life clear from the Jordan bottoms to the healing touch at
Gethsemane's gate, and in the suffering clear up to the ninth hour of
that fateful day He is the _Man_, one of ourselves, though clearly more
even in His humanity than the humanity we are.

On the Transfiguration Mount the favoured inner three, the leaders, see
the glory within shining out through the Man. So bewildered are they
that the chief impression that remains is of a blinding brightness. Yet
this is up on a high mountain far away from the crowd, and from the
haunts of men.

As Stephen is being stoned his eyes are opened to see the Son of Man
standing in glory up at the Father's right hand. The Damascus traveller
sees an overpowering burst of glory out of the blue and hears a voice
speaking. In the epistles Paul pictures Him seated at the Father's right
hand with an authority greater than any other. All the power He has is
placed at the disposal of His followers on the earth. He Himself is
above in the glory.[55]

But in this very end of the Book John is given a _new sight of Christ_.
He sees Him _as He is now_. That is to say, this is the sight of Christ
as He is now _characteristically_. It is the distinctive sight that
stands out above all these others.

He _is_ at one's right hand in closest personal relation, through His
Holy Spirit. He _is_ at the Father's right hand in glory waiting
expectantly till the time is ripe for the next direct move on the earth.
But there's more than these. There's a sight of Him that overshadows
these. It is the characteristic sight that lets us see Him as He is
peculiarly _now_ in His relation to _affairs on the earth_.


Christ as He Is Now.

This new sight of Christ is the heart and soul of this crowning book,
this end-book of the Book.

It was out of this sight that this end-book grew. It is written wholly
under the spell of this new sight of Christ. It is a revelation both
_of_ Jesus Christ and _by_ Jesus Christ; first of, then by.

John begins his story by telling that he had gotten such a revelation,
and of the special blessing attached to reading and fitting one's life
to it.[56] Then follows his salutation to those for whom the revelation
was given, and the book written.[57] It is peculiarly a _Church_ book.
Its message is not peculiarly for individual followers, but for groups
of believers gathered together as Churches.

The salutation is absorbed with the One whom he has seen in the vision,
what He has done for us in shedding His blood, and that He is actually
coming again. "Behold He cometh with the clouds; and every eye shall see
Him, and they that pierced Him." The Jew is specifically designated: the
coming has special significance for the Jewish nation. And all the
people of the earth shall penitently mourn as they see Him. And then
like an endorsing signature from the One of whom he is writing comes the
sentence: "I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God, who is and
who was, and who cometh, the Almighty One."

Then comes the new sight of the crowned Christ.[58] It was on a Lord's
day. John was on the lonely sea-girt isle of Patmos. He was alone,
brooding probably over some bit of the Word of God, and about the Jesus
of whom he had been so earnestly testifying. It was these that had
brought him to his lonely island prison. These ever burned within him,
the wondrous written Word, the immensely more wondrous Word made flesh,
of whom he had written, the Word that was God and became a Man and
walked the will of God.

And as he brooded he became conscious of the Spirit of God overshadowing
him, gentle as the soft breeze, noiseless as the fragrant dew, mighty as
an enveloping presence that filled his being and had possession of him.

Then a voice spake and the tone of authority in it was unmistakable.
"What thou seest, write." He was to see something. He was to tell what
he saw. There's a delightful touch of the simplicity of natural speech
here. He turned to _see_ the _voice_. And he saw Him who was the voice
of God to him. Then the sight is told in the same simplicity of speech.

There is a group of candlesticks, light-holders, made of gold. And in
the midst of the group there is some One standing. He is in outer form
like a _man_. But there is such an overpowering sense of divine glory
that John falls on his face as one dead. Yet through all this
overwhelming experience the impression of a man stands unmistakably out.

With keen, quick glance John takes in head and hair, eyes and feet,
voice and hands, mouth and face. A simple, natural man in every outer
particular like himself, a brother man, wearing man's garb and girdle.
This is the first impression indelibly stamped on John's mind.

But there's more, ah, much more than a man in this man! This is the
stupendous part. There is some One, other than man, and more than man,
possessing this man. The divine fills the human. It is this sense of the
glory filling the man that is so overpowering to John.

A glorious presence overshadows the man and shines out of Him, but never
obliterates nor makes the man less. That indescribable glory within
shining out through the man magnifies every part of His human being. The
head and hair are white, not like a pale or painted white, but a
transparent whiteness, an intense searching, glowing light shining out
from Him through the human head and hair.

The eyes are as a flame of pure fire, the feet like melting metal
glowing in fire. And the whole countenance was as the sun in its
noontime strength shining out of a rainless, cloudless sky. Humanity
enveloped in deity, yet remaining true, full humanity. God within man
immeasurably more than man, yet not overwhelming, not disturbing nor
obliterating, any part of his humanity, rather making every part stand
out more distinctly.

Is this incidentally a kind of parable? Is it something like this on an
immensely humbler scale that was meant for us men? God the Holy Spirit
dwelling in a man. He the chief one, the divine one, yet expressing
Himself _through_ the man, and doing it fully to meet the need of the
hour. His presence magnifying, vitalizing, and using every human power,
yet Himself the dominant personality.

It is most striking to note that this is the same in principle as every
appearance of God in the Old Testament pages. Sometimes He talked with
men when there is no suggestion made of any appearance or of what the
appearance was like. But wherever the appearance is spoken of it is
always either fire or some touch of the human kind or both.

In Eden He waits and speaks, two human things. He talks with Abraham as
a man talks, and ratified the covenant by passing fire through the
pieces of the covenant sacrifice.[59] It is as a simple, natural man
appearing at Abraham's tent door that He talks about Sodom. It is a
human voice speaking about Isaac, though no appearance is mentioned.
Moses sees a flaming bush, and hears a voice in the desert, and sees a
whole mount aflame while a voice speaks at Sinai.

And so it was always: the fiery presence-cloud in the Wilderness,
Joshua's Captain taking command, Manoah's angel ascending in the flame
of the altar, the voice in the night heard by Samuel, the flooding of
Tabernacle and Temple with the glory-presence, Carmel's fire descending,
Elijah's "still small voice," Isaiah's vision of glory and the voice,
Ezekiel's man of flame speaking, and Daniel's, both of the latter two
akin to this Revelation appearance.

But there is a distinctness and a fulness of description here greater
than at any previous time, yet the same essential thing as at every
appearance of God in Old Testament pages. The coming of Jesus among us
has brought God closer to us and made Him mean more. Jesus was God
coming closer and in a way that we could understand better and take hold
of more easily.


The Identifying Mark.

But let us reverently look a little closer that we may understand yet
better. There are certain characteristics of this Man of Fire that are
allowed to stand sharply out here. We are meant to look at them. This is
part of the purpose in the heart of Christ in letting us see Him as He
is here.

The sense of _purity_ is intenser than can be put into words. Fire is
pure. There is nothing so pure. It resists impurity. It burns it up. It
is most significant that this is the one thing familiar to us that
always accompanies the presence of God as He appears to men. It is
always in fire whether to speak His message of peace and love or to
remove the impurity of evil.

Our God is a consuming fire. Yet fire only consumes what can't stand its
flame. The fire reveals purity and makes pure. God is pure. The presence
within the man looked out in eyes of flame, in a countenance like the
sun, and feet like molten brass glowing in a furnace. There could be no
stronger statement of purity than this.

Then there is an overwhelming sense of _authority_. That seems the human
word to use, though the word seems to tell so much less than John felt.
John feels it more than he can tell it. He cannot tell it in words. His
limp figure lying flat on the earth tells what words never can. He had
seen the glory outshining in the Transfiguration Mount, but this is
unspeakably beyond that.

There was a voice like a trumpet. It commanded John to write. It says:
"I _became_ dead, and, behold! I _am_ alive forever more." It is an
authority over life to yield it up, and over death to put it to death,
and call life back, never again to be touched by the finger of death. No
such authority is known among men to-day. And this is further emphasized
in the quiet words: "I have the _keys_--- the control--of death and of
the whole spirit world."

But immensely more than all this to John was the intense feeling of
majesty which completely overpowered him. The sense of authority was
overwhelming. The items in the description can thus be catalogued, but
it is impossible to get the overwhelming sense of majestic authority
that came to John, except as he got it,--by a _sight_, something of a
sight of this great crowned Christ.

But _who_ is this? Is this not merely Ezekiel's vision repeated?[60] He
saw just such a vision, one in the likeness of a man, enveloped in fire,
and sitting on a throne. And the effect was the same as Ezekiel lies
flat on his face. Is it not the same as Daniel saw?[61] A _man_ clothed
in linen, aflame with inner fire, and the same authoritative voice, and
Daniel in a deep sleep of awe-stricken stupor with face on the ground?
He does indeed seem to be the same. The descriptions tally remarkably.

But listen. He speaks. And the sense of terrifying authority in the
voice that spake is gentled to John's tense ear in the quiet words that
come. Like the loving words that came to Daniel's quaking heart is the
personal message that came to John,--"Fear not." And with the words, as
ever, come the new sense of stilling peace within. "I am the First and
the Last, and the Living One."

