shadowy monotheistic background, was at any rate a practical system for
everyday use, and it may be said to contain all the great ethical truths
to be found in the teachings of Christ. Lao Tzu harped upon a doctrine
of Inaction, by virtue of which all things were to be accomplished,--a
perpetual accommodation of self to one's surroundings, with the minimum
of effort, all progress being spontaneous and in the line of least
resistance. Such a system was naturally far better fitted for the study,
where in fact it has always remained, than for use in ordinary life.

In one of the few genuine utterances of Lao Tzu which have survived the
wreck of time, we find an allusion to a spiritual world. Unfortunately,
it is impossible to say exactly what the passage means. According to Han
Fei (died B.C. 233), who wrote several chapters to elucidate the sayings
of Lao Tzu, the following is the correct interpretation:--

"Govern a great nation as you would cook a small fish (i.e. do not
overdo it).

"If the empire is governed according to Tao, evil spirits will not be
worshipped as good ones.

"If evil spirits are not worshipped as good ones, good ones will do no
injury. Neither will the Sages injure the people. Each will not injure
the other. And if neither injures the other, then there will be mutual
profit."

The latter portion is explained by another commentator as follows:--

"Spirits do not hurt the natural. If people are natural, spirits have
no means of manifesting themselves; and if spirits do not manifest
themselves, we are not conscious of their existence as such. Likewise,
if we are not conscious of the existence of spirits as such, we must be
equally unconscious of the existence of inspired teachers as such; and
to be unconscious of the existence of spirits and of inspired teachers
is the very essence of Tao."

Adumbrations of Heracleitus.--In the hands of Lao Tzu's more immediate
followers, Tao became the Absolute, the First Cause, and finally One in
whose obliterating unity all seemingly opposed conditions of time and
space were indistinguishably blended. This One, the source of human
life, was placed beyond the limits of our visible universe; and in order
for human life to return thither at death and to enjoy immortality, it
was only necessary to refine away corporeal grossness according to the
doctrines of Lao Tzu. Later on, this One came to be regarded as a fixed
point of dazzling luminosity, in remote ether, around which circled for
ever and ever, in the supremest glory of motion, the souls of those who
had successfully passed through the ordeal of life, and who had left the
slough of humanity behind them.

The final state is best described by a poet of the ninth century A.D.:--

     Like a whirling water-wheel,
     Like rolling pearls,--
     Yet how are these worthy to be named?
     They are but illustrations for fools.
     There is the mighty axis of Earth,
     The never-resting pole of Heaven;
     Let us grasp their clue,
     And with them be blended in One,
     Beyond the bounds of thought,
     Circling for ever in the great Void,
     An orbit of a thousand years,--
     Yes, this is the key to my theme.

Debased Taoism.--This view naturally suggested the prolongation of
earthly life by artificial means; hence the search for an elixir,
carried on through many centuries by degenerate disciples of Taoism. But
here we must pass on to consider some of the speculations on God, life,
death, and immortality, indulged in by Taoist philosophers and others,
who were not fettered, as the Confucianists were, by traditional
reticence on the subject of spirits and an unseen universe.

Spirits must exist.--Mo Tzu, a philosopher of the fourth and fifth
centuries B.C., was arguing one day for the existence of spirits with a
disbelieving opponent. "All you have to do," he said, "is to go into
any village and make enquiries. From of old until now the people have
constantly seen and heard spiritual beings; how then can you say they do
not exist? If they had never seen nor heard them, could people say that
they existed?" "Of course," replied the disbeliever, "many people have
seen and heard spirits; but is there any instance of a properly verified
appearance?" Mo Tzu then told a long story of how King Hsuan, B.C.
827-781, unjustly put to death a Minister, and how the latter had said
to the King, "If there is no consciousness after death, this matter will
be at an end; but if there is, then within three years you will hear
from me." Three years later, at a grand durbar, the Minister descended
from heaven on a white horse, and shot the King dead before the eyes of
all.

Traces of Mysticism.--Chuang Tzu, the famous philosopher of the third
and fourth centuries B.C., and exponent of the Tao of Lao Tzu, has the
following allusions to God, of course as seen through Taoist glasses:--

"God is a principle which exists by virtue of its own intrinsicality,
and operates spontaneously without self-manifestation.

"He who knows what God is, and what Man is, has attained. Knowing what
God is, he knows that he himself proceeded therefrom. Knowing what Man
is, he rests in the knowledge of the known, waiting for the knowledge of
the unknown.

"The ultimate end is God. He is manifested in the laws of nature. He is
the hidden spring. At the beginning of all things, He was."

Taoism, however, does not seem to have succeeded altogether, any more
than Confucianism, in altogether estranging the Chinese people from
their traditions of a God, more or less personal, whose power was the
real determining factor in human events. The great general Hsiang Yu,
B.C. 233-202, said to his charioteer at the battle which proved fatal
to his fortunes, "I have fought no fewer than seventy fights, and have
gained dominion over the empire. That I am now brought to this pass is
because God has deserted me."



CHAPTER IV -- MATERIALISM

Yang Hsiung.--Yang Hsiung was a philosopher who flourished
B.C. 53 - A.D. 18. He taught that the nature of man at birth is neither
good nor evil, but a mixture of both, and that development in either
direction depends wholly upon environment. To one who asked about God,
he replied, "What have I to do with God? Watch how without doing
anything He does all things." To another who said, "Surely it is God who
fashions and adorns all earthly forms," he replied, "Not so; if God in
an earthly sense were to fashion and adorn all things, His strength
would not be adequate to the task."

Wang Ch'ung.--Wang Ch'ung, A.D. 27-97, denies that men after death live
again as spiritual beings on earth. "Animals," he argues, "do not become
spirits after death; why should man alone undergo this change? . . .
That which informs man at birth is vitality, and at death this vitality
is extinguished. Vitality is produced by the pulsations of the blood;
when these cease, vitality is extinguished, the body decays, and becomes
dust. How can it become a spirit? . . . When a man dies, his soul
ascends to heaven, and his bones return (_kuei_) to earth; therefore he
is spoken of as a disembodied spirit (_kuei_), the latter word really
meaning that which has returned. . . . Vitality becomes humanity, just
as water becomes ice. The ice melts and is water again; man dies
and reverts to spirituality. . . . The spirits which people see are
invariably in the form of human beings, and that very fact is enough of
itself to prove that these apparitions cannot be the souls of dead men.
If a sack is filled with grain, it will stand up, and is obviously a
sack of grain; but if the sack is burst and the grain falls out, then it
collapses and disappears from view. Now, man's soul is enfolded in his
body as grain in a sack. When he dies his body decays and his vitality
is dissipated; and if when the grain is taken away the sack loses its
form, why, when the vitality is gone, should the body obtain a new shape
in which to appear again in the world? . . . The number of persons who
have died since the world began, old, middle-aged, and young, must run
into thousands of millions, far exceeding the number of persons alive at
the present day. If every one of these has become a disembodied spirit,
there must be at least one to every yard as we walk along the road; and
those who die must now suddenly find themselves face to face with vast
crowds of spirits, filling every house and street. . . . People say that
spirits are the souls of dead men. That being the case, spirits should
always appear naked, for surely it is not contended that clothes have
souls as well as men. . . . It can further be shown not only that dead
men never become spirits, but also that they are without consciousness,
by the fact that before birth they are without consciousness. Before
birth man rests in the First Cause; when he dies he goes back to the
First Cause. The First Cause is vague and without form, and man's soul
is there in a state of unconsciousness. At death the soul reverts to its
original state: how then can it possess consciousness? . . . As a matter
of fact, the universe is full of disembodied spirits, but these are not
the souls of dead men. They are beings only of the mind, conjured up
for the most part in sickness, when the patient is especially subject to
fear. For sickness induces fear of spirits; fear of spirits causes the
mind to dwell upon them; and thus apparitions are produced."

Another writer enlarges on the view that _kuei_ "disembodied spirit" is
the same as _kuei_ "to return." "At death, man's soul returns to heaven,
his flesh to earth, his blood to water, his blood-vessels to marshes,
his voice to thunder, his motion to the wind, his sleep to the sun and
moon, his bones to trees, his muscles to hills, his teeth to stones, his
fat to dew, his hair to grass, while his breath returns to man."

Attributes of God.--There was a certain philosopher, named Ch'in Mi
(died A.D. 226), whose services were much required by the King of Wu,
who sent an envoy to fetch him. The envoy took upon himself to catechise
the philosopher, with the following result:--

"You are engaged in study, are you not?" asked the envoy.

"Any slip of a boy may be that," replied Ch'in; "why not I?"

"Has God a head?" said the envoy.

"He has," was the reply.

"Where is He?" was the next question.

