them, and draw nearer to God; as a little child, seeing a fierce animal
approaching it, would not stay to fight it, nor even to look at it, but
would run for shelter to its mother's arms, where it would be safe. "God
is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and
that right early" (Ps. xlvi. 5).

If we adopt any other course of action, if we attempt to attack our
enemies in our weakness, we shall be wounded, even if we are not
entirely defeated; but remaining in the simple presence of God, we find
ourselves immediately fortified.

This was what David did: he says, "I have set the Lord always before me;
because He is at my right hand, I shall not be moved. Therefore my
heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth; my flesh also shall rest in
hope." It is also said by Moses, "The Lord shall fight for you, and ye
shall hold your peace" (Exod. xiv. 14).




CHAPTER XV.

PRAYER AND SACRIFICE EXPLAINED BY THE SIMILITUDE OF A PERFUME--OUR
ANNIHILATION IN THIS SACRIFICE--SOLIDITY AND FRUITFULNESS OF THIS PRAYER
AS SET FORTH IN THE GOSPEL.


Prayer ought to be both petition and sacrifice.

Prayer, according to the testimony of St John, is an incense, whose
perfume rises to God. Therefore it is said in the Revelation (chap.
viii. 3), that an angel held a censer, which contained the incense of
the prayers of saints.

Prayer is an outpouring of the heart in the presence of God. "I have
poured out my soul before the Lord," said the mother of Samuel (1 Sam.
i. 15). Thus the prayers of the Magi at the feet of the infant Jesus in
the stable of Bethlehem were signified by the incense which they
offered.

Prayer is the heat of love, which melts and dissolves the soul, and
carries it to God. In proportion as it melts, it gives out its odour,
and this odour comes from the love which burns it.

This is what the Bride meant when she said, "While the King sitteth at
His table, my spikenard sendeth forth the smell thereof" (Cant. i. 12).
The table is the heart. When God is there, and we are kept near to Him,
in His presence, this presence of God melts and dissolves the hardness
of our hearts, and as they melt, they give forth their perfume.
Therefore the Bridegroom, seeing His Bride thus melted by the speech of
her Beloved, says, "Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense?" (Cant. iii. 6).

Thus the soul rises up towards its God. But in order to this, it must
suffer itself to be destroyed and annihilated by the force of love. This
is a state of _sacrifice_ essential to the Christian religion, by which
the soul suffers itself to be destroyed and annihilated to render homage
to the sovereignty of God; as it is written, "The power of the Lord is
great, and He is honoured of the lowly" (Ecclus. iii. 20). And the
destruction of our own being confesses the sovereign being of God.

We must cease to be, so that the Spirit of the Word may be in us. In
order that He may come to us, we must yield our life to Him, and die to
self that He may live in us, and that we being dead, our life may be
hidden with Christ in God (Col. iii. 3).

"Come unto me," says God, "all ye that be desirous of me, and fill
yourselves with my fruits" (Ecclus. xxiv. 19). But how can we be filled
with God? Only by being emptied of self, and going out of ourselves in
order to be lost in Him.

Now, this can never be brought about except by our becoming nothing.
Nothingness is true prayer, which renders to God "honour, and glory, and
power, for ever and ever" (Rev. v. 13).

This prayer is the prayer of truth. It is worshipping the Father in
spirit and in truth. In _spirit_, because we are by it drawn out of our
human and carnal action, to enter into the purity of the Spirit, who
prays in us; and in _truth_, because the soul is led into the truth of
the ALL of God, and the NOTHING of the creature.

There are but these two truths, the ALL and the NOTHING. All the rest is
untruth.

We can only honour the ALL of God by our NOTHINGNESS; and we have no
sooner become nothing, than God, who will not suffer us to be empty,
fills us with Himself. Oh, if all knew the blessings which come to the
soul by this prayer, they would be satisfied with no others: it is the
pearl of great price; it is the hidden treasure. He who finds it gladly
sells all that he has to buy it (Matt. xiii. 44, 46). It is the well of
living water, which springs up into everlasting life (John iv. 14). It
is the practice of the pure maxims of the gospel.

Does not Christ Himself tell us that the kingdom of God is within us?
(Luke xvii. 21). This kingdom is set up in two ways. The first is, when
God is so thoroughly master of us that nothing resists Him: then our
heart is truly His kingdom. The other way is, that by possessing God,
who is the sovereign Lord, we possess the kingdom of God, which is the
height of felicity, and the end for which we were created. As it has
been said, _to serve God is to reign_.

The end for which we were created is to enjoy God in this life, and men
do not believe it!




CHAPTER XVI.

THIS STATE OF PRAYER NOT ONE OF IDLENESS, BUT OF NOBLE ACTION, WROUGHT
BY THE SPIRIT OF GOD, AND IN DEPENDENCE UPON HIM--THE COMMUNICATION OF
HIS LIFE AND UNION.


Some people, hearing of the prayer of silence, have wrongly imagined
that the soul remains _inactive_, _lifeless_, and _without movement_.

But the truth is, that its action is more noble and more extensive than
it ever was before it entered this degree, since it is moved by God
Himself, and acted upon by His Spirit. St Paul desires that we should be
_led by the Spirit of God_ (Rom. viii. 14). I do not say that there must
be no action, but that we must act in dependence upon the divine
movement. This is admirably set forth by Ezekiel. The prophet saw wheels
which had the spirit of life, and wherever this spirit was to go, they
went; they went on, or stood, or were lifted up, as they were moved,
for the spirit of life was in them: but they never went back (see Ezek.
i. 19-21). It should be the same with the soul: it should suffer itself
to be moved and guided by the living Spirit who is in it, following His
direction, and no other. Now this Spirit will never lead it to go
backwards, that is, to reflect upon the creature, or to lean upon
itself, but always to go forward, pressing continually towards the mark.

This action of the soul is a restful action. When it acts of itself, it
acts with effort; and is therefore more conscious of its action. But
when it acts in dependence upon the Spirit of grace, its action is so
free, so easy, so natural, that it does not seem to act at all. "He
brought me forth also into a large place; He delivered me, because He
delighted in me" (Ps. xviii. 19).

As soon as the soul has commenced its course towards its centre,[2] from
that moment its action becomes vigorous--that is, its course towards the
centre which attracts it, which infinitely surpasses the velocity of any
other movement.

  2. See chap. ix.

It is action then, but an action so _noble_, so _peaceful_, so
_tranquil_, that it seems to the soul as though it were not acting at
all; because it rests, as it were, naturally. When a wheel is only
turning with a moderate speed, it can easily be distinguished; but when
it goes quickly, no part of it can be distinctly seen. So the soul which
remains at rest in God has an action infinitely noble and exalted, yet
very peaceful. The greater its peace, the greater is its velocity,
because it is abandoned to the Spirit, who moves it and makes it act.
This Spirit is God Himself, who draws us, and in drawing makes us run to
Him, as the Bride well knew when she said, "Draw me, we will run" (Cant.
i. 4). Draw me, O my Divine Centre, by my inmost heart: my powers and my
sensibilities will run at Thy attraction! This attraction alone is a
balm which heals me, and a perfume which draws. "We will run," she says,
"because of the savour of Thy good ointments." This attracting virtue is
_very strong_ but the soul follows it _very gladly_; and as it is
equally strong and sweet, it attracts by its strength and delights by
its sweetness.

The Bride says, "Draw me, we will run." She speaks of herself, and to
herself: "Draw _me_;" there is the unity of the object which is
attracted: "_We_ will run;" there is the correspondence of all the
powers and sensibilities which follow in the train of the centre of the
heart.

It is not then a question of remaining in idleness, but of acting _in
dependence upon the Spirit of God_, who animates us, since it is in Him
that "we live, and move, and have our being" (Acts xvii. 23). This calm
dependence upon the Spirit of God is absolutely necessary, and causes
the soul in a short time to attain the simplicity and unity in which it
was created. It was created one and simple, like God. In order, then, to
answer the end of our creation, we must quit the multiplicity of our own
actions, to enter into the simplicity and unity of God, in whose image
we were created (Gen. i. 27). The Spirit of God is "one only," "yet
manifold" (Wisdom of Solomon vii. 22), and its unity does not prevent
its multiplicity. We enter into God's unity when we are united to His
Spirit, because then we have the same Spirit that He has; and we are
multiplied outwardly, as regards His dispositions, without leaving the
unity.

So that, as God acts infinitely, and we are of one spirit with Him, we
act much more than we could do by our own action. We must suffer
ourselves to be guided by Wisdom. This "Wisdom" is more moving than any
motion (Wisdom of Solomon vii. 24). Let us, then, remain in dependence
upon His action, and our action will be vigorous indeed.

"All things were made by (the Word); and without Him was not anything
made that was made" (John i. 3). God, in creating us, created us in His
image, after His likeness (Gen. i. 26). He gave to us the Spirit of the
Word by the breath of life (Gen. ii. 7), which He breathed into us when
we were created in the image of God, by the participation of the life of
the Word, who is the image of His Father. Now this life is one, simple,
pure, intimate, and fruitful.

The devil having disfigured this beautiful image, it became necessary
that this same Word, whose breath had been breathed into us at our
creation, should come to restore it. It was necessary that it should be
He, because He is the image of the Father; and a defaced image cannot be
repaired by its own action, but by the action of him who seeks to
restore it. Our _action_ then should be, to _put ourselves_ into a
position to suffer the action of God, and to allow the Word to retrace
His image in us. An image, if it could move, would by its movement
prevent the sculptor's perfecting it. Every movement of our own hinders
the work of the Heavenly Sculptor, and produces false features.

We must then remain silent, and only move as He moves us. Jesus Christ
has _life in Himself_ (John v. 26), and He must communicate life to all
who live.

That this action is the most noble cannot be denied. Things are only of
value as the principle in which they originate is noble, grand, and
elevated. Actions committed by a divine principle are _divine actions_;
whereas the actions of the creature, however good they may appear, are
_human actions_ or at best they are virtuous actions, if they are done
with the help of grace.

Jesus says that He has life in Himself; all other beings have but a
borrowed life, but the Word has life in Himself; and as He is
communicative, He desires to communicate this life to men. We must then
give place to this life, that it may flow in us, which can only be done
by evacuation, and the loss of the life of Adam and of our own action,
