towards God redoubles, and she forgets herself more, it is not to be
wondered at that in running she soils herself in the muddy places
through which she passes; and as all her attention is directed towards
her Beloved, although she does not perceive it by reason of her own
condition, she thinks no more of herself, and does not notice where she
steps. So that, while believing herself most guilty, she does not
willingly commit a single sin; though all her sins appear voluntary to
herself, they are rather faults of surprise, which often she does not
see until after they are committed. She cries to her Bridegroom, but He
does not heed her, at least not perceptibly, though He sustains her with
an invisible hand. Sometimes she tries to do better, but then she
becomes worse; for the design of her Bridegroom in letting her fall
_without wounding herself_ (Ps. xxxvii. 24) is that she should lean no
longer on herself; that she should recognise her helplessness; that she
should sink into complete self-despair; and that she should say, "My
soul chooseth death rather than life" (Job vii. 15). It is here that the
soul begins truly to _hate itself_ and to _know itself_ as it would
never have done if it had not passed through this experience.

All our natural knowledge of self, whatever may be its degree, is not
sufficient to cause us really to hate ourselves. "He that loveth his
life shall lose it; and he that hateth his life in this world, shall
keep it unto life eternal" (John xii. 25). It is only such an experience
as this which can reveal to the soul its infinite depth of misery. No
other way can give true purity; if it give any at all, it is only
superficial, and not in the depth of the heart, where the impurity is
seated.

Here God searches the inmost recesses of the soul for that hidden
impurity which is the effect of the self-esteem and self-love which He
designs to destroy. Take a sponge which is full of impurities, wash it
as much as you will, you will clean the outside, but you will not render
it clean throughout unless you press it, in order to squeeze out all the
filth. This is what God does. He squeezes the soul in a painful manner,
but He brings out from it that which was the most deeply hidden.

I say, then, that this is the only way in which we can be purified
radically; and without it we should always be filthy, though outwardly
we might appear very clean. It is necessary that God should make the
soul thoroughly sensible of its condition. We could never believe,
without the experience, of what nature left to itself is capable. Yes,
indeed, our own being, abandoned to itself, is worse than all devils.
Therefore we must not believe that the soul in this state of misery is
abandoned by God. It was never better sustained; but nature is, as it
were, left a little alone, and makes all these ravages without the soul
in itself taking any part in them. This poor desolate bride, running
hither and thither in search of her Beloved, not only soils herself
grievously, as I have said, by falling into faults of surprise and
self-esteem, but she wounds herself with the thorns that come in her
way. She becomes so wearied at length that she is forced to die in her
race for want of help; that is, to expect nothing from herself or her
own activity.

That which is productive of the highest good to the soul in this
condition is that God manifests no pity towards it; and when He desires
to promote its advancement, He lets it run even to death; if He stops it
for a moment, by doing which He ravishes and revives it, it is because
of its weakness, and in order that its weariness may not compel it to
rest.

When He sees that it is becoming disheartened and inclined to give up
the race altogether, He looks upon it for a moment, and the poor bride
finds herself wounded anew by this look. She would willingly say to
Him, "Alas! why hast Thou thus compelled me to run? Oh, that I could
find Thee; and see Thee face to face!" But alas! when she seems to lay
hold of Him, He flees from her again. "I sought Thee," she cries, "but I
found Thee not" (Cant. iii. 1).

As this look from her Bridegroom has increased her love, she redoubles
her speed in order to find Him: nevertheless she was delayed just so
long as the look lasted, that is, in sensible joy. This is why the
Bridegroom does not often cast such looks upon her, and only when He
sees that her courage is failing.

The soul then dies at the end of its race, because all its active
strength is exhausted; for though it had been passive, it had not lost
its active strength, though it had been unconscious of it. The bride
said, "Draw me, we will run after thee" (Cant. i. 3). She ran indeed,
but how? By the loss of all; as the sun travels incessantly, yet without
quitting his repose. In this condition she so hates herself, that she
can hardly suffer herself. She thinks her Bridegroom has good reason to
treat her as He does, and that it is His indignation against her which
makes Him leave her. She does not see that it is in order to make her
run that He flees, that it is in order that He may purify her that He
suffers her to become so soiled. When we put iron in the fire, to purify
it and to purge it from its dross, it appears at first to be tarnished
and blackened, but afterwards it is easy to see that it has been
purified. Christ only makes His bride experience her own weakness, that
she may lose all strength and all support in herself, and that, in her
self-despair, He may carry her in His arms, and she may be willing to be
thus borne; for whatever her course may be, she walks as a child; but
when she is in God, and is borne by Him, her progress is infinite, since
it is that of God Himself.

In addition to all this degradation, the bride sees others adorned with
her spoils. When she sees a holy soul, she dare not approach it; she
sees it adorned with all the ornaments which her Bridegroom has taken
from her; but though she admires it, and sinks into the depths of
nothingness, she cannot desire to have these ornaments again, so
conscious is she of her unworthiness to wear them. She thinks it would
be a profanation to put them upon a person so covered with mud and
defilement. She even rejoices to see that, if she fills her Beloved with
horror, there are others in whom He can take delight, and whom she
regards as infinitely happy in having gained the love of her God: as for
the ornaments, though she sees others decorated with them, she does not
suppose that these are the sources of their happiness. If she sees any
blessedness in the possession of them, it is because they are the tokens
of the love of her Beloved. When she is thus sensible of her littleness
in the presence of such as these, whom she regards as queens, she does
not know the good which will result to her from this nakedness, death,
and decay. Her Bridegroom only unclothes her that He may be Himself her
clothing: "Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ," says St Paul (Rom. xiii.
14). He only kills her that He may be her life: "If we be dead with
Christ, we believe that we shall also live with Him." He only
annihilates her that she may be transformed in Himself.

This loss of virtue is only brought about by degrees, as well as the
other losses, and this apparent inclination for evil is involuntary; for
that evil which makes us so vile in our own eyes is really no evil at
all.

The things which bring defilement to these persons are certain faults
which only lie in the feelings. As soon as they see the beauty of a
virtue, they seem to be incessantly falling into the contrary vice: for
example, if they love truth, they speak hastily or with exaggeration,
and fancy they lie at every moment, although in fact they do but speak
against their sentiments; and it is thus with all the other virtues; the
more important these virtues are, and the more strongly they cling to
them, because they appear the more essential, the greater is the force
with which they are torn from them.


Section IV.

ENTRANCE OF THE SOUL INTO MYSTIC DEATH, AS TO ITS SENSIBILITIES, POWERS,
AND EVEN ITS PERCEIVED FOUNDATION--IMPORTANT OBSERVATIONS ON THIS
CONDITION.


This poor soul, after having lost its all, must at last lose _its own
life_ by an utter self-despair, or rather it must die worn out by
terrible fatigue. Prayer in this degree is extremely painful, because
the soul being no longer able to make use of its own powers, of which it
seems to be entirely deprived, and God having taken from it a certain
sweet and profound calm which supported it, is left like those poor
children whom we see running here and there in search of bread, yet
finding no one to supply their need, so that the power of prayer seems
to be as entirely lost as if we had never possessed it; but with this
difference, that we feel the pain occasioned by the loss, because we
have proved its value by its possession, while others are not sensible
of the loss, because they have never known its enjoyment. The soul,
then, can find no support in the creature; and if it feels itself
carried away by the things of earth, it is only by impetuosity, and it
can find nothing to satisfy it. Not that it does not seek to abandon
itself to the things in which it formerly delighted; but alas! it finds
in them nothing but bitterness, so that it is glad to leave them again,
taking nothing back but sadness at its own unfaithfulness.

The _imagination_ goes altogether astray, and is scarcely ever at rest.
The three powers of the soul, the _understanding_, the _memory_, and the
_will_, by degrees lose their life, so that at length they become
altogether dead, which is very painful to the soul, especially as
regards the will, which had been tasting I know not what of sweetness
and tranquillity, which comforted the other powers in their deadness and
powerlessness.

This unexplainable something which sustains the soul at its foundation,
as it were, is the hardest of all to lose, and that which the soul
endeavours the most strenuously to retain; for as it is too delicate, so
it appears the more divine and necessary: it would consent willingly to
be deprived of the two other powers, and even of the will, so far as it
is a distinct and perceived thing, if only this something might be left;
for it could bear all its labours if it may have within itself the
witness that it is born of God.

However, this must be lost, like the rest--that is, as to the
sentiment--and then the soul enters into the sensible realisation of all
the misery with which it is filled. And it is this which really produces
_the spiritual death_; for whatever misery the soul might endure, if
this, I know not what, were not lost, it would not die; and if, on the
other hand, this were lost without the soul being conscious of its
misery, it would be supported, and would not die. It can easily
understand that it must give up all dependence upon its own feelings or
upon any natural support, but to lose an almost imperceptible comfort,
and to fall from weakness, to fall into the mire, to this it cannot
consent. This is where reason fails, this is where terrible fears fill
the heart, which seems to have only sufficient life to be sensible of
its death.

It is, then, the loss of this imperceptible support, and the experience
of this misery, which causes death.

We should be very careful, in such times as these, not to let our senses
be led away willingly to creatures, seeking willingly consolation and
diversion. I say _willingly_, for we are incapable of mortifications and
attentions reflected upon ourselves, and the more we have mortified
ourselves, the stronger will be the bearing in the contrary direction,
without being aware of it; like a madman, who goes wandering about, if
you attempt to keep him too rigorously within bounds, apart from its
being useless, it would retard his death.

What must we do then? We must be careful to give no support to the
senses, to suffer them, and to let them find recreation in innocent
ways; for as they are not capable of an inward operation, by
endeavouring to restrain them we should injure health, and even mental
strength. What I say applies only to this degree; for if we were to make
this use of the senses in the time of the strength and activity of
grace, we should do wrong; and our Lord Himself in His goodness makes us
see the conduct that we should pursue; for at first, He puts such a
pressure on the senses, they have no liberty. They only have to desire
something in order to be deprived of it; God orders it thus that the
senses may be drawn from their imperfect operation, to be confined
within the heart; and in severing them outwardly, He binds them inwardly
so gently, that it costs them little to be deprived of everything; they
even find more pleasure in this deprivation than in the possession of
all things. But when they are sufficiently purified, God, who wishes to
draw the soul out of itself with a contrary movement, permits the senses
to expand outwardly, which appears to the soul as a great impurity.
However, it has now happened seasonably, and to endeavour to order
things otherwise, would be to purify ourselves in a different way from
that which God desires, and therefore to defile ourselves anew.

This does not prevent our making mistakes in this outward development of
the senses; but the confusion which it occasions us, and our fidelity in
making use of it, is the furnace in which we are most quickly purified,
by dying the soonest to ourselves. It is here also that we lose the
esteem of men. They look on us with contempt, and say, "Are not these
the persons whom we formerly admired? How are they become thus
disfigured?" "Alas!" we reply, "look not upon me, because I am black"
(Cant. i. 6). "It is the sun which has thus discoloured me." It is at
this point that we suddenly enter the third degree, that of burial and
decay.




CHAPTER VIII.

THIRD DEGREE OF THE PASSIVE WAY OF FAITH IN ITS
CONSUMMATION--CONSUMMATED STATE OF SPIRITUAL
DEATH--BURIAL--DECAY--ADVICE AS TO THE CONDUCT OF PERSONS IN THESE
CONDITIONS, WHICH ARE FOLLOWED BY A NEW LIFE.


The torrent, as we have said, has passed through every imaginable
vicissitude. It has been dashed against rocks; indeed, its course has
been but a succession of falls from rock to rock; but it has always
reappeared, and we have never seen it really lost. Now it begins to lose
itself in gulf after gulf. Formerly it still had a course, though it was
so precipitate, so confused, and so irregular; but here it is engulphed
with a yet greater precipitation in unsearchable depths. For a long time
it disappears altogether from view, then we perceive it slightly, but
more by hearing than by sight, and it only appears to be again
precipitated in a deeper gulf. It falls from abyss to abyss, from
precipice to precipice, until at last it falls into the depths of the
sea, where, losing all form, it is lost to be found no more, having
become one with the sea itself. The soul, after many deaths, expires at
last in the arms of Love; but it does not even perceive those arms. It
has no sooner expired, than it loses all vital action, all desire,
inclination, tendency, choice, repugnance, and aversion. As it draws
near to death, it grows weaker; but its life, though languishing and
agonising, is still life, and "while there is life there is hope," even
though death be inevitable. The torrent must be buried out of sight.

O God! what is this? What were only precipices become abysses. The soul
falls into a depth of misery from which there is no escape. At first
this abyss is small, but the further the soul advances, the stronger
does it appear, so that it goes from bad to worse; for it is to be
remarked, that when we first enter a degree, there clings to us much
that we have brought in with us, and at the end we already begin to feel
symptoms of that which is to come. It is also noticeable that each
degree contains within it an infinitude of others.

A man, after his death and before his burial, is still among the living:
he still has the face of a man, though he is an object of terror; thus
the soul, in the commencement of this degree, still bears some
resemblance to what it was before; there remains in it a certain secret
impression of God, as there remains in a dead body a certain animal heat
which gradually leaves it. The soul still practises devotion and prayer,
but this is soon taken away from it. It must lose not only all prayer,
every gift of God, but God Himself to all appearance--that is, so far as
He was possessed selfishly by the _ego_--and not lose Him for one, two,
or three years, but for ever. All facility for good, all active virtue,
are taken from it; it is left naked and despoiled of everything. The
world, which formerly esteemed it so much, begins to fear it. Yet it is
no visible sin which produces the contempt of men, but a powerlessness
to practise its former good works with the same facility. Formerly whole
days were spent in the visitation of the sick, often even against
natural inclination; such works as these can be practised no longer.

The soul will soon be in an entire oblivion. Little by little, it loses
everything in such a degree, that it is altogether impoverished. The
world tramples it under foot, and thinks no more of it. O poor soul!
thou must see thyself treated thus, and see it with terror, without
being able to prevent it. It must suffer itself to be buried, covered
with earth, and trodden under foot by all men.

It is here that heavy crosses are borne, and all the heavier that they
are believed to be merited. The soul begins to have a horror of itself.
God casts it so far off, that He seems determined to abandon it for
ever. Poor soul! thou must be patient, and remain in thy sepulchre. It
is content to remain there, though in terrible suffering, because it
sees no way of escape from it; and it sees, too, that it is its only fit
place, all others being even sadder to it. It flees from men, knowing
that they regard it with aversion. They look upon this forlorn Bride as
an outcast, who has lost the grace of God, and who is only fit to be
buried in the earth.

The heart endures its bitterness; but, alas! how sweet this state is
even now, and how easy it would be to remain in the sepulchre, if it
were not necessary to decay! The old man becomes gradually corrupted;
formerly there were weaknesses and failings, now the soul sees a depth
of corruption of which it had hitherto been ignorant, for it could not
imagine what were its self-esteem and selfishness. O God! what horror
this soul suffers in seeing itself thus decaying! All troubles, the
contempt and aversion of man, affect it no longer. It is even insensible
to the deprivation of the Sun of Righteousness; it knows that His light
does not penetrate the tomb. But to feel its own corruption, that it
cannot endure. What would it not rather suffer? But it must experience,
to the very depths of its being, what it is.

And yet, if I could decay without being seen by God, I should be
content: what troubles me is the horror which I must cause Him by the
sight of my corruption. But, poor desolate one! what canst thou do? It
should suffice thee, one would think, to _bear_ this corruption, without
_loving_ it: but now thou art not even sure that thou dost not desire
it! The soul is in darkness, without being able to judge whether its
terrible thoughts proceed from itself or from the evil one.

It is no longer troubled at being cast off by God; it is so conscious of
its demerit, that it consents to the deprivation of the sensible
presence of God. But it cannot endure the thought that the taint of its
corruption reaches even to God. It does not wish to sin. Let me decay,
is its cry, and find my home in the depths of hell, if only I may be
kept free from sin. It no longer thinks of love, for it believes itself
to be incapable of affection. It is, in its own opinion, worse than when
it was in a state of nature, since it is in the state of corruption
