his head.

[Illustration: David seized his sword and cut off his head.]

So God's people were saved, and so again God made use of the shepherd
boy's training and skill, this time to win a great victory for His
people.

The fair-haired shepherd boy had done his duty faithfully in the fields
on the hillside at home, where he was but little thought of. He had
always tried to do his best, whether he was keeping the sheep or
practising with his sling or learning to play the harp. And now,
suddenly, the great opportunity had come and found him ready.

He had entered the camp an unnoticed country lad, carrying provisions to
his brothers. Now every soldier in the camp was shouting his name; the
king was ready to shower rewards and honors upon him. He was the hero of
the hour.

The pleasant days in the Bethlehem fields were now over for David. There
was no thought of allowing him to return to his work. No, the king
declared he must remain as a soldier in the army, ready to defend his
king and country. Though he was still a mere boy he was placed in
command and set over the men of war.

It was much more difficult work than looking after sheep, and as time
went on and dangers and difficulties beset him on every side, David must
often have longed for the old quiet days on the hillside. His path was
rough and dangerous now, and sad to say his feet often slipped and he
wandered far astray, but always he held fast to his faith in God, and
found his way back to the straight path.

As the years went by Samuel's promise was at last fulfilled, and David
was made king over God's chosen people. David had often forgotten God,
but God had never forgotten him.

What a change it was from the days when he wandered about the fields in
his sheepskin coat, often sleeping out under the stars, possessing only
his harp and his shepherd's sling.

Now he wore royal robes, and there was a crown of pure gold upon his
head. Instead of the starry sky for a roof, he now lived in a palace of
cedar wood.

And he knew surely that it was God who had taken care of him; that it
was God who had set the crown of gold upon his head, the seal to the
promise made in that long ago day when the old prophet had poured the
anointing oil upon the head of the wandering shepherd boy.

Looking back, he saw that he had made many mistakes, that his soul was
stained with many sins; but he knew, too, that God would listen when he
prayed, "Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow."

As a little shepherd lad he had cared far more for his sheep than his
own safety. He had always been ready to risk his life for them. So now,
when he became king, his people were just as precious to him as his
sheep had been. He cared for them with all his heart. He was prepared to
suffer himself rather than any hurt should come near them.

So perhaps he was, after all, not unworthy to stand as a type of the
great King, "great David's greater Son," the little Baby who was to be
born in the town of Bethlehem, the Good Shepherd who was to lay down His
life for His sheep.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of David the Shepherd Boy, by Amy Steedman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAVID THE SHEPHERD BOY ***

***** This file should be named 25486.txt or 25486.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/4/8/25486/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, David Wilson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
