sprung from Ephraim, unless they find them in America; for the midst
of all other parts of the earth is inhabited by mixed races, who have
sprung from various sources; while here an almost boundless country
was secluded from the rest of the world, and inhabited by a race of
men, evidently of the same origin, although as evidently divided into
many nations. Now, the Scriptures cannot be broken; therefore, these
Scriptures must apply to America, for the plainest of reasons: they
can apply to no other place.

Now, secondly, we are to prove that God revealed himself to the seed
of Joseph or Ephraim--their location we have already proved--dwelling
in America. For this, we quote Hosea, viii, 12; speaking of Ephraim,
he says by the spirit of prophecy: "I have written to him the great
things of my law, but they were counted as a strange thing." This is
proof positive and needs no comment, that the great truths of Heaven
were revealed unto Ephraim, and were counted as a strange thing.

Third: Were these writings to come forth just previously to the
gathering of Israel? Answer: They were, according to Ezekiel,
thirty-seventh chapter, where God commanded him to "Take one stick,
and write upon it For Judah, and the children of Israel his
companions; then take another stick, and write upon it For Joseph, the
stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions; and
join them one to another, into one stick, and they shall become one in
thine hand. And when the children of thy people shall speak unto thee,
saying, Wilt not thou show us what thou meanest by these? say unto
them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will take the stick of
Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his
fellows, and will put them with him, even with the stick of Judah, and
make them one stick, and they shall be one in mine hand; and the
sticks whereon thou writest shall be in thine hand before their eyes.
And say unto them, Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, I will take the
children of Israel from among the heathen, whither they be gone, and
will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land;
and I will make them one nation in the land upon the mountains of
Israel; and one king shall be king to them all: and they shall be no
more two nations, neither shall they be divided into two kingdoms any
more at all."

Now, nothing can be more plain than the above prophecy; there are
presented two writings, the one to Ephraim, the other to Judah; that
of Ephraim is to be brought forth by the Lord, and put with that of
Judah, and they are to become one in their testimony, and grow
together in this manner, in order to bring about the gathering of
Israel. The eighty-fifth Psalm is very plain on the subject: speaking
of the restoration of Israel to their own land, it says, "Mercy and
Truth are met together; Righteousness and peace have kissed each
other. _Truth shall spring out of the earth:_ and Righteousness shall
look down from heaven. Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good;
and our land shall yield her increase. Righteousness shall go before
Him, and shall set us in the way of His steps." Now the Savior, while
praying for His disciples, said: "Sanctify them through Thy
_truth_--Thy _word_ is _truth_." From these passages we learn, that
His word is to spring out of the earth, while Righteousness looks down
from heaven. And the next thing that follows is, that Israel are set
in the way of His steps, and partaking of the fruit of their own land.
Jeremiah, xxxiii, 6, speaking of the final return from captivity of
both Judah and Israel, says: "I will reveal unto them the abundance of
peace and truth." And Isaiah, speaking of the everlasting covenant,
which should gather them, makes this extraordinary and very remarkable
expression: "Their seed shall be known amongst the Gentiles, and their
offspring among the people." Now, reader, let me ask, can any one tell
whether the Indians of America are of Israel, unless by revelation
from God? Therefore this was a hidden mystery, which it was necessary
to reveal in time for their gathering.

So much, then, we have produced from the Scriptures, in proof of a
work, like the book of Mormon, making its appearance in these days; to
say nothing of Isaiah, xxix. But says one, "What is the use of the
Book of Mormon, even if it be true?" I answer: First, it brings to
light an important history, before unknown to man. Second, it reveals
the origin of the American Indians, which was before a mystery. Third,
it contains important prophecies, yet to be fulfilled, which
immediately concern the present generation. Fourth, it contains much
plainness in regard to points of doctrine, insomuch that all may
understand, and see eye to eye, if they take pains to read it.

"But what are its proofs, as to chosen witnesses who testify to its
translation by inspiration?" For this testimony, I refer the reader to
the testimony of the witnesses in the first page of the Book of
Mormon; he will there find as positive testimony as has ever been
found in the other Scriptures concerning any truth which God ever
revealed. Men there testify, not only that they have seen and handled
the plates, but that an angel of God came down from heaven, and
presented the plates before them, while the glory of God shone round
about them, and the voice of God spoke from heaven, and told them that
these things were true, and had been translated by the gift and power
of God, and commanded them to bear record of the same to all people.

Blessed be the Lord God of our fathers! He has visited His people, and
the dayspring from on high has dawned upon our benighted world once
more; for no sooner had the Book been translated, and men begun to
bear record of the same, than the Angel of the Lord came down from
heaven again, and commissioned men to preach the Gospel to every
creature, and to baptize with water for the remission of sins. No
sooner did the people begin to believe their testimony, and be
baptized, than the Holy Ghost fell upon them, through the laying on of
hands in the name of Jesus; and the heavens were opened: and while
some had the ministering of angels, others began to speak in other
tongues, and prophesy. From that time forth, many of them were healed
by the laying on of hands in the name of Jesus; and thus mightily grew
the word of God, and prevailed. And thus, thousands have been raised
up to testify that they do know for themselves, and are not dependent
on the testimony of any man, for the truth of these things, for these
signs follow them that believe. And when a man believes the truth,
through the testimony of God's witnesses, and then these signs follow,
not only them, but him also; if he has the ministering of angels, if
he has been healed, or heals others, by the laying on of hands in the
name of Jesus, or if he speaks in other tongues, or prophesies, he
knows it for himself; and thus is fulfilled the saying of Scripture,
"If any man do my will, he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be
of God." Thus faith comes by hearing, and knowledge by obeying; but
hearing comes by preaching, and preaching comes by sending; as it is
written--"How shall they preach, except they be sent?"

But there are many who say--"Show us a sign, and we will believe."
Remember, faith comes not by signs, but signs come by faith. Gifts
were not given to make men believe; but what saith the Scripture?
"Gifts are for the edifying of the Church." If otherwise, why was it
not written--"Faith comes by miracles," instead of "Faith comes by
hearing?" I always take it for granted, that a man or woman who comes
demanding a sign in order to make them believe, belongs to a wicked
and adulterous generation, at least, to say no worse; for any person
who will go to Jesus, with a pure heart, desiring and praying in
faith, that he may know the truth concerning these things, the Lord
will reveal it to him, and he shall know, and shall bear testimony,
for by the Spirit of God they shall know truth from error: as it is
written--"My sheep hear my voice." And he that will not come unto
Jesus by faith, shall never know the truth, until, too late, he finds
the harvest is over, and the summer is ended, and his soul not saved.

Thus the religion of Jesus, unlike all other religious systems, bears
its own weight, and brings certainty and knowledge, leaving no room
for imposition. And now I say unto all people, Come unto the Father in
the name of Jesus; doubt not, but be believing, as in days of old, and
ask in faith for whatsoever you stand in need of; ask not that you may
consume it on your lusts, but ask with a firmness not to be shaken,
that you will yield to no temptation, but that you will keep His
commandments, as fast as He makes them manifest unto you; and if ye do
this, and He reveals to you that He has sent us with a new and
everlasting covenant, and commanded us to preach, and baptize, and
build up His Church as in days of old, then come forward and obey the
truth; but if you do not know, or are not satisfied that He has sent
us, then do not embrace the doctrine we preach. Thus to your own
master you shall stand or fall; and one day you shall know, yea, in
that great day, when every knee shall bow, then shall you know that
God has sent us with the truth, to prune His vineyard for the last
time, with a mighty pruning.

We shall now introduce much circumstantial evidence, from American
antiquities, and from the traditions of the natives, etc.

First, says Mr. Boudinot: "It is said among their principal or beloved
men, that they have it handed down from their ancestors, that the book
which the white people have, was once theirs: that while they had it
they prospered exceedingly, etc. They also say, that their fathers
were possessed of an extraordinary Divine Spirit, by which they
foretold future events, and controlled the common course of nature;
and this they transmitted to their offspring, on condition of their
obeying the sacred laws; that they did, by these means, bring down
showers of blessings upon their beloved people; but that this power,
for a long time past, had entirely ceased." Colonel James Smith, in
his journal, while a prisoner among the natives, says: "They have a
tradition, that in the beginning of this continent, the angels or
heavenly inhabitants, as they call them, frequently visited the
people, and talked with their forefathers, and gave directions how to
pray."

Mr. Boudinot, in his able work, remarks concerning their language:
"Their language, in its roots, idiom, and particular construction,
appears to have the _whole genius_ of the Hebrew; and what is very
remarkable, and well worthy of serious attention, has most of the
peculiarities of that language." There is a tradition related by an
aged Indian, of the Stockbridge tribe, that their fathers were once in
possession of a "Sacred Book," which was handed down from generation
to generation; and at last hid in the earth, since which time they had
been under the feet of their enemies. But these oracles were to be
restored to them again; and _then_ they would triumph over their
enemies, and regain their rights and privileges. Mr. Boudinot, after
recording many traditions similar to the above, at length remarks:
"Can any man read this short account of Indian traditions, drawn from
tribes of various nations; from the west to the east, and from the
south to the north, wholly separated from each other, written by
different authors of the best character, both for knowledge and
integrity, possessing the best means of information, at various and
distant times, without any possible communication with each other; and
yet suppose that all this is the effect of chance, accident, or
design, from a love of the marvelous, or a premeditated intention of
deceiving, and thereby ruining their well established reputation? Can
any one carefully, and with deep reflection, consider and compare
these traditions and nations with the position and circumstances of
the long lost ten tribes of Israel, without at least drawing some
presumptive inferences in favor of these wandering natives being
descended from the ten tribes of Israel?"

"Joseph Merrick, Esq., a highly respectable character in Pitsfield,
Mass., gave the following account: That in 1815, he was leveling some
ground under and near an old wood-shed standing on a place of his,
situated on _Indian Hill_. He ploughed and conveyed away old chips and
earth to some depth. After the work was done, walking over the place,
he discovered, near where the earth had been dug the deepest, a black
strap, as it appeared, about six inches in length, and one and a half
in breadth, and about the thickness of a leather trace to a harness.
He perceived it had, at each end, a loop of some hard substance,
probably for the purpose of carrying it. He conveyed it to his house,
and threw it into an old tool box. He afterwards found it thrown out
at the door, and again conveyed it to the box.

"After some time, he thought he would examine it; but in attempting to
cut it, found it as hard as bone; he succeeded, however, in getting it
open, and found it was formed of two pieces of thick rawhide, sewed
and made water-tight with the sinews of some animal, and gummed over;
and in the fold was contained _four_ folded pieces of parchment. They
were of a dark yellow hue, and contained some kind of writing. The
neighbors coming in to see the strange discovery, tore one of the
pieces to atoms, in the true Hun and Vandal style. The other three
pieces Mr. Merrick saved, and sent them to Cambridge, where they were
examined, and discovered to have been written with a pen, in _Hebrew_,
plain and legible. The writing on the three remaining pieces of
parchment, was quotations from the Old Testament. See Deut., vi, from
4--9; also xi, 13--21; and Exodus, xiii, 11--16, to which the reader
can refer, if he has the curiosity to read this most interesting
discovery.

"On the banks of White River, in Arkansas Territory, have been found
ruins erected no doubt by an enlightened population, of the most
extraordinary character, on account of their dimensions, and the
materials of which they were erected. One of these works is a wall of
earth, which encloses an area of six hundred and forty acres, equal to
a mile square, and having, in its centre, the foundation of a large
circular building, or temple. Another, yet more strange, and more
extensive, consists of the foundations of a great city, whose streets,
crossing each other at right angles, are easily traced through the
mighty forest. And besides these are found the foundations of
_houses_, made of _burnt_ bricks, like the bricks of the present time.
These have been traced to the extent of a mile."

The foregoing is taken from Priest's American Antiquities, and from
the same work we extract the following, page 246:

"_Ruins of the City of Otolum, discovered in North America_.--In a
letter of C. S. Rafinesque, whom we have before quoted, to a
correspondent in Europe, we find the following: 'Some years ago, the
Society of Geography, in Paris, offered a large premium for a voyage
to Guatemala, and for a new survey of the antiquities of Yucatan and
Chiapa, chiefly those fifteen miles from Palenque.'"

"I have," says this author, "restored to them the true name of
_Otolum_, which is yet the name of the stream running through the
ruins. They were surveyed by Captain Del Rio, in 1787, an account of
which was published in English, in 1822. This account describes partly
the ruins of a _stone_ city, of no less dimensions than seventy-five
miles in circuit; length, thirty-two, and breadth twelve miles, full
of palaces, monuments, statues, and inscriptions: one of the earliest
seats of American civilization; about equal to Thebes of ancient
Egypt."

It is stated in the _Family Magazine_, No. 34, p. 266, for 1833, as
follows: "Public attention has been recently excited, respecting the
ruins of an ancient city, found in Guatemala. It would seem that these
ruins are now being explored, and much curious and valuable matter, in
a literary and historical point of view, is anticipated. We deem the
present a most auspicious moment, now that the public attention is
turned to the subject, to spread its contents before our readers, as
an introduction to future discoveries, during the researches now in
progress."

The following are some of the particulars, as related by Captain Del
Rio, who partially examined them, as above related, in 1787: "From
Palenque, the last town northward in the province of _Ciudad Real de
Chiapa_, taking a southwesterly direction, and ascending a ridge of
high land, that divides the kingdom of Guatemala from Yucatan, at the
distance of six miles, is the little river _Micol_, whose waters flow
in a westerly direction, and unite with the great river _Tulijah_,
which bends its course towards the province of _Tobasco_. Having
passed Micol, the ascent begins, and at half a league, or a mile and a
half, the traveler crosses a little stream called Otolum; from this
point heaps of stone ruins are discovered, which render the roads very
difficult for another half league, when you gain the height whereon
the stone houses are situated, being still fourteen in number in one
place, some more dilapidated than others, yet still having many of
their apartments perfectly discernible. These stand on a rectangular
area, three hundred yards in breadth by four hundred and fifty in
length, which is a fraction over fifty-six rods wide, and eighty-four
rods long, being in the whole circuit, two hundred and eighty rods,
which is three fourths of a mile, and a trifle over. This area
presents a plain at the base of the highest mountain forming the
ridge. In the centre of this plain is situated the largest of the
structures which has been, as yet, discovered among these ruins. It
stands on a mound, or pyramid, twenty yards high, which is sixty feet,
or nearly four rods, in perpendicular altitude, which gives it a lofty
and beautiful majesty, as if it were a temple suspended in the sky.
This is surrounded by other edifices, namely, five to the northward,
four to the southward, one to the southwest, and three to the
eastward, fourteen in all.

"In all directions, the fragments of other fallen buildings are seen
extending along the mountain, that stretches east and west either way
from these buildings, as if it were the great temple of worship, or
their government-house, around which they built their city, and where
dwelt their kings and officers of state. At this place was found a
subterranean stone aqueduct, of great solidity and durability, which
in its course passes beneath the largest building."

Let it be understood, this city of Otolum, the ruins of which are so
immense, is in North, not South America, in the same latitude with the
island of Jamaica, which is about eighteen degrees north of the
equator, being on the highest ground between the northern end of the
Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean, where the continent narrows
towards the Isthmus of Darien, and is about eight hundred miles south
of New Orleans.

The discovery of these ruins, and also of many others, equally
wonderful, in the same country, is just commencing to arouse the
attention of the schools of Europe, which hitherto have denied that
America could boast of her antiquities. But these immense ruins are
now being explored under the direction of scientific persons, a
history of which, in detail, will, doubtless, be forthcoming in due
time; two volumes of which, in manuscript, we are informed, have
already been written, and cannot but be received with enthusiasm by
Americans.

A gentleman who was living near the town of Cincinnati, in 1826, on
the upper level, had occasion to sink a well for his accommodation; he
persevered in digging to the depth of eighty feet, without finding
water; but still persisting in the attempt, his workmen found
themselves obstructed by a substance, which resisted their labor,
though evidently not stone. They cleared the surface and sides from
the earth bedded around it, when there appeared the stump of a tree,
three feet in diameter, and two feet high, which had been cut down
with an ax. The blows of the ax were yet visible. It was nearly of the
color and apparent character of coal, but had not the friable and
fusible quality of that substance. Ten feet below, the water sprang
up, and the well is now in constant supply and high repute.

In Morse's Universal Geography, first volume, p. 142, the discovery of
the stump is corroborated: "In digging a well in Cincinnati, the stump
of a tree was found in a sound state, ninety feet below the surface;
and in digging another well, at the same place, another stump was
found, at ninety four feet below the surface, which had evident marks
of the ax; and on its top there appeared as if some iron tool had been
consumed by rust."

We might fill a volume with accounts of American antiquities, all
going to show that this country has been inhabited by a people who
possessed a knowledge of the arts and sciences, who built cities,
cultivated the earth, and who were in possession of a written
language. But the things which we have here introduced are abundantly
sufficient for our purpose. If a few characters in Hebrew have been
found in the earth in America, written on parchment, then it is just
as easy to admit that a whole volume has been found in the earth in
America, written on plates, in Egyptian characters. The astonishing
facts of the stumps found eighty or ninety feet under ground at
Cincinnati, and similar discoveries in many other parts of North and
South America, such as buried cities, and other antiquities, all go to
prove that there has been a mighty convulsion and revolution, not only
of nations, but of nature; and such a convulsion as is nowhere else so
reasonably accounted for, as in the following extraordinary and
wonderful account of events, which transpired in this country, during
the crucifixion of Messiah, which we extract from the Book of Mormon,
Nephi, v, 2-11:

"And it came to pass, in the thirty and fourth year, in the first
month, in the fourth day of the month, there arose a great storm, such
an one as never had been known in all the land; and there was also a
great and terrible tempest; and there was terrible thunder, insomuch
that it did shake the whole earth, as if it was about to divide
asunder; and there were exceeding sharp lightnings, such as never had
been known in all the land. And the city of Zarahemla did take fire;
and the city of Moroni did sink into the depths of the sea, and the
inhabitants thereof were drowned; and the earth was carried up upon
the city of Moronihah, that, in the place of the city thereof, there
became a great mountain; and there was a great and terrible
destruction in the land southward. But, behold, there was a more great
and terrible destruction in the land northward; for, behold, the whole
face of the land was changed, because of the tempest, and the
whirlwinds, and the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the exceeding
great quaking of the whole earth; and the highways were broken up, and
the level roads were spoiled, and many smooth places became rough, and
many great and notable cities were sunk, and many were burned, and
many were shook till the buildings thereof had fallen to the earth,
and the inhabitants thereof were slain, and the places were left
desolate; and there were some cities which remained, but the damage
thereof was exceeding great, and there were many in them who were
slain, and there were some who were carried away in the whirlwind, and
whither they went, no man knoweth, save they know that they were
carried away; and thus the face of the whole earth became deformed,
because of the tempests, and the thunderings, and the lightnings, and
the quaking of the earth. And, behold, the rocks were rent in twain;
they were broken up upon the face of the whole earth, insomuch that
they were found in broken fragments, and in seams, and in cracks, upon
all the face of the land.

"And it came to pass, that when the thunderings, and the lightnings,
and the storm, and the tempest, and the quakings of the earth did
cease--for, behold, they did last for about the space of three hours:
and it was said by some that the time was greater; nevertheless, all
these great and terrible things were done in about the space of three
hours; and then, behold, there was darkness upon the face of the land.

"And it came to pass that there was a thick darkness upon all the face
of the land, insomuch that the inhabitants thereof, who had not
fallen, could feel the vapor of darkness; and there could be no light
because of the darkness, neither candles, neither torches; neither
could there be fire kindled with their fine and exceeding dry wood, so
that there could not be any light at all; and there was not any light
seen, neither fire, nor glimmer, neither the sun, nor the moon, nor
the stars, for so great were the mists of darkness which were upon the
face of the land.

"And it came to pass, that it did last for the space of three days,
that there was no light seen; and there was great mourning and
howling, and weeping among all the people continually; yea, great were
the groanings of the people, because of the darkness and great
destruction which had come upon them. And in one place they were heard
to cry, saying, O that we had repented before this great and terrible
day, and then would our brethren have been spared, and they would not
have been burned in that great city of Zarahemla! And in another place
they were heard to cry and mourn, saying, O that we had repented
before this great and terrible day, and had not killed and Stoned the
prophets and cast them out; then would our mothers, and our fair
daughters, and our children have been spared, and not have been buried
up in that great city Moronihah; and thus were the howlings of the
people great and terrible.

"And it came to pass, that there was a voice heard among all the
inhabitants of the earth upon the face of this land, crying, Wo, wo,
wo unto this people; wo unto the inhabitants of the whole earth,
except they shall repent, for the devil laugheth, and his angels
rejoice, because of the slain of the fair sons and daughters of my
people; and it is because of their iniquity and abominations that they
are fallen. Behold, that great city of Zarahemla have I burned with
fire, and the inhabitants thereof. And behold, that great city Moroni
have I caused to be sunk in the depth of the sea, and the inhabitants
thereof to be drowned. And behold, that great city Moronihah have I
covered with earth, and the inhabitants thereof, to hide their
iniquities and their abominations from before my face, that the blood
of the prophets and the saints shall not come any more unto me against
them. And behold the city of Gilgal have I caused to be sunk, and the
inhabitants thereof to be buried up in the depths of the earth: yea,
and the city of Onihah and the inhabitants thereof, and the city of
Mocum and the inhabitants thereof, and the city of Jerusalem and the
inhabitants thereof, and waters have I caused to come up in the stead
thereof, to hide their wickedness and abominations from before my
face, that the blood of the prophets and the saints shall not come up
any more unto me against them. And behold the city of Gadiandi, and
the city of Gadiomnah, and the city of Jacob, and the city of
Gimgimno, all these have I caused to be sunk, and made hills and
valleys in the places thereof; and the inhabitants thereof have I
buried up in the depths of the earth, to hide their wickedness and
abominations from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and
saints should not come up anymore unto me against them. And behold
that great city of Jacobugath, which was inhabited by the people of
the king of Jacob, have I caused to be burned with fire, because of
their sins and their wickedness, which was above all the wickedness of
the whole earth, because of their secret murders and combinations; for
it was they that did destroy the peace of my people and the government
of the land: therefore I did cause them to be burned, to destroy them
from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and the saints
should not come up unto me any more against them. And behold, the city
of Laman, and the city of Josh, and the city of Gad, and tho city of
Kishkumen, have I caused to be burned with fire, and the inhabitants
thereof, because of their wickedness in casting out the prophets, and
stoning those whom I did send to declare unto them concerning their
wickedness and their abominations; and because they did cast them all
out, that there were none righteous among them, I did send down fire
and destroy them, that their wickedness and abominations might be hid
from before my face, that the blood of the prophets and the saints
whom I sent among them might not cry unto me from the ground against
them; and many great destructions have I caused to come upon this land
and upon this people, because of their wickedness and their
abominations.

"O, all ye that are spared, because ye were more righteous than they,
will ye not now return unto me, and repent of your sins, and be
converted, that I may heal you? Yea, verily, I say unto you, if ye
will come unto me, ye shall have eternal life. Behold, mine arm of
mercy is extended towards you, and whomsoever will come, him will I
receive; and blessed are those who come unto me. Behold, I am Jesus
Christ, the son of God. I created the heavens and the earth, and all
things that in them are. I was with the Father from the beginning. I
am in the Father, and the Father in me; and in me hath the Father
glorified his name. I came unto my own, and my own received me not.
And the Scriptures concerning my coming are fulfilled. And as many as
have received me, to them have I given to become the sons of God; and
even so will I to as many as shall believe on my name; for, behold, by
me redemption cometh, and in me is the law of Moses fulfilled. I am
the light and life of the world. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning
and the end. And ye shall offer up unto me no more the shedding of
blood: yea, your sacrifices and your burnt offerings shall be done
away, for I will accept none of your sacrifices and your burnt
offerings; and ye shall offer, for a sacrifice unto me, a broken heart
and a contrite spirit. And whoso cometh unto me with a broken heart
and a contrite spirit, him will I baptize with fire and with the Holy
Ghost, even as the Lamanites, because of their faith in me, at the
time of their conversion, were baptized with fire and with the Holy
Ghost, and they knew it not. Behold, I have come unto the world to
bring redemption unto the world, to save the world from sin:
therefore, whoso repenteth and cometh unto me as a little child, him
will I receive; for of such is the kingdom of God. Behold, for such I
have laid down my life, and have taken it up again: therefore, repent
and come unto me, ye ends of the earth, and be saved.

"And now, behold it came to pass, that all the people of the land did
hear these sayings; and did witness of it. And after these sayings,
there was silence in the land for the space of many hours: for so
great was the astonishment of the people that they did cease lamenting
and howling for the loss of their kindred which had been slain;
therefore there was silence in all the land for the space of many
hours.

"And it came to pass, that there came a voice again unto the people,
and all the people did hear, and did witness of it, saying, O ye
people of these great cities which have fallen, who are descendants of
Jacob; yea, who are of the house of Israel, how oft have I gathered
you as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and have
nourished you. And again, how oft would I have gathered you, as a hen
gathereth her chickens under her wings; yea, O ye people of the house
of Israel, who have fallen; yea, O ye people of the house of Israel;
ye that dwell at Jerusalem, as ye that have fallen; yea, how oft would
I have gathered you, as a hen gathereth her chickens, and ye would
not. O, ye house of Israel, whom I have spared, how oft will I gather
you, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, if ye will
repent and return unto me with full purpose of heart. But if not, O
house of Israel, the places of your dwellings shall become desolate,
until the time of the fulfilling of the covenant to your fathers.

"And now it came to pass, that after the people had heard these words,
behold, they began to weep and howl again, because of the loss of
their kindred and friends. And it came to pass that thus did three
days pass away. And it was in the morning, and the darkness dispersed
from off the face of the land, and the earth did cease to tremble, and
the rocks did cease to rend, and the dreadful groanings did cease, and
all the tumultuous noises did pass away, and the earth did cleave
together again, that it stood; and the mourning, and the weeping, and
the wailing of the people who were spared alive, did cease, and their
mourning was turned into joy, and their lamentations into the praise
and thanksgiving unto the Lord Jesus Christ, their Redeemer. And thus
far were the Scriptures fulfilled, which had been spoken by the
prophets."

Here, then, is an account which shows, clearly and definitely, how and
when the American antiquities became buried; how the stumps of trees
were placed eighty or ninety feet under ground; how cities were sunk,
and overwhelmed; how mountains fell and valleys rose; how the rocks
were rent, and how the whole face of the continent became altered and
deformed. We now close this subject by saying to all the people, if
you wish information on the antiquities of America; if you wish
historical, prophetical, or doctrinal information of the highest
importance, read carefully the Book of Mormon.




CHAPTER V.

THE RESURRECTION OF THE SAINTS, AND THE RESTORATION OF ALL THINGS
SPOKEN BY THE PROPHETS.


This is one of the most important subjects upon which the human mind
can contemplate; and one perhaps as little understood, in the present
age, as any other now lying over the face of prophecy. But, however
neglected at the present time, it was once the groundwork of the
faith, hope, and joy of the Saints. It was a correct understanding of
this subject, and firm belief in it, that influenced all their
movements. Their minds once fastening upon it, they could not be
shaken from their purposes; their faith was firm, their joy constant,
and their hope like an anchor to the soul, both sure and steadfast,
reaching to that within the veil. It was this that enabled them to
rejoice in the midst of tribulation, persecution, sword, and flame;
and in view of this, they took joyfully the spoiling of their goods,
and gladly wandered as strangers and pilgrims on the earth. For they
sought a country, a city, and an inheritance that none but a saint
ever thought of, understood, or even hoped for.

Now, we can never understand precisely what is meant by restoration,
unless we understand what is lost or taken away; for instance, when we
offer to restore anything to a man, it is as much as to say he once
possessed it, but had lost it, and we propose to replace, or put him
in possession of, that which he once had; therefore, when a Prophet
speaks of the restoration of all things, he means that all things have
undergone a change, and are to be again restored to their primitive
order, even as they first existed.

First, then, it becomes necessary to take a view of creation, as it
rolled in purity from the hand of its Creator; and if we can discover
the true state in which it then existed, and understand the changes
