    is determined not to leave me_."[A]

[Footnote A: Page 491.--Let it be remembered that the Josephites in
this work quoted accepted Mr. Tullidge as their historian. Italics are
mine. R.]

Mr. Tullidge quotes this passage differently from what it is written
in the history of Joseph Smith; what authority he has for doing it he
does not say. In Joseph's own history it is written:

    I want Hyrum to live to avenge my blood, but he is determined not
    to leave me.[A]

[Footnote A: Hist. Joseph Smith, _Mill. Star_, Vol. XXIV, p. 332.]

But though Mr. Tullidge misquotes this passage, there is evidence in
addition to his word, that Joseph did desire and even ordained Hyrum
Smith to succeed him. At the October conference following the
martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum, and the 8th of August meeting at which
the Twelve were recognized as the presiding quorum in the church,
President Young in a discourse said:

    If Hyrum had lived he would not have stood between Joseph and the
    Twelve, but he would have stood for Joseph. Did Joseph ordain any
    man to take his place? He did. Who was it? It was Hyrum. But Hyrum
    fell a martyr before Joseph did.[A]

[Footnote A: _Times and Seasons_, Vol. V, p. 683.]

If the prophet Joseph wanted Hyrum to lead the church, as asserted by
Mr. Tullidge, and had "ordained" him to that position--according to
the statement of President Young--what becomes of the claims made in
behalf of "young Joseph" to an appointment and ordination to lead the
church? In desiring and ordaining Hyrum to fill his place had the
prophet forgotten the "anointing" and "ordination" of his son? This
clearly disposes of the claims of "young Joseph" through any
appointment by his father; for if the prophet Joseph appointed and
ordained his brother Hyrum to succeed him, he did not appoint or
ordain his son Joseph to do the same thing. If ever there was a case
of a claim not proven, Mr. Smith's claim of appointment to the
Presidency of the church through his father is that case.

Having disposed of Mr. Smith's claim to the right of the Presidency of
the church so far as it is based upon an appointment through his
father, let us now take up his second claim, viz:

_The position is his by lineage--his birth-right_.

There are two offices and only two, in the church which descend by
lineage from father to son: the office of patriarch and that of
bishop. Of patriarchs it is said:

    It is the duty of the Twelve, in all large branches of the Church,
    to ordain evangelical[A] ministers, as they shall be designated
    unto them by revelation. The order of this priesthood was
    confirmed to be handed down from father to son, and rightly
    belongs to the literal descendants of the chosen seed to whom the
    promises were made. This order was instituted in the days of Adam,
    and came down by lineage in the following manner.[B]

[Footnote A: "An evangelist is a patriarch, even the oldest man of the
blood of Joseph or of the seed of Abraham."--_Joseph Smith_ (Hist. of
Joseph, under date of June 27, 1839).]

[Footnote B: Doc. and Cov, cvii, 39, 40.]

The revelation then traces the lineage from Adam to Noah. This passage
applies solely to patriarchs in the church, and yet Josephites attempt
in their arguments to make it apply to the Presidency of the church.
They say:

    The law of lineage points unmistakably to young Joseph as the
    legal successor of his father. The law in the Doctrine and
    Covenants informs us that.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Successor_, pp. 4, 5.]

And then follows part of the foregoing quotation--beginning with "The
order of this priesthood was confirmed to be handed down from father
to son, etc."--being careful to omit the clause of the passage which
shows it to refer to evangelists or patriarchs only.[A] This is the
way the passage is used by the writer of the Josephite tract called
_The Successor_. Another writer, or perhaps the same one in another
place, thus quotes it in support of "young Joseph's" claims:

[Footnote A: _The Successor_, p. 4.]

    The order [_including offices_] of this Priesthood was confirmed
    to be handed down from father to son, and rightly belongs to the
    literal descendants of the chosen seed, to whom the promises were
    made. This order [_not the Priesthood, but the offices therein_]
    was instituted in the days of Adam, and came down by lineage in
    the following manner: From Adam to Seth [_Abel having been
    slain_].[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX. p. 337.]

I have written the words inserted by the Josephite writer in brackets
in italics, that they may all the more readily be noticed. The
Josephites are not only guilty of making a clear misapplication of
this passage, but they read into the revelation by their inserted
words in brackets what is not there, and what was never intended to be
conveyed even by inference. The statement of the revelation is that
the patriarchal order of priesthood was confirmed to be handed down
from father to son, etc.; and not the offices in the priesthood as the
Josephite writer quoted above affirms by his bracketed inserted words
in the revelation.

I cannot think this is merely a mistake on the part of Josephite
writers, the matter is so plainly a perversion of scripture, that it
amounts to downright dishonesty.

In like manner Josephites misapply a passage in the writings of
Abraham,[A] where Abraham is represented as seeking after the
patriarchal order of priesthood which was his by virtue of his
lineage. Abraham sought for his rights as a patriarch--which right
comes down from father to son, but Josephite writers make his words
apply to the office of high priests in general, instead of confining
it to patriarchs.

[Footnote A: Pearl of Great Price, Book of Abraham.]

Of the second office in the church which descends from father to
son--the office of bishop--the revelations of God provide that the
literal descendants of Aaron--among the first born of his sons--have a
right by virtue of their lineage to that position, if at any time they
can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the
Lord. But even in that case they must be designated by the Presidency
of the Melchisedek priesthood, found worthy, and ordained by that
Presidency, or by its direction, otherwise they are not legally
authorized to officiate in that calling.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. sec. lxviii.]

These are the only offices in the priesthood which descend by lineage;
yet Josephite writers quote the following in support of "young
Joseph's" claims to the Presidency by lineage:

    Therefore thus saith the Lord unto you [Joseph the martyr][A] with
    whom the Priesthood hath continued through the lineage of your
    fathers, for ye are _lawful heirs according to the flesh_, and
    have been hid from the world with Christ in God; therefore your
    life and the Priesthood hath remained, and must needs _remain_[B]
    through you and your lineage, until the restoration of all things
    spoken of by the mouths of all the holy prophets since the world
    began.[C]

[Footnote A: Words in brackets are the Josephite writer's.]

[Footnote B: Italics in the above are Josephite's.]

[Footnote C: Doc. and Cov. sec. lxviii.]

It is only by inserting the words, "Joseph the martyr," into the
revelation--as the Josephite writer has done--that the passage can be
made to apply at all to the prophet Joseph personally. The revelation
quoted is one that was given, explaining the parable of the wheat and
tares, and begins thus:

    Verily thus saith the Lord unto you my servants, concerning the
    parable of the wheat and of the tares, etc.

Throughout the Lord addresses his "servants" and not Joseph Smith
personally. Hence the statement in the passage that the priesthood had
continued through the lineage of their fathers; that they were lawful
heirs according to the flesh; that it must remain through them and
their lineage until the restoration of all things--was a statement
concerning, and a promise made as much to the other elders addressed
on that occasion and their posterity, as to Joseph Smith and his
posterity; and the insertion in the passage of "Joseph the martyr" in
order to make the passage apply to him personally and to his posterity
alone, is another instance of a Josephite writer's trickery.

Moreover, the statement and promise made to all the servants of God to
whom the revelation is addressed, is in relation to the
priesthood--not the Presidency of the priesthood, or the Presidency of
the church, or any other office in the priesthood or church of Christ.
Priesthood, and office in the priesthood are two things quite
distinct; and even if a man inherited the priesthood of his fathers,
it does not follow that he would inherit their office, which must come
to him by appointment as the law of the Lord directs, and hereafter to
be considered.

Josephites are at great pains to trace in the Book of Mormon the
handing down of records and other sacred things from father to son,[A]
and this to prove--what? That the office of President of the church or
leader of the people, descends by right of lineage from father to son!
That is, because the records of a people are handed down from father
to son, therefore the Presidency of the church descends by lineage
also! What can be more absurd than this? Nor does it help our
opponents out of the absurdity because some of those who held the
records among the Nephites were presiding high priests over the
church. Its only significance is that in those particular cases the
office of presiding high priest and that of recorder were united.

[Footnote A: See _Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX., pp. 358-9-0.]

Moreover, in the matter of the records descending from father to son
the chain of succession is frequently broken, and in some instances
those breaks make a divergence from the direct line. Out of sixteen
transfers of the records and other sacred things from one person to
another, from the time Lehi left Jerusalem to the coming of Messiah to
the Nephites--in seven instances the transfer is _not_ made from
father to son! In three instances the transfer is made to brothers
instead of from father to son; in two cases the transfer is made to
nephews; and in two instances the transfer is made to those who are no
kin at all, making seven exceptions to the rule out of sixteen cases;
lacking only one of being half! Out of six transfers of the sacred
things, from the coming of Messiah among the Nephites to Joseph Smith,
three of them are not from father to son. One transfer is made to a
brother; and two are made to persons of no kin whatever to their
predecessors. Josephites say the "exceptions" in this matter "prove
the rule," but a "rule" that is violated in half the cases where it is
supposed to operate, has rather too many exceptions to prove it--they
destroy it.

Let it not be lost sight of, however, that the argument based upon the
transfer of records among the Nephites from father to son has nothing
to do with the office of President of the church descending by
lineage.

As a conclusion to my argument against the claim of Mr. Smith, that
the position of President of the church is his by right of lineage, I
quote the words of his illustrious father. In a discourse delivered on
the 27th of August, 1843, having for his text the seventh chapter of
Hebrews, and explaining the phrase in the third verse--"without
father, without mother, _without descent_," etc., he said:

    The Melchisedek priesthood holds the right from the eternal God,
    _and not by descent from father and mother;_[A] and that
    priesthood is eternal as God himself, having neither beginning of
    days nor end of life.[B]

[Footnote A: _Italics_ mine.--R.]

[Footnote B: Hist, of Joseph Smith, _Mill. Star_, Vol. XXII, p. 55.]

In the face of this how can Mr. Smith claim any right, by virtue of
lineage, to the Melchisedek priesthood, much less to the highest
office in that priesthood? His claim is denied by that very father
from whom he claims to have received it by inheritance. It occurs to
me here to ask a question: If the office of President of the church
does descend by lineage from the fathers, through the line of the
eldest sons, how is it that the "law" did not operate on the other
side of the prophet Joseph as well as on this side of him? If that
"law" had operated so--and there is no good reason why it should not
so operate, if indeed it be the "law" of the priesthood--it would have
left out not only the present Mr. Smith but even the prophet Joseph
himself. For in that event it would have come first to Joseph Smith,
the father of the prophet, who was a noble, righteous man; and then
after his death to his eldest living son, Hyrum Smith, than whom there
has been no more righteous man among all the sons of God who have
lived in this generation; and from him it would have passed on to his
eldest son, thus leaving out the prophet Joseph altogether, as well as
Mr. Smith. But let us leave a claim already disproved, and an argument
which proves too much for those who employ it.

The third claim made in behalf of Mr. Smith is:

_He was called to the position of President of the church by
"revelation" to himself_.

Of this it is not necessary to say very much. It could only be
important if sustained by the other two claims, viz: that he was
appointed by his father to succeed to the office of President of the
church; and secondly, that the office is his by lineage. Since these
two claims have been disproven, it renders his third claim of no
effect. The "revelations" to himself by which he was called, however,
are as shadowy as the arguments by which it is attempted to sustain
his two preceding claims are weak.

Those "revelations" calling him to the Presidency of the church, as I
gather them from Mr. Smith's Autobiography, are as follows: First, a
vision just after recovering from an illness, in 1853, in which was
shown to him, on the one hand, the busy marts of the world where men
struggle for place, power and distinction; and on the other hand, an
extended plain covered with the peaceful homes of a thrifty, happy
people. A personage who appeared by his side said:

    Which would you prefer, life, success and renown among the busy
    scenes that you first saw; or a place among these people without
    honors or renown? Think of it well, for the choice will be offered
    to you sooner or later, and you must be prepared to decide. Your
    decision once made you cannot recall it, and must abide the
    result.[A]

[Footnote A: Aut. of Joseph Smith, in Josephite edition, Life of
Joseph, p. 753.]

Second, one day out in an open field, while considering the question,
"why not go to Utah?" he was overshadowed by a bright cloud and he
heard the words: "Because the light in which you stand is greater than
theirs."[A]

[Footnote A: Aut. of Mr. Smith, in Josephite edition of Life of
Joseph, p. 763.]

Third, a manifestation was given to him that he must oppose polygamy;
but in what way the manifestation was given is not stated.[A]

[Footnote A: Ibid.]

Fourth, in 1859, when revolving the question in his mind: "where and
with whom shall my life-labor lie," he received a manifestation--how
he does not say--to the following effect:

    The Saints reorganizing at Zarahemla and other places, is the only
    organized portion of the Church accepted by me. I have given them
    my spirit, and will continue to do so while they remain humble and
    faithful.[A]

[Footnote A: Aut. of Mr. Smith, Life of Joseph, Josephite edition, p.
772.]

These are all the "revelations" spoken of by Mr. Smith in his
autobiography, or quoted by his supporters, hence these must be the
"revelations" to himself by which he was called to be President of the
church! Just where the "call" can be found in them is the thing which
the writer of these pages cannot see: and he challenges anybody else
to point it out.

It should be observed here, perhaps, that "revelations" to a man
personally, that he is called to be President of the church, even when
clear and definite, do not constitute him the President. Something
else is necessary. As observed elsewhere, not only must a man be
called of God, but he must be accepted by the church--"chosen by the
body, appointed and ordained to that office, and upheld by the
confidence, faith, and prayer of the church."[A] Besides having no
definite call by "revelation," even to himself (judging by the visions
and manifestations related by Mr. Smith) to preside over the church,
Mr. Smith has never complied with the conditions of the law of the
church stated above. That is, he has never been "chosen by the body
. . . . upheld by the confidence, faith and prayers of the
church"--unless, indeed, the few people, scarce a corporal's guard,
who gathered at the Josephite conference at Amboy, in 1860,
constituted out of all the tens of thousands of saints in this country
at the time, the church! What of the scores of thousands of saints in
Utah at that time who never so much as received notice of or an
invitation to be present at that "general conference of the church" at
Amboy? Surely _Messrs._ Gurley and Newkirk were somewhat at fault in
neglecting to notify the majority of the saints to attend that
conference at which the only true President of the church was to be
chosen! To call that gathering at Amboy the general conference of the
church, is as ridiculous as absurdity can make it. It is on a par,
however, with the "revelations" to Mr. Smith, calling him to be
President of the church--the one is a fitting concomitant of the
other.

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov., Sec. cvii, 22.]

Of course Josephites see the absurdity of this gathering at Amboy
being called a general conference of the church, and try to escape it
by explaining that all the rest of the saints were in transgression,
and could not call a conference--those represented at the Amboy
conference were the only saints;[A] that is, the only saints who were
"faithfully honoring and obeying the law of the Lord, and the order of
his church"[B]--so easy is it to say:

[Footnote A: _The Successor_, p. 9.]

[Footnote B: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, p. 375.]

    Orthodoxy, my lord, is _my_ doxy; and heterodoxy is some other
    man's doxy![A]

[Footnote A: Bishop Warburton's answer to Lord Sandwich when he said
he did not know the difference between heterodoxy and orthodoxy.]

I come next to the fourth and last claim made in behalf of Mr. Smith,
viz:--

_He was ordained to be President of the church by those holding legal
authority_.

Mr. Smith was ordained by Messrs. William Marks, Z. H. Gurley, Samuel
Powers and W. W. Blair; William Marks, I think, being mouth. This is
that William Marks, who in 1839, was chosen president of the stake of
Zion at Commerce, afterwards Nauvoo;--who a year or two before the
prophet Joseph's death was associated with traitors and distrusted by
the prophet;[A]--who sustained the claims of Sidney Rigdon to be
"Guardian of the church";--who at the general conference of the church
in Nauvoo, October, 1844, was rejected by the saints as president of
the Nauvoo stake of Zion, two persons only voting in his favor, the
rest against him;[B]--who as we shall see further on, in December,
1844, over his own signature said: "_The Twelve are the proper persons
to lead the church;_"--who, in 1846, as per statement of Mr. Smith
himself,[C] was associated with Mr. Strang, the apostate, in preaching
in Fulton city and vicinity, calling upon Mr. Smith and his mother at
the time;--and who in 1860 is the chief man in ordaining Mr. Smith
"President of the church"--one possessing "legal" authority to do so!
To say the least, in the light of William Marks' record, his "legal
authority" to ordain the President of the church is very questionable.

[Footnote A: In the winter of 1843, at a time of great danger to the
prophet, and when Nauvoo was in danger of being invaded from Missouri
to capture him, forty men were sworn into service as special police.
In addressing them on the occasion of their being sworn in, the
prophet, then mayor of the city, spoke of the danger he was in from
traitors living in Nauvoo, saying, "We have a Judas in our midst."
This appears to have had an unpleasant effect upon the minds of some
leading men in the church, especially upon the minds of Wm. Law and
Wm. Marks, who complained before the mayor's court about the actions
of these special police. After the investigation of their complaints
Joseph, in his journal, says: "Whatever can be the matter with these
men?" [Law and Marks] Is it that the wicked flee when no man pursueth,
that hit pigeons always flutter, that drowning men catch at straws, or
that presidents Law and Marks are absolutely traitors to the church,
that my remarks should produce such excitement in their minds? . . .
The people in the town are astonished, almost every man saying to his
neighbor, "Is it possible that brother Law or brother Marks is a
traitor, and would deliver brother Joseph into the hands of his
enemies in Missouri? If not, what can be the meaning of all this? The
righteous are as bold as a lion."--(Hist. Jos. S., _Mill. S_., Vol.
XXII, p. 631.) Yet this man of whom the prophet could write these
words, is the chief man in ordaining his son "President of the
church!"]

[Footnote B: He had previously been dropped by the high council
because he persisted in sustaining the claims of Sidney Rigdon as
against those of the Twelve.--_Times and Seasons_, Vol. V, p. 692.]

[Footnote C: See his Aut. in Josephite Ed., Life of Joseph, p. 754.]

Zenas H. Gurley for years followed fames J. Strang's leadership, and
advocated his claims. Subsequently apostatizing from him and uniting
with Mr. Jason W. Briggs, in forming the "Reorganized church." Any
authority held by Mr. Gurley previous to the death of Joseph the
prophet, was destroyed by his leaving the church of Christ to follow
the apostate James J. Strang; hence any ordination received under his
hands was worthless.

I have not been able to learn what position, if any, Messrs. Powers
and Blair held in the church previous to the martyrdom of the prophet;
but it is enough to know that about the time "young Joseph" decided to
take the Presidency of the "Reorganized church," they were associated
with William Marks[A] in the work of "reorganizing" the church. It is
claimed for them, however, as also for Mr. Gurley, that "they were
apostles called by prophecy in the Reorganized church."[B]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph Smith (Tullidge) Josephite Ed. p. 774.]

[Footnote B: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, p. 375.]

It has already been stated how seven Josephite apostles were called
and ordained in our sketch of the rise of the Josephite church. Seven
men were "called" to form a majority of the quorum of the twelve, by a
"revelation" through H. H. Deam; but Messrs. Rogers and Blair were not
in that number, hence they must have been "called" subsequently. But
no matter when they were "called," if they held any apostolic
authority, they held it by virtue of some ordination received at the
hands of some one or more of the seven apostles, chosen through Mr.
Deam's "revelation." Now, I affirm that among all those seven men who
were "called" to form the majority of the quorum of the twelve, in the
"Reorganization" not one of them held the apostleship; that they could
not give what they did not possess; that therefore neither the seven
men called to be apostles, in April, 1853, received the apostleship,
nor any whom they subsequently ordained.

Further on I shall show that the church of Christ was not disorganized
at the death of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, nor at any other time since it
was organized by the commandment of God, to Joseph the prophet, in
1830; and therefore, this "Reorganization" which began its existence
in 1852-3 must have been a spurious institution, and, therefore,
incapable of bestowing legitimate authority upon anyone.

The methods of argument by which the claims of the "Reorganization"
are sustained must be noticed, for they are as erroneous as they are
misleading. After the April conference of the "Reorganization" in
1853, a pamphlet was issued entitled "_A word of consolation to the
scattered Saints_," in which a justification of the proceedings of
said conference is attempted. In that pamphlet it is said:

    In justification of the course then taken, and the principles
    involved on the question of _authority_, we have ever courted, and
    still court, investigation in the rigid character of the facts in
    the first organization.[A] Here they are: Joseph Smith and Oliver
    Cowdery were ordained to the lesser priesthood by an angel; then
    by their authority, and a commandment, they on the 6th day of
    April, ordained each other Elders, and the eldership ordained high
    priests and apostles, and this high priesthood, ordained, by
    _commandment_, the president of the high priesthood, the highest
    office in the Church; so that the alleged lesser, ordaining the
    greater is common to both the first organization and the
