to visit us after His wonted manner; * * * but we were not at all
moved with His hand, nor took any pains to return to God. We heaped
sin upon sin, judging like careless Epicureans, that God cared not for
our sins, nor would ever visit us on account of them. And our
pretended shepherds, laying aside the rule of godliness, practiced
among themselves contention and division." He adds that the "dreadful
persecution of Diocletian was then inflicted on the Church as a just
punishment, and as the most proper chastisement for their
iniquities."--(Milner, "Church History," Cent. III, ch. 17.)

13. It will be remembered that the great change whereby the Church was
raised to a place of honor in the state, occurred in the early part of
the fourth century. It is a popular error to assume that the decay of
the Church as a spiritual institution dates from that time. The
picture of the Church declining as to spiritual power in exact
proportion to her increase of temporal influence and wealth has
appealed to rhetoricians and writers of sensational literature; but
such a picture does not present the truth. The Church was saturated
with the spirit of apostasy long before Constantine took it under his
powerful protection by according it official standing in the state.
In support of this statement, I quote again from Milner, the avowed
friend of the Church: "I know it is common for authors to represent
the great declension of Christianity to have taken place only after
its external establishment under Constantine. But the evidence of
history has compelled me to dissent from this view of things. In fact,
we have seen that for a whole generation previous to the [Diocletian]
persecution, few marks of superior piety appeared. Scarce a luminary
of godliness existed; and it is not common in any age for a great work
of the Spirit of God to be exhibited but under the conduct of some
remarkable saints, pastors, and reformers. This whole period as well
as the whole scene of the persecution is very barren in such
characters. * * * Moral and philosophical and monastical instructions
will not effect for men what is to be expected from evangelical
doctrine. And if the faith of Christ was so much declined (and its
decayed state ought to be dated from about the year 270), we need not
wonder that such scenes as Eusebius hints at without any
circumstantial details, took place in the Christian world. * * * He
speaks also of the ambitious spirit of many, in aspiring to the
offices of the Church, the ill judged and unlawful ordinations, the
quarrels among confessors themselves, and the contentions excited by
young demagogues in the very relics of the persecuted Church, and the
multiplied evils which their vices excited among Christians. How sadly
must the Christian world have declined which could thus conduct itself
under the very rod of divine vengeance? Yet let not the infidel or the
profane world triumph. _It was not Christianity, but the departure
from it_, which brought on these evils."--(Milner, "Church History,"
Cent. IV, ch. 1. The italics are introduced by the present writer.
See also Note 5, end of chapter.)

14. The foregoing embodies but a few of the many evidences that could
be cited in demonstration of the fact that during the period
immediately following the apostolic ministry--the period covered by
the persecutions of the Christians by the heathen nations,--the Church
was undergoing internal deterioration, and was in a state of
increasing perversion. Among the more detailed or specific causes of
this ever widening departure from the spirit of the gospel of Christ,
this rapidly growing apostasy, the following may be considered as
important examples:

(1). The corrupting of the simple principles of the gospel by the
admixture of the so-called philosophic systems of the times.

(2). Unauthorized additions to the ceremonies of the Church, and the
introduction of vital changes in essential ordinances.

(3). Unauthorized changes in Church organization and government.

15. We shall consider in due order each of the three causes here
enumerated. It may appear that the conditions set forth in these
specifications are more properly to be regarded as effects or results,
than as causes, incident to the general apostasy,--that they are in
the nature of evidences or proofs of a departure from the original
constitution of the Church, rather than specific causes by which the
fact of apostasy is to be explained or accounted for. Cause and
effect, however, are sometimes very intimately associated, and
resulting conditions may furnish the best demonstration of causes in
operation. Each of the conditions given above as a specific cause of
the progressive apostasy was, at its inception, an evidence of
existing unsoundness, and an active cause of the graver results that
followed. Each succeeding manifestation of the spirit of apostasy was
at once the result of earlier disaffection, and the cause of later and
more pronounced developments.


NOTES.

1. _Inordinate Zeal Manifested by Some of the Early Christians_: "The
sober discretion of the present age will more readily censure than
admire, but can more easily admire than imitate, the fervor of the
first Christians; who, according to the lively expression of Sulpicius
Severus, desired martyrdom with more eagerness than his own
contemporaries solicited a bishopric. The epistles which Ignatius
composed as he was carried in chains through the cities of Asia,
breathe sentiments the most repugnant to the ordinary feelings of
human nature. He earnestly beseeches the Romans that when he should be
exposed in the amphitheatre, they would not by their kind but
unreasonable intercession, deprive him of the crown of glory, and he
declares his resolution to provoke and irritate the wild beasts which
might be employed as the instruments of his death. Some stories are
related of the courage of martyrs who actually performed what Ignatius
had intended: who exasperated the fury of the lions, pressed the
executioner to hasten his office, cheerfully leaped into the fires
which were kindled to consume them, and discovered a sensation of joy
and pleasure in the midst of the most exquisite torture."--(Gibbon,
"Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," ch. XVI.)

2. _Internal Dissensions During Time of Peace_. As stated in the text,
the early part of Diocletian's reign--the period immediately preceding
the outburst of the last great persecution to which the Christians
were subjected--was a time of comparative freedom from opposition, and
this period was characterized by internal disturbances and dissensions
within the Church. Illustrative of the tolerance shown by the emperor
before he became hostile to the Church, and the accompanying decline
of spiritual earnestness among the Christians themselves, Gibbon says:
"Diocletian and his colleagues frequently conferred the most important
offices on those persons who avowed their abhorrence of the worship of
the gods, but who had displayed abilities proper for the service of
the state. The bishops held an honorable rank in the respective
provinces, and were treated with distinction and respect, not only by
the people, but by the magistrates themselves. Almost in every city
the ancient churches were found insufficient to contain the increasing
multitudes of proselytes; and in their place more stately and
capacious edifices were erected for the public worship of the
faithful. The corruption of manners and principles so forcibly
lamented by Eusebius, may be considered not only as a consequence, but
as a proof, of the liberty which the Christians enjoyed and abused
under the reign of Diocletian. Prosperity had relaxed the nerves of
discipline. Fraud, envy, and malice prevailed in every congregation.
The presbyters aspired to the episcopal office, which every day became
an object more worthy of their ambition. The bishops who contended
with each other for ecclesiastical preeminence, appeared by their
conduct to claim a secular and tyrannical power in the church; and the
lively faith which still distinguished the Christians from the
Gentiles, was shown much less in their lives than in their
controversial writings."--(Gibbon, "Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire," ch. XVI.)

3. _The Effect of Peace on the Early Church_. "Disastrous as the
persecutions of the early Christian centuries were, still more
mischievous to the Church were those periods of tranquillity which
intervened between the outbursts of rage which prompted them. Peace
may have her victories no less renowned than those of war; and so,
too, she has her calamities, and they are not less destructive than
those of war. War may destroy nations, but ease and luxury mankind
corrupt--the body and the mind. Especially is peace dangerous to the
church. Prosperity relaxes the reins of discipline; people feel less
and less the need of a sustaining providence; but in adversity the
spirit of man feels after God, and he is correspondingly more devoted
to the service of religion. We shall find the early Christians no
exception to the operation of this influence of repose. Whenever it
was accorded them, either through the mercy or the indifference of the
emperors, internal dissensions, the intrigues of aspiring prelates,
and the rise of heresies, characterized those periods."--(B. H.
Roberts, "A New Witness for God," p. 70.)

4. _Schisms and Heresies in the Early Church_. Eusebius, whose
writings date from the early part of the fourth century, cites the
writings of Hegesippus, who lived in the first quarter of the second
century, as follows: "The same author [Hegesippus] also treats of the
beginning of the heresies that arose about this time, in the following
words: 'But after James the Just had suffered martyrdom, as our Lord
had for the same reason, Simeon, the son of Cleophas, our Lord's
uncle, was appointed the second bishop [of Jerusalem] whom all
proposed as the cousin of our Lord. Hence they called the Church as
yet a virgin, for it was not yet corrupted by vain discourses.
Thebuthis made a beginning, secretly to corrupt it on account of his
not being made bishop. He was one of those seven sects among the
Jewish people. Of these also was Simeon, whence sprang the sect of
Simonians; also Cleobius, from whence came the Cleobians; also
Dositheus, the founder of the Dositheans. From these also sprung the
Gortheonians from Gortheoeus; and also Masbotheans from Masbothoeus.
Hence also the Meandrians, the Marcionists, and Carpocratians and
Valentinians, and Basilidians, and the Saturnillians, every one
introducing his own peculiar opinions, one differing from the other.
From these sprung the false Christs and the false prophets and false
apostles, who divided the unity of the Church by the introduction of
corrupt doctrines against God and against His Christ."--(Eusebius,
"Ecclesiastical History," Book IV, ch. 22.)

5. _Early Decline of the Church_: Milner, summing up the conditions
attending the Church at the end of the second century, says: "And here
we close the view of the second century, which, for the most part
exhibited proofs of divine grace, as strong, or nearly so, as the
first. We have seen the same unshaken and simple faith of Jesus, the
same love of God and of the brethren; and--that in which they
singularly excelled modern Christians--the same heavenly spirit and
victory over the world. But a dark shade is enveloping these divine
glories. The Spirit of God is grieved already by the ambitious
intrusions of self-righteous, argumentative refinements, and Pharisaic
pride; and though it be more common to represent the most sensible
decay of godliness as commencing a century later, to me it seems
already begun."--(Milner, "Church History," Cent. II, ch. 9.)

Mosheim, writing of conditions attending the closing years of the
third century, says: "The ancient method of ecclesiastical government
seemed in general still to subsist, while, at the same time, by
imperceptible steps, it varied from the primitive rule and degenerated
toward the form of a religious monarchy. * * * This change in the form
of ecclesiastical government was soon followed by a train of vices,
which dishonored the character and authority of those to whom the
administration of the Church was committed. For, though several yet
continued to exhibit to the world illustrative examples of primitive
piety and Christian virtue, yet many were sunk in luxury and
voluptuousness, puffed up with vanity, arrogance and ambition,
possessed with a spirit of contention and discord, and addicted to
many other vices that cast an undeserved reproach upon the holy
religion of which they were the unworthy professors and ministers.
This is testified in such an ample manner by the repeated complaints
of many of the most respectable writers of this age, that truth will
not permit us to spread the veil, which we should otherwise be
desirous to cast over such enormities among an order so sacred. The
bishops assumed in many places a princely authority, particularly
those who had the greatest number of churches under their inspection,
and who presided over the most opulent assemblies. They appropriated
to their evangelical function the splendid ensigns of temporal
majesty. A throne, surrounded with ministers, exalted above his equals
the servant of the meek and humble Jesus; and sumptuous garments
dazzled the eyes and the minds of the multitude into an ignorant
veneration of their arrogated authority. The example of the bishops
was ambitiously imitated by the presbyters, who, neglecting the sacred
duties of their station, abandoned themselves to the indolence and
delicacy of an effeminate and luxurious life. The deacons, beholding
the presbyters deserting thus their functions, boldly usurped their
rights and privileges, and the effects of a corrupt ambition were
spread through every rank of the order sacred."--(Mosheim,
"Ecclesiastical History," Cent. III, Part II, ch. 2:3, 4.)




CHAPTER VII.

**Internal Causes.--Continued**.


1. First among the specific causes of disturbance operating within the
Church, and contributing to its apostasy, we have named: "_The
corrupting of the simple principles of the gospel by the admixture of
the so-called philosophic systems of the times_."

2. The attempted grafting of foreign doctrines on the true vine of the
gospel of Christ was characteristic of the early years of the
apostolic period. We read of the sorcerer Simon, who professed belief
and entered the Church by baptism, but who was so devoid of the true
spirit of the gospel that he sought to purchase by money the authority
and power of the priesthood.--(See Acts 8:9, 13, 18-24.) This man,
though rebuked by Peter, and apparently penitent, continued to trouble
the Church, by inculcating heresies and winning disciples within the
fold. His followers were distinguished as a sect or cult down to the
fourth century; and, writing at that time, Eusebius says of them:
"These, after the manner of their founder, insinuating themselves into
the Church, like a pestilential and leprous disease, infected those
with the greatest corruption, into whom they were able to infuse their
secret, irremediable, and destructive poison."--(Eusebius,
"Ecclesiastical History," Book II, ch. 1.) This Simon, known in
history as Simon Magus, is referred to by early Christian writers, as
the founder of heresy, owing to his persistent attempts to combine
Christianity with Gnosticism. It is with reference to his proposition
to purchase spiritual authority that all traffic in spiritual offices
has come to be known as simony.

3. Through the mouth of the Revelator, the Lord reproved certain of
the churches for their adoption or toleration of doctrines and
practices alien to the gospel. Notably is this the case with respect
to the Nicolaitanes, and the followers of the doctrines of
Balaam.--(See Rev. 2:15; compare verse 6; see also verse 20. See Note
1, end of chapter.)

4. The perversion of true theology thus developed within the Church is
traceable to the introduction of both Judaistic and pagan
fallacies.--(See Note 2, end of chapter.) Indeed, at the opening of
the Christian era and for centuries thereafter, Judaism was more or
less intimately mixed with pagan philosophy, and contaminated with
heathen ceremonies. There were numerous sects and parties, cults and
schools, each advocating rival theories as to the constitution of the
soul, the essence of sin, the nature of Deity, and a multitude of
other mysteries. The Christians were soon embroiled in endless
controversies among themselves.

5. Judaistic converts to Christianity sought to modify and adapt the
tenets of the new faith so as to harmonize them with their inherited
love of Judaism, and the result was destructive to both. Our Lord had
indicated the futility of any such attempts to combine new principle
with old systems, or to patch up the prejudices of the past with
fragments of new doctrine. "No man," said He, "putteth a piece of new
cloth unto an old garment, for that which is put in to fill it up
taketh from the garment, and the rent is made worse. Neither do men
put new wine into old bottles: else the bottles break, and the wine
runneth out, and the bottles perish: but they put new wine into new
bottles, and both are preserved."--(Matt. 9:16, 17.) The gospel came
as a new revelation, marking the fulfilment of the law, it was no mere
addendum, nor was it a simple reenactment of past requirements; it
embodied a new and an everlasting covenant. Attempts to patch the
Judaistic robe with the new fabric of the gospel could result in
nothing more sightly than a hideous rent. The new wine of the covenant
could not be bottled in the time-eaten leathern containers of Mosaic
libations. Judaism was belittled and Christianity perverted by the
incongruous association.

6. Among the early and most pernicious adulterations of Christian
doctrine is the introduction of the teachings of the Gnostics. These
self-styled philosophers put forth the boastful claim that they were
able to lead the human mind to a full comprehension of the Supreme
Being, and a knowledge of the true relationship between Deity and
mortals. They said in effect that a certain being had existed from all
eternity, manifested as a radiant light diffused throughout space, and
this they called the _Pleroma_. "The eternal nature, infinitely
perfect and infinitely happy, having dwelt from everlasting in a
profound solitude, and in a blessed tranquillity produced at length
from itself, two minds of a different sex, which resembled their
supreme parent in the most perfect manner. From the prolific union of
these two beings, others arose, which were also followed by succeeding
generations; so that in process of time a celestial family was formed
in the Pleroma. This divine progeny, immutable in its nature, and
above the power of mortality, was called, by the philosophers,
_Aeon_--a term which signifies, in the Greek language, an eternal
nature. How many in number these Aeons were was a point much
controverted among the oriental sages."--(Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical
History," Cent. I, Part II, 1:7.)

7. Then one of the Aeons, distinctively called the Demiurge, created
this world, and arrogantly asserted dominion over the same, denying
absolutely the authority of the supreme parent. The Gnostic doctrine
declares man to be a union of the body, which, being the creation of
the Demiurge, is essentially evil, and a spirit, which, being derived
from Deity, is characteristically good. The spirits thus imprisoned in
evil bodies will be finally liberated, and then the power of the
Demiurge will cease, and the earth will be dissolved into nothingness.

8. Our justification for introducing here this partial summary of
Gnosticism is the fact that early efforts were made to accommodate the
tenets of this system to the demands of Christianity; and that Christ
and the Holy Ghost were declared to belong to the family of Aeons
provided for in this scheme. This led to the extravagant absurdity of
denying that Jesus had a body even while He lived as a man; and that
His appearance as a corporeal being was a deception of the senses
wrought by His supernatural power.--(See Note 3, end of chapter.)

9. That the doctrines of the Gnostics were unsatisfying even to those
who professed to believe therein is evident from the many cults and
parties that came into existence as subdivisions of the main sect; and
it is interesting to note that in modern times certain free-thinkers
have prided themselves in assuming a title expressing the full
antithesis of the name Gnostics, viz. Agnostics.

10. The practical effect of the principles of Gnosticism in the lives
of its adherents is strangely diverse. One division of the sect
followed a life of austerity, embracing rigorous self-denial, and
bodily torture, in the vain belief that the malignant body could thus
be subdued, while the spirit would be given added power and increased
freedom. Another cult sought to minimize the fundamental difference
between right and wrong, by denying the element of morality in human
life; and these abandoned themselves to the impulses of the passions
and the frailties of the bodily nature without restraint, on the
assumption that there was no such relation between body and soul as
would cause injury to the latter through bodily indulgences and
excesses.

11. Another sect or school whose doctrines were in a measure
amalgamated with those of Christianity was that of the New Platonics.
The ancient sects of Platonists or Platonics were allied in some
points of doctrine with the Epicureans, and were rivals if not
opponents of the Stoics. The early Platonics held that unorganized
matter has existed from all eternity, and that its organizer, God, is
similarly eternal. As God is eternal, so also His will or intelligence
is without beginning, and this eternal intelligence existing as the
will or intent of Deity, was called the _Logos_. Such precepts had
been taught long before the Christian era, and the philosophy
professed by some of the contending sects among the Jews in the time
of Christ had been influenced thereby.

12. As the principles of Christianity became generally known, certain
leaders in the sect of Platonics found in the new doctrine much to
study and admire. By this time, however, Platonism itself had
undergone much change, and the more liberal adherents had formed a new
organization and distinguished themselves by the appellation New
Platonics. These professed to find in Jesus Christ the incarnation of
the Logos, and accepted with avidity the declaration of St. John: "In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word
was God. * * * And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us."--(John 1:1, 14.) According to the Eclectic or New Platonic
philosophy, the "Word" referred to by St. John was the "Logos"
described by Plato.

13. The Platonic conception of the Godhead as consisting of the Deity
and the Logos, was enlarged in accordance with Christian tenets to
embrace three members, the Holy Ghost being the third. Thence arose
bitter and lasting dissension as to the relative powers of each member
of the Trinity, particularly the position and authority of the Logos
or Son. The many disputes incident to the admixture of Platonic theory
with Christian doctrine continued through the centuries, and in a
sense may be said to trouble the minds of men even in this modern age.

14. It is wholly beyond our purpose to classify or describe the hybrid
offspring resulting from the unnatural union of pagan philosophy and
Christian truth; nor shall we attempt to follow in detail the
dissensions and quarrels on theological points and questions of
doctrine. Our purpose is achieved when by statement of fact and
citation of authority, the reality of the apostasy is established. We
shall consider therefore only the most important of the dissensions by
which the Church was troubled.--(See Note 4, end of chapter.)

15. About the middle of the third century, Sibellius, a presbyter or
bishop of the church in Africa, strongly advocated the doctrine of
"trinity in unity" as characterizing the Godhead. He claimed that the
divine nature of Christ was no distinct nor personal attribute of the
man Jesus, but merely a portion of the divine energy, an emanation
from the Father, with which the Son was temporarily endowed; and that
in like manner the Holy Ghost was a part of the divine Father. These
views were as vigorously opposed by some as defended by others, and
the disagreement was rife when Constantine so suddenly changed the
status of the Church, and brought to its support the power of the
state. Early in the fourth century the dispute assumed a threatening
aspect in a bitter contention between Alexander, bishop of Alexandria,
and Arius, one of the subordinate officers of the same church.
Alexander proclaimed that the Son was in all respects the equal of the
Father, and also of the same substance or essence. Arius insisted that
the Son had been created by the Father, and therefore could not be
co-eternal with His divine Parent; that the Son was the agent through
whom the will of the Father was executed, and that for this reason
also the Son was inferior to the Father both in nature and dignity. In
like manner the Holy Ghost was inferior to the other members of the
Godhead.

16. Arianism, as the doctrine came to be known, was preached with
vigor and denounced with energy; and the dissension thus occasioned
threatened to rend the Church to its foundation. At last the emperor,
Constantine, was forced to intervene in an effort to establish peace
among his contending churchmen. He summoned a council of church
dignitaries which assembled in the year 325, and which is known from
its place of session as the Council of Nice. This council condemned
the doctrine of Arius, and pronounced sentence of banishment against
its author. What was declared to be the orthodox doctrine of the
universal or Catholic church respecting the Godhead was promulgated as
follows:

17. "We believe in one God, the Father, Almighty, the maker of all
things visible and invisible; and in one Lord, Jesus Christ, the Son
of God, begotten of the Father, only begotten, (that is) of the
substance of the Father; God of God, Light of Light; Very God of Very
God; begotten not made; of the same substance with the Father, by whom
all things were made, that are in heaven and that are in earth: who
for us men, and for our salvation, descended and was incarnate, and
became man; suffered and rose again the third day, ascended into the
heavens and will come to judge the living and the dead; and in the
Holy Spirit. But those who say there was a time when he [the Son] was
not, and that he was not before he was begotten, and that he was made
out of nothing, or affirm that he is of any other substance or
essence, or that the Son of God was created, and mutable, or
changeable, the Catholic Church doth pronounce accursed."

18. This is the generally accepted version of the Nicene Creed as
originally promulgated. In form it was somewhat modified, though left
practically unchanged as to essentials, by the council held at
Constantinople half a century later. What is regarded as a restatement
of the Nicene Creed has been attributed to Athanasius, one of the
chief opponents of Arianism, though his right to be considered the
author is questioned by many and emphatically denied by some
authorities on ecclesiastical history. Nevertheless, the statement
referred to has found a place in literature as the "Creed of
Athanasius," and whether rightly or wrongly named it persists as a
declaration of belief professed by some Christian sects today. It has
a present place in the prescribed ritual of the Church of England. The
"Creed of Athanasius" reads as follows:

19. "We worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither
confounding the persons, nor dividing the substance. For there is one
person of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy
Ghost. But the Godhead of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is all one:
the glory equal, the majesty co-eternal. Such as the Father is, such
is the Son; and such is the Holy Ghost. The Father uncreate, the Son
uncreate and the Holy Ghost uncreate. The Father incomprehensible, the
Son incomprehensible and the Holy Ghost incomprehensible. The Father
eternal, the Son eternal, the Holy Ghost eternal. And yet there are
not three eternals; but one eternal. As also there are not three
incomprehensibles, nor three uncreated; but one uncreated, and one
incomprehensible. So likewise the Father is Almighty, the Son
Almighty, and the Holy Ghost Almighty; and yet there are not three
Almighties, but one Almighty. So the Father is God, the Son is God,
and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet they are not three Gods but one
God."

20. The Council of Nice is known in ecclesiastical history as one of
the most famous and important gatherings ever assembled as an official
body concerned with church administration. Not only was the Arian
dispute disposed of, so far as ecclesiastical decree could dispose of
a question vitally affecting the individual conscience, but many other
subjects of controversy were similarly quieted for the time. Thus the
long-standing dispute as to the time of celebrating Easter was settled
by vote, as was also the question agitated by Novatus and his
followers--as to the propriety of re-admitting repentant apostates to
the Church; and the schism caused by Meletius, a bishop of Upper
Africa, who had refused to recognize the superior authority of the
bishop of Alexandria. From the number and diversity of the questions
brought before the Nicene Council for adjudication, we may safely
conclude that the newly enthroned Church was not characterized by
unity of purpose nor harmony of action. However, compared with the
bitter contentions that follow, the dissensions in the reign of
Constantine were but as the beginnings of trouble.

21. The moral effect of the potent spirit of apostasy operating
through the first three centuries of the Church's existence and
nourished by the contributions of heathen philosophy, proved, as was
inevitable, highly injurious and evil. Some of the most pernicious of
these effects it becomes our duty to consider.

22. _Perverted Views of Life_. One of the heresies of early origin and
rapid growth in the Church was the doctrine of antagonism between body
and spirit, whereby the former was regarded as an incubus and a curse.
From what has been said this will be recognized as one of the
perversions derived from the alliance of Gnosticism with Christianity.
A result of this grafting in of heathen doctrines was an abundant
growth of hermit practices, by which men sought to weaken, torture,
and subdue their bodies, that their spirits or "souls" might gain
greater freedom. Many who adopted this unnatural view of human
existence retired to the solitude of the desert, and there spent their
time in practices of stern self-denial and in acts of frenzied
self-torture. Others shut themselves up as voluntary prisoners,
seeking glory in privation and self-imposed penance. It was this
unnatural view of life that gave rise to the several orders of
recluses, hermits and monks.

23. Think you not that the Savior had such practices in mind, when,
warning the disciples of the false claims to sanctity that would
characterize the times then soon to follow, He said: "Wherefore if
they shall say unto you, Behold he (Christ) is in the desert; go not
forth: behold, he is in the secret chambers; believe it not."--(Matt.
24:26.)

24. When the Church came into the favor of the state under Constantine
in the fourth century, there sprang up many orders of recluses who
"maintained that communion with God was to be sought by mortifying
sense, by withdrawing the mind from all external objects, by
macerating the body with hunger and labor, and by a holy sort of
indolence, which confined all the activity of the soul to a lazy
contemplation of things spiritual and external." Mosheim, the author
just quoted, continues: "The Christian church would never have been
disgraced by this cruel and unsocial enthusiasm, nor would any have
been subjected to those keen torments of mind and body to which it
gave rise, had not many Christians been unwarily caught by the
specious appearance and the pompous sound of that maxim of the ancient
philosophy: 'That in order to the attainment of true felicity and
communion with God, it was necessary that the soul should be separated
from the body, even here below; and that the body was to be macerated
and mortified for this purpose.'"--(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. IV,
Part II, ch. 3:12, 13.)

25. The fruit of this ill-sowing was the growth of numerous orders of
monks, and the maintenance of monasteries. Celibacy was taught as a
virtue, and came to be made a requirement of the clergy, as it is in
the Roman Catholic church to-day. An unmarried clergy, deprived of the
elevating influences of home life, fell into many excesses, and the
corruption of the priests has been a theme of reproach throughout the
centuries. "The Lord God said, It is not good that the man should be
alone; I will make him an help meet for him,"--(Gen. 2:18.) and again,
"Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh."--(Verse 24.) His
inspired apostle proclaimed: "Neither is the man without the woman,
neither the woman without the man, in the Lord."--(I Cor. 11:11.
Compare I Tim. 4:3.) Nevertheless an apostate church decrees that its
ministers shall be forbidden to follow the law of God.

26. _Disregard for Truth_. As early as the fourth century, certain
pernicious doctrines embodying a disregard for truth gained currency
in the Church. Thus, it was taught "that it was an act of virtue to
deceive and lie, when by that means the interests of the church might
be promoted."--(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. IV, Part II, ch. 3:16.)
Needless to say, sins other than those of falsehood and deceit were
justified when committed in the supposed interests of church
advancement, and crime was condoned under the specious excuse that the
end justifies the means. Many of the fables and fictitious stories
relating to the lives of Christ and the apostles, as also the spurious
accounts of supernatural visitations and wonderful miracles, in which
the literature of the early centuries abound, are traceable to this
infamous doctrine that lies are acceptable unto God if perpetrated in
a cause that man calls good.--(See Note 5, end of chapter.)
