preparations, and the two missions were finally founded within a few
weeks of each other--on the 28th of August and the 9th of October, 1791,
respectively. The site selected for the Mission of Santa Cruz was in the
neighborhood already known by that name, and near the San Lorenzo River;
that of Nuestra Senora de la Soledad, on the west side of the Salinas
River, in the vicinity of the present town of Soledad, and about thirty
miles from Monterey.

A glance at the map of California will help us to understand the policy
which had dictated the creation of the four missions founded since
Junipero's death. The enormous stretch of country between San Francisco
and San Diego, the northern and southern extremes of evangelical
enterprise, was as yet quite insufficiently occupied, and these new
settlements had been started with the object of to some extent filling
up the vast vacant spaces still left among those already existing. For
the efficient performance of missionary work something more was needed
than a number of separate establishments, no matter how well managed
and successful these in themselves might be. Systematic organization was
essential; for this it was requisite that the various missions should
be brought, by proximity, into vital relations with one another, that
communication might be kept up, companionship enjoyed, and, in case of
need, advice given and assistance rendered. The foundations of Santa
Barbara, La Purisima, Santa Cruz and Soledad, had done something, as
will be seen, towards the ultimate drawing together of the scattered
outposts of church and civilization. But with them a beginning had only
been made. Further developments of the same general plan which aimed, it
will be understood, not alone at the spiritual conquest, but also at the
proper control of the new kingdom--were now taken under consideration.
And, as a result, five fresh missions were presently resolved upon. One
of these was to be situated between San Francisco and Santa Clara; the
second, between Santa Clara and Monterey; the third, between San Antonio
and San Luis Obispo; the fourth, between San Buenaventura and San
Gabriel; and the fifth, between San Juan Capistrano and San Diego. The
importance of these proposed settlements as connecting links will be at
once apparent, if we observe that by reason of their carefully chosen
locations they served, as it were, to put the older missions into actual
touch. When at length the preliminary arrangements had been made, no
time was wasted in the carrying out of the programme, and in a little
over a year, all five missions were in operation. The mission San
Jose (a rather tardy recognition to the patron-saint of the whole
undertaking), was founded on the 11th June, 1797; San Juan Bautista
thirteen days later; San Miguel Arcangel on the 25th July, and San
Fernando Rey de Espana on the 8th September of the same year; and San
Luis Rey de Francia (commonly called San Luis Rey to distinguish it from
San Luis Obispo), on the 13th of the July following. The delay which
had not at all been anticipated in the establishment of this last-named
mission, was due to some difficulties in regard to site. With this
ended--so far as fresh foundations were concerned--the pious labours
of Lasuen as padre-presidente. He now returned to San Carlos to devote
himself during the remainder of his life to the arduous duties
of supervision and administration. There he died, in 1803, aged
eighty-three years.

His successor, Father Estevan Tapis, fourth president of the Upper
California missions, signalized his elevation to office by adding a
nineteenth to the establishments under his charge. Founded on the
17th September, 1804, on a spot, eighteen miles from La Purisima and
twenty-two from Santa Barbara, to which Lasuen had already directed
attention, this was dedicated to the virgin-martyr, Santa Inez. It was
felt that a settlement somewhere in this region was still needed for the
completion of the mission system, since without it, a gap was left in
the line between the two missions first-named, which were some forty
miles apart. With the planting of Santa Inez thorough spiritual
occupation may be said to have been accomplished over the entire area
between San Francisco and San Diego, and from the Coast Range to the
ocean. The nineteen missions had been so distributed over the vast
country, that the Indians scattered through it could everywhere be
reached; while the distance from mission to mission had, at the same
time, been so reduced that it was in no case too great to be easily
covered in a single day's journey. The fathers of each establishment
could thus hold frequent intercourse with their next neighbors, and
occasional travelers moving to and fro on business could from day to day
be certain of finding a place for refreshment and repose [7].




IX.


Santa Inez carries us for the first time over into the nineteenth
century, and its establishment may in a sense be regarded as marking the
term of the period of expansion in California mission history. A pause
of more than a decade ensued, during which no effort was made towards
the further spread of the general system; and then, with the planting
of two relatively unimportant settlements in a district thentofore
unoccupied the tally was brought to a close.

The missions which thus represented a slight and temporary revival of
the old spirit of enterprise, were those of San Rafael Arcangel and San
Francisco Solano. The former, located near Mount Tamalpais, between San
Francisco de Assis and the Russian military station at Fort Ross, dates
from the 17th December, 1817; the latter, situated still further north,
in the Sonoma Valley, from the 4th July, 1823. Some little uncertainty
exists as to the true reasons and purposes of their foundation. The
commonly accepted version of the story connects them directly with
problems which arose out of the course of affairs at San Francisco. In
1817 a most serious epidemic caused great mortality among the Indians
there; a panic seemed inevitable; and on the advice of Lieutenant Sola,
a number of the sick neophytes were removed by the padres to the other
side of the bay. The change of climate proved highly beneficial;
the region of Mount Tamalpais was found singularly attractive; and a
decision to start a branch establishment, or asistencia, of the mission
at San Francisco was a natural result. The patronage of San Rafael was
selected in the hope that, as the name itself expresses the "healing of
God," that "most glorious prince" might be induced to care "for bodies
as well as souls." While considerable success attended this new venture,
the condition of things at San Francisco, on the other hand, continued
anything but satisfactory; and a proposal based on these two facts was
presently made, that the old mission should be removed entirely from the
peninsula, and refounded in a more favorable locality somewhere in the
healthy and fertile country beyond San Rafael. It was thus that the name
of San Francisco got attached from the outset to the new settlement at
Sonoma; and when later on (the old mission being left in its place) this
was made into an independent mission, the name was retained, though the
dedication was transferred, appropriately enough, from St. Francis of
Assisi to that other St. Francis who figures in the records as "the
great apostle of the Indies."

Such is the simpler explanation of the way in which the last two
missions came to be established. It has, however, been suggested that,
while all this may be true as far as it goes, other causes were at work
of a subtler character than those specified, and that these causes were
involved in the development of political affairs. It will have been
noted that, though the threatened encroachments of the Russians had been
one of the chief reasons for this Spanish occupation of Alta California,
there had hitherto been no attempt to meet their possible advances in
the very regions where they were most to be expected--that is, in the
country north of San Francisco. In course of time, however, always with
the ostensible purpose of hunting the seal and the otter, the Russians
were found to be creeping further and further south; and at length,
under instructions from St. Petersburg, they took possession of the
region of Bodega Bay, establishing there a trading post of their Fur
Company, and a strong military station which they called Fort Ross. As
this settlement was on the coast, and only sixty-five miles, as the crow
flies, from San Francisco, it will be seen that the Spanish authorities
had some genuine cause for alarm. And the mission movement north of San
Francisco is considered by some writers to have been initiated, less
from spiritual motives, than from the dread of continued Russian
aggression, and the hope of raising at least a slight barrier against
it. However this may be, the two missions were never employed for
defensive purposes; nor is it very clear that they could have been made
of much practical service in case of actual need.




X.


Such, in briefest outline, is the story of the planting of the
twenty-one missions of Alta California. This story, as we have seen,
brings us down to the year 1823. But by this time, as we follow the
chronicles, our attention has already begun to be diverted from the
forces which still made for growth and success to those which ere long
were to co-operate for the complete undoing of the mission system and
the ruin of all its work.

Perhaps it was in the nature of things (if one may venture here to
employ a phrase too often used out of mere idleness or ignorance) that
the undertaking which year by year had been carried forward with so much
energy and success, should after a while come to a standstill; and
the commonest observation of life will suffice to remind us that when
progress ceases, retrogression is almost certain to set in. The immense
zeal and unflagging enthusiasm of Junipero Serra and his immediate
followers could not be transmitted by any rite or formula to the men
upon whose shoulders their responsibilities came presently to rest.
Men they were, of course, of widely varying characters and
capabilities--some, unfortunately, altogether unworthy both morally
and mentally, of their high calling; many, on the contrary, genuine
embodiments of the great principles of their order--humane, benevolent,
faithful in the discharge of daily duty, patient alike in labour and
trial, and careful administrators of the practical affairs which lay
within their charge. But without injustice it may be said of them that
for the most part they possessed little of the tremendous personal force
of their predecessors, and a generous endowment of such personal force
was as needful now as it ever had been.

Not unless we wish to emulate Southey's learned friend, who wrote whole
volumes of hypothetical history in the subjunctive mood, it is hardly
