It is, as you perceive, only a particular form of that general
providence by which God governs the universe, giving to the lilies
their eclat and perfume, watching with maternal care over the young
brood, preparing its food for the little bird, and not allowing a
single hair to fall from our heads without His permission. I
purposely make use of the beautiful images that Jesus Himself
employed to reveal to us the sweet mystery of providence.

To deny that man has a special vocation is placing him in a rank
inferior to the plants and irrational animals. It is denying the
variety of dispositions which enter into the combination of
character, and which is at once one of the greatest charms of and
most precious advantages to society; it is forcing on the mind the
conviction that every one is free to choose, whether in or out of
season, his post in the world, even when such a course would be
contrary to the principles of common-sense, and would entail the
subversion of society; for, let each and every one be directed in the
choice of his post by the whims and caprices of nature, assuredly
society will soon become demoralized, even as an army in which each
soldier would be free to choose and take the grade and position that
best suited his tastes.

If society is kept in a constant feverish agitation, by the furious
contests of ungoverned passion, it is because no one, or at least the
vast number never take the trouble to consult God by prayer, or
otherwise, before making a choice of a state of life. If there are so
many dissatisfied with their state of life it is because they are not
where God had destined them to be. If life is blighted with
deception, fraught with regrets and bitterness, if our fairest hopes
are blasted, if pain and sorrow brood over our existence, it is
because the soul suffers the punishment entailed by her levity or
negligence in a matter on which her weal or woe depends, both for
time and eternity.

Oh, how sadly rare in the world is that sweet and celestial peace,
that interior contentment, that pure and simple joy which in holier
times families prized as their most precious inheritance; and which
they handed down to their posterity as one of their richest gifts:
then the thought of God and eternity presided over all the important
actions of their life; then the light of heaven was invoked when
there was question of any important undertaking; and as grave matters
were considered and weighed in the light of truth and religion, due
attention was paid to the choice of a state of life.

They knew that, while other proceedings might be changed, and
consequently their fatal result averted when foreseen, the step made
in the choice of a state of life is irrevocable and a mistake made in
that step not only involves our happiness or misery for time but also
for eternity. Hence it is said by many that vocation is closely
allied with predestination.

It is a most solemn moment in the Christian's life, for it is the
beginning of that road by which he must attain his destination. At
this juncture it is consoling to consider with the eye of faith, the
love and solicitude with which God protects the soul; to behold Jesus
offering with ineffable tenderness for her the blood which He shed on
the cross. To see the guardian angel redoubling his charitable
efforts in the interest of his client, awaiting with pious anxiety
the issue of a deliberation upon which must depend in a great measure
the success or failure of his labors for her eternal salvation.

Still, should any one be so unfortunate as to make a bad choice, let
him not consider his condition irremediable; divine mercy has
inexhaustible resources from which to provide us with the means to
work out our salvation, and prevent the doleful consequences of those
fatal errors.

Yet, it is certain beyond all question, that we render the work of
our eternal salvation always more difficult when we have not embraced
that state of life which God had laid out for us; for the sins which
are a consequence of this want of correspondence to the divine will,
will have, if not a decisive influence, at least a considerable share
in the work of our reprobation. How many souls now writhing in
eternal torments could, on ascending the course of their lives, point
out the solemn moment in which they made a choice of a state of life
as the time of their departure from the road to heaven.

No Christian who has his salvation at heart will hesitate to say
that it is folly to treat with indifference and levity a matter of
such vital importance; for he must remember with a sacred awe that,
when he makes a choice of a state of life, he pronounces in a certain
manner an irrevocable sentence on himself.

When the soul is deprived of the advantages of a rule of life, of
the advantages of good dispositions, character and temperament, as
well as of those provided by circumstances, men and things on the one
hand; and when she is obliged to struggle incessantly against herself
and external obstacles on the other hand, the work of her salvation
becomes more difficult and less certain. In this deplorable
condition, the only pillar left her on which she can anchor her hopes
of salvation is the mercy of God; but then a faithful correspondence
with divine grace in the most minute details, constant and
persevering prayer to obtain strength to bear the trials of life with
profit, are positively necessary conditions to escape destruction.

Commencing her career, woman finds for the most part only two roads
that dispute the choice of her adoption. Estranged, generally
speaking, to the professional life, or at least, acting in it only a
secondary role, she scarcely gives it a serious thought; she can
therefore give all due deliberation to her choice between marriage
and celibacy.

If all were bound to choose the more perfect state, considered in
itself, the question would be easily settled, as in that case there
would be, properly speaking, no choice to make; for evidently it is
the celibate state of life that should be adopted, since it is a more
perfect state than that of marriage; and the church, maintaining the
doctrine of the Apostle on this point, has condemned as heretics
those who teach that the married state is as perfect as that of
virginity. But, if all should aspire to perfection, if all are free
to choose the kind of life that will better insure the attaining of
that perfection, then all are not obliged to embrace the celibate
state, since our perfection consists in doing God's will.

When you are about to make a choice of a state of life, you are not
only permitted, but even urged, to take into consideration your
dispositions and aptitudes for the state which you propose to
embrace; and, if they are in good accord with it, you may safely
conjecture that they were given you for that state of life. Your
imperative duty consists in distinguishing between the call given by
God and the voice of passion or prejudice. Hence you should promptly
and faithfully follow the attractions and dispositions that God has
given you, and nothing else.

If for instance, a woman made her choice with a view of pandering to
her vanity, curiosity, worldly love, or some other passion still more
culpable perhaps, God would have no part in her determinations, and
she would inevitably become the dupe of her own folly; for God gives
light only to such as are sincere in their search for it, and they
who look for it in this way are such as those, who, in examining the
question of their vocation, have chiefly in view the glory of God and
their own salvation.

If the natural dispositions should be taken into consideration, it
is not indeed with a view to flatter nature and avoid the struggles
incident to the Christian life. That would be renouncing the glorious
title of Christian, and the incomparable favor that God has conferred
upon us in creating us to live with Him forever. If it is useful to
consult our taste and aptitude it is because they are for the most
part indicative of God's will; hence we ought to employ them for the
purpose for which He gave them to us. Then the object of your
researches in this matter should be to discover God's will in that
state of life for which He has given you a pronounced taste and
aptitude; but, because the caprice of nature or character may
sometimes be taken for that taste and aptitude, you are not
altogether safe from deception without some other guarantee.

It frequently happens that man believes to be an inspiration from
God what is only the effect of badly-regulated passion or some bad
habit deeply rooted in the soul. In order to be sure that God has
given such a disposition or aptitude of the heart and mind as being
indicative of the state of life He would have us enter, it should be
possessed of the following conditions, namely: The sanction of time,
which is the instrument that God ordinarily employs to stamp the
impress of His will on the works that He operates in us. It is
necessary that this disposition has been constant, that is to say,
that it has not suffered from frequent or long interruptions. A
transitory taste appearing to-day and vanishing to-morrow, a volatile
inclination frequently appearing and just as frequently disappearing,
merits no consideration in an affair that involves the Christian's
happiness both for time and eternity.

However, if the aptitude which you feel in your soul for a given
state of life has lost much of its vivacity, or even when it should
have frequently vanished in the course of your life; you are in duty
bound to study the causes and circumstances of this change,
especially when, with the disappearence of that inclination, piety
and fervor in God's service have also diminished in the soul.

If, as often as you felt the sweet impulse of divine grace in prayer
and holy communion this inclination became also aroused in the soul;
if you felt it increase in proportion as you gave yourself to God,
you may safely conclude that it is the indicator of God's will in
your regard, and that its vascillating or enfeebled condition was the
work of your own perverse will. Hence, in order to ascertain whether
the natural inclination or aptitude you feel for any state of life is
from God or the effect of a deluded fancy, you need but compare your
natural aptitude with those you have received through divine grace;
and if you find them in perfect accord you may rest assured that they
are from God, for He is the author of nature as well as of grace. On
the contrary, should they disagree then you may safely conclude that
your natural desire or inclination is a delusion.

This last consideration should not be omitted, especially when there
is question of embracing the religious life; for the attraction by
which we feel ourselves drawn to a more perfect life is in itself a
gift of God, and one of His most precious gifts. As often as this
attraction reveals its presence in the heart, it singularly involves
the study of vocation. Hence, it is a most delicate and perilous
matter to deal with, for if this attraction comes from God and if the
soul repels it she prepares for herself lamentable delusions, and a
life fraught with bitterness and remorse. God has a reason for
frequently saying in the Sacred Scriptures that He is a jealous God,
and the church, for the same reason, addresses Jesus in the litanies,
_jealous of souls_.

Hence, after having shown the greatest preference for a soul, in
honoring her with the exalted dignity of being His spouse, adorning
her with the gorgeous splendor of His richest treasures, and then see
Himself basely rejected, or treated with cold indifference; His
divine justice should naturally revenge the insult; which is done by
delivering her into her own hands, the most cruel punishment that
could be inflicted on her.

However, if you feel an attraction for the religious life, it, would
be imprudent and rash on your part to decide the matter yourself. You
should, in the spirit of humility, after having consulted God by
prayer, consult some enlightened persons noted for their wisdom and
prudence, piety and learning, who will advise you with a view to
secure the spiritual welfare of your soul above all things. Should
those to whom you address yourself fail to give all the assurance you
should have, be not backward in consulting others; for unlimited
confidence in the words of any man, no matter who he may be, will not
dispense you from all responsibility before God, nor preserve you
from making a wrong choice.

Neither should you lose sight of, or derogate in the least, from the
respect and obedience you owe your parents. It is their sacred duty
and right to advise you; and to whom should you look for a more
disinterested advice? A young girl would indeed be an object of pity
if, instead of finding a truly Christian tenderness in her parents,
they would be her idolizers so far as to be blinded to her true
interests. It is for this blind and foolish love that many parents
sacrifice their children, either by ignoring their just claims to
embrace the religious life, or by opposing an advantageous marriage
through vanity or personal interest.




CHAPTER XIII.


A SERIOUS MIND.

A vast number of people unfortunately labor under the false
impression that woman's great work and duty consists in making her
company agreeable and pleasing to all. This error is most prejudicial
to woman; it is opposed to the teachings of religion and the Holy
Scriptures; and nevertheless it is only too true that a countless
number of women have sedulously labored for its propagation, or, at
least, they have proved by their actions that this is their
_only_ work; and in many places, to the great detriment of
society, the education of girls has been directed in a great measure
according to this false opinion.

They are taught to esteem graceful manners, elegance of deportment,
flashy humor, affability of character, and unlimited condescension as
being the elements of a finished education; and the precious days of
childhood with the more precious time of adolescence have been
entirely absorbed to acquire it.

This is the school that has given birth to what is called "_Arts
of Pleasure_," to which it sacrifices the knowledge of more
necessary things which instruct the mind, fortify the heart, and
invigorate the will. Our compassion and disgust are simultaneously
aroused, when we see so many women whose education has given them no
other knowledge than to teach them how to flatter the taste of others
at the expense of Christian modesty.

How many women there are who, from their youth, have renounced the
dignity and glorious privileges of their sex, calmly resigning
themselves to play the inferior and humiliating role that the
prejudices and passions of a frivolous society impose upon them!

It is our heart-felt desire that you may never experience anything
of the kind; suffer not the aureola with which God has decorated your
brow to be ruthlessly removed and trampled under foot. Remember that
your soul is just as noble as that of man; that it is illuminated by
the same faith, drawn towards heaven by the same hopes, and united to
the same Author of all greatness and of all life by the same charity.
Should your belief in this waver, transport yourself in spirit to
Calvary: there you will see that women were the only sympathizers of
Jesus, and, while hanging on the cross, women were, with the
exception of St. John, the only witnesses of His death.

The apostles and disciples, all had fled; and in this memorable
scene in which all things seem to be confounded courage and valor
seemed to have taken refuge in the soul of women. Hence the Church
records, with love and gratitude, on the brightest pages of her
history, this noble and generous act of devotedness as being the
special privilege of your sex, since it was won on the ever-memorable
day of our redemption.

It is not easy to look a painful truth in the face; but we are
forced to do so when we reluctantly confess that female frivolity is
the source of that levity which prevails now-a-days, to such an
extent as to affect the very laws and government of society. To keep
aloof from this poisonous atmosphere, you must cultivate that serious
turn of mind, that gravity which gives women an air of majesty, and
wins the homage of those who do not even understand her.

Experience will teach you that the importance attached to the
seriousness with which woman's life should be enveloped is
undervalued. Learn to appreciate it as it merits; show that
appreciation by now giving to all the actions of your life that
weight and gravity which shall render them agreeable to God.

To succeed in your good resolution great firmness is required; you
will be obliged to condemn the frivolity of young persons in whose
company circumstances may throw you. You must set your face against
the fashions of the world, against the force of habit and prejudice,
perhaps against the freaks of your own character. But remember that
the reward awaiting you is well worth the struggle you are asked to
sustain; and this struggle will not be so difficult as you may think,
if you face it courageously, coherently and perseveringly, employing,
of course, the proper means.

To begin, you should cast overboard that inclination to frivolity
wherever you meet with it. But since a bad plant is more quickly and
radically destroyed by pulling it out of the roots than by simply
lopping of the tops as they appear over ground, so do we likewise
succeed better in correcting a bad habit, or destroying an evil
inclination by attacking it at its source than by being satisfied
with arresting its bad effects, allowing the cause to remain. And
since it is in the mind that frivolity takes up its abode, it is
there that it must be sought for and destroyed.

There exists among the different faculties of the soul a certain
order, a species of hierarchy which gives a certain preponderance to
some of them over the others; consequently some of them are of an
inferior while others are of a superior order. You will labor in vain
to give a serious cast to your sentiments and actions if you feed
your mind on frivolous thoughts, while serious thoughts are the
progenitors of enduring affections and noble deeds. Hence the culture
of the mind is an important factor to the acquisition of a taste for
those things which are the true ornament of woman. Sentiments are the
outcomings of thoughts, and both together are expressed by actions.

Feed your intelligence with serious thoughts; never amuse it with
those trifles which absorb the attention of persons of your age. Do
not think that those serious thoughts badly become your youth; that
they would deprive you of a part of your comfort, rendering you
wearisome to others and insupportable to yourself; that they would
give you a pedantic and affected air which would lead others to
believe that you despised them; that every age has its peculiar
tastes and customs, and that it would be an act of uncalled-for
severity to exact from a young person just beginning, so to say, the
apprenticeship of life, a gravity of manners and dispositions that
would scarcely be required at a maturer age.

Seriousness is required in all ages, but not always in the same
degree. Thus the gravity befitting a young lady is very different
from that expected from a woman more advanced in years. This virtue,
far from excluding legitimate amusement and pleasure, only regulates
and elevates them by confining them to just limits. An agreeable and
lively turn may be given to the most serious things, rendering them
pleasing and acceptable to the minds of all.

Truth is never subtle, and never darkens the soul in which it
resides; on the contrary, it sheds a halo of light around her,
revealing all those interior movements which lend a sweet and amiable
charm to every action.

You would be the first to condemn the doctrine of those who maintain
that woman must be of a frivolous turn of mind in order to be
agreeable. You would justly regard, as an outrage to your sex, such
assertions as go to show that seriousness can have no place in the
mind of woman. Such being the case, you will not say, with many of
your age, that the time will come soon enough to feed your soul with
solid substantial food; and that the age of serious thoughts will
come only too soon; nor will you close your eyes to the fact, taught
by long experience, that every one must reap in riper years such
fruit as they had sown in youth. If you wait till then, it will be
too late for you to enter another groove and form new habits. If you
are now frivolous in your thoughts and sentiments you will be so
later; for, as age fortifies the tastes and inclinations, frivolity
must increase as you advance in years.

Perhaps facts of this nature have already fallen under your notice;
you must have met with old ladies whose levity so painfully contrasts
with the gravity that becomes their age; and, while it is not
permitted us to judge others, yet every good Christian must be
shocked at this contrast. Profit by their example, sad as it is, and
hasten to conclude that it is folly to defer to a future time what
can and should be done at present; and that defects, as well as
virtue, are fortified by time and habit. If your early education has
not been truly Christian, if the teachings of divine faith have not
yet rendered you familiar with the most serious things of life, you
might perhaps consider as difficult, or even impracticable, the
counsels that I give you now.

Is there anything more serious or more in opposition to our natural
inclinations, and at the same time less consistent with the
deplorable levity of our minds, than the truths of our holy religion?
For serious, indeed, must be the reflections that those truths
inspire, which you should now learn to meditate seriously, in order
to make them a life-long practice. Is it not a serious occupation of
the mind to think of God, of the salvation of your soul, the
briefness of life, eternity which follows it, the duties that
religion imposes upon you? Is it not a serious occupation to address
God in holy prayer, to descend into the secret folds of your
conscience, and examine all your actions in the light of the gospel;
to reveal in all your works the sacred character that you have
received in baptism; to lead a life according to the spirit of faith,
and not according to the spirit of the world-for, if there is no
difference between your conduct and that of worldlings, to what
purpose will the title of Christian avail you? All this is a serious
work, and requires a serious mind to accomplish it.

The practice of Christian virtues supposes and develops at the same
time the love of seriousness. This love does not increase in a
superficial soul; while it is entirely sterile in a frivolous mind.
Remember that you have now attained the age between childhood and
womanhood, when it is no longer lawful to be amused by trifles, and
when you are called upon to prepare for austere duties which you
must, ere long, discharge.

You have now come to that period of life at which you must determine
your final future course; hence you have need of a serious mind and
will to guide you securely in the choice of the road, as also to pave
it with those virtues which in the end will form your most precious
treasures. This road will be such as you have made it, narrow or
wide, level or rough, according to the pains and labor that you have
expended in preparing it.

If you hearken to the voice of reason, and wish to profit by the
lessons of wisdom, you will not squander a most precious time in vain
amusements; you will neither step to the right nor to the left, but
continue right on in the way of stern duty. The world's siren charms
will have no attraction for you, as their bitter fruits would extort
from you bitter regrets for having so little profited by the most
precious time of your life.

Oh, how sorrowful the old age of women who have never nourished
their minds otherwise than with frivolous thoughts: finding neither
in themselves nor in society any means to dispel the gloom that
envelops them, and not being able to enlist the sympathy of the world
which abandons and despises them, they are condemned to eke out a
miserable existence in the disgust and wearisomeness of a sombre
solitude.

To a serious woman, on the contrary, old age lends a peculiar charm
which renders her company agreeable to, and sought for, by all
serious minds. Her conversation and manners still possess all the
blitheness, freshness and vivacity of youth. Her steady lightsome
gaze, tempered by a benignant and reflective mind, lends her an air
of amiability and majesty. Her language is instructive, her counsels
encouraging, while her reproaches arouse the heart to a sense of
duty. She has friends wherever she is known, friends who revere and
respect, without idolizing her. In her youth she never pandered to
flattery, now, old, she shall not experience ingratitude. The friends
she earned by her sterling worth will recall to her mind the happy
souvenirs of her youth, even up to the last days of her life; for her
years bear with them all their primitive charms which can never
decline under the influence of time, because the thoughts and
affections that produced and preserved them are now what they were,
solid and grave. And while the companions of her youth languish and
fret in their sad isolation, she, always the same, sees herself
surrounded by a multitude, anxious to profit by her experience.

If you have learned to be serious in youth, you shall enjoy an
agreeable old age; but if the former be stamped with levity and
frivolity, the latter shall be fraught with sorrow and desolation. Do
not count on the charms of youth, it is a flower that shall very soon
fade, and like a bird on the wing, shall leave no trace behind it.
The lustre of your eyes now beaming delight shall soon grow dull; the
bloom shall depart from your cheek; the bright hopes that now fill
your soul shall give place to sad souvenirs; and your heart which is
now the abode of delight shall then be harrowed with sorrow and woe.
To-day you are flattered and praised, then you shall be a castaway,
abandoned. All that will remain to you is God and your soul, with
whom you had never learned to converse or commune. Oh, sad, indeed,
is the old age of a frivolous youth!




CHAPTER XIV.


CHOICE OP COMPANIONS.

Since a predisposition to good and evil is found among persons of
all classes and ages; and as this predisposition is especially strong
at your age, when the sympathies are most tender, when the heart so
candid and open is ready to receive and reciprocate those secret
emanations that escape from the souls of loved ones; you require to
take more than ordinary precautions, since the danger to which these
circumstances expose you is indeed very great, and requires a
prudence superior to your years,--you must therefore look for it in
the advice of others, but more especially in that of your mother who
should be your first adviser in all things.

How many women owe to the examples and deceptive lessons of a so-
called friend, the bitterness that corrodes their hearts, and the
