the Land of Purity.

184. Not one, indeed, but not far asunder are the confused deed and
the confused practice. The teachings that are not the teachings of
the Land of Purity are to be condemned as confused deeds.

185. Having invoked the testimony of all the Buddhas, Zendo-Daishi
hath set before us the story of the two rivers, the one, the river
of fire, the other the river of water, that he might incline the
heart to righteous deeds, and guard the true faith of the Divine
Promise.

186. Verily a simple man may attain unto the true Illumination, if
he believe the Holy Promise that is the spirit of the teaching of
Shinshu. Because for this only was the Lord made manifest in this
world, and not according to those other teachings which shall pass
away and be no more.

187. Before the Almighty Power of the Divine teaching do all the
fetters of evil deeds fall away. Therefore is the Divine Promise of
our Father invoked as that Holy Thing which giveth unto us
omnipotent strength.

188. Yet, to whomsoever would enter the Promised Land, created in
the power of His Divine Vow, is belief in his own strength impotent.

And because they are needless, therefore the wise who have received
the Great and Lesser Vehicles must trust unto the promise of the
Almighty One.

189. Whoso hath known himself the slave of illusion shall yet,
relying on the Power of the Holy Promise, enter into the immortal
joy of the Truth, and all his earthly body shall fall from him.

190. Merciful and compassionate parents unto us are the Blessed One
and the Lord Buddha. For they have opened before us the ways of
good, having so purposed that the great Faith shall be.

191. He who is one with the True Soul hath attained unto a heart
clear and hard as diamond. Therefore is he at one with that man who
hath the three excellent forms of Penitence. This hath the Great
Teacher shown us.

192. By that faith alone, like unto a jewel of price, we who in this
sinful world have our being, may enter into the Eternal Kingdom,
being eternally freed from the yoke of birth and death.

193. At that moment when faith in the Enlightened One is perfected,
pure and lasting as the diamond, then shall the Spiritual Light
shine upon us and guard us, the light which for ever guideth us from
rebirth and death.

194. Whoso attaineth not unto the True Faith hath not in him one of
the Trinity of Virtues, that are Sincerity, Faith, and Hope, and the
man that hath not one of these three holdeth not the perfect faith.

195. Whoso attaineth unto the True Faith given of Him is freed from
all let and hindrance, for his heart is at one with the Divine
Promise, and he is obedient unto the true teaching that is the Very
Word of the Buddha.

196. Whoso hath comprehended the truth of the Holy Name is at that
very moment freed from doubt. He hath possessed the Right thought,
and he is commended as excellent and rare in his attainment.

197. He shall be let and hindered that is not at one with the Divine
Promise, and therefore he whose faith is not full of Peace is a man
who holdeth not the Divine Thought.

198. The attainment of the Divine Wisdom shall come unto him who
reciteth the Holy Name, for his faith cometh from the Divine Promise
of Him that leadeth him into the Promised Land. He shall not fail
to attain unto the Great Nirvana.

199. At this time when the five Signs of Degeneration are manifest,
many men are there who doubt and blaspheme the Holy Doctrine. Yea,
even the Priests, together with the people, are enemies unto him who
walketh in the right way.

200. He who blasphemeth the Divine Promise is a man born blind. He
shall sink into three evil worlds for age-long myriads of Kalpas.

201. Though the way into the Land that is in the West hath been made
plain before us, yet the age-long Kalpas have rolled away without
good fruit thereof, for we have hindered ourselves and our brethren
that we might not enter therein.

202. Without the Almighty Strength of the Divine Promise how should
we leave this sinful world? Wherefore we should live in hearty
thanksgiving for the Grace of our Father, thinking ever upon the
ocean deeps of his love.

203. For it is by the marvellous mercy of our Lord that we may cast
aside the anguish of birth and death, in the shining hope of our
Eternal Kingdom.

Therefore should we return unto the Lord righteous deeds in
thanksgiving for His grace and mercy.


CONCERNING GENSHIN-SOZU

204. Genshin the Great Teacher declareth: "In this world have I,
even I, appeared as an incarnation of the Buddha, and now, my work
of Salvation being accomplished, I return unto the Eternal Kingdom
that is my home.

205. From the teaching of our Lord hath Genshin, the Great Teacher,
tenderly opened unto us the gate of the Doctrine of the Holy Name,
and hath so taught mankind in this evil world that is far removed
from the Golden Day of our Lord.

206. Genshin-Sozu, he who sat in the Assemblage on the Peak of
Vultures in the time of our Lord, hath taught us that there are two
Paradises, that which is eternal and that which is temporal, and
thus setteth forth the merit and the defect of the Right Practice
and of the Mingled Deed.

207. Acharya Genshin, the Great Teacher, considering one of the
Sutra with the commentary of Ekanzenji, hath made plain the
attributes of the Land of Outermost Places.

208. For he said: "Not one man is there of thousands who may not be
born into the Land of Purity." And thus saying, he commendeth the
followers of the Right Practice.

And again:

"There is not even one among tens of thousands who may enter it."
And so saying, he condemneth the doers of the mingled deed.

209. Further he setteth forth how few are the men who can enter into
the True Land of Purity. And very solemnly he warneth us that more
are they that are born into the Temporal Paradise.

210. Wheresoever men or women, be they noble or lowly born, recite
the Holy Name of our Father, there is no pre-eminence of place or
time. Freely may they do this, whether walking, resting, sitting,
or lying.

211. Though our eyes are so blinded by illusion that we discern not
the light whereby He embraceth us, yet that great mercy for ever
shineth upon us and is not weary.

212. Whatsoever may be his Visible Deed that would be born into the
Promised Land, he shall not forget day or night to hold fast unto
the name of the Divine Promise.

213. To us that in this world are sinners most sinful, there is none
other way of Salvation save that we should enter into the Land of
Purity, by reciting the holy name of Him who is our Father.



CONCERNING HONEN SHONIN

214. Since the day when Honen Shonin appeared in the world, and set
forth the single Ark of the Divine Promise, hath the Doctrine of the
Pure Land gloriously shone upon the hearts of all men in the land of
Nihon.

215. For from the strength of the wisdom of light, Honen, the Great
Teacher, came into the world and hath taught the chosen doctrine of
the Divine Promise, and he hath built Jodo-Shinshu upon the rock.

216. Though Zendo and Genshin, those great teachers, have well
instructed us, yet had Honen Shonin kept silence, wherewith should
we know the holy teaching of Shin-Shu, we who dwell in remote
country and in an evil day?

217. Throughout the long, long Kalpas of my lives that are overpast
could I never find the way of Deliverance, and if Honen Shonin, the
Great Teacher, had not arisen in this world, vainly had I spent the
precious hours of my life.

218. When his years were but fifteen, Honen Shonin entered into the
Way of Illumination, for in departing from worldly life he fulfilled
his heart's desire, and by him was clearly understanded the doctrine
of the transience of life.

219. The excellent righteousness of Honen Shonin, his deeds and the
wisdom that was in him, drew unto him for refuge many even of chief
priests of the heretics that seek Nirvana through the way of the
sages. Yea, they sought him even as their appointed teacher, radiant
and stray of soul as the diamond.

220. Even while Honen Shonin yet walked in this world, there issued
from his body rays of a golden shining, and this, so it is said,
hath Kanezane Fujiwara beheld with his own eyes.

221. The people passed it from mouth to mouth that this Honen Shonin
was the living incarnation of Doshaku Zenji, or yet again of Zendo
Daishi.

222. Before the eyes of men Honen Shonin stood as the Boddhisattva
of Wisdom, or, yet more, as the Blessed One again made flesh.

The Emperor and all his ministers did homage unto him, yea, and the
men of the chief city and of the far countries.

223. He who had been Emperor, in the time of Jokyu, brought homage
to Honen Shonin. All the priests and scholars of the word of
Confucius had understanding of the doctrine of Shin Shu.

224. A chosen vessel of the Blessed One that men might be saved,
Honen Shonin was manifested in the world, and he opened wide the
gate of perfect wisdom, having instructed mankind in the Holy Faith.

225. Of all rare things it is the rarest that we should ourselves
meet with the True Teacher, yet verily the chain of doubt in the
Divine Mercy is the true cause of unending birth and death.

226. Honen Shonin issued forth from the mysterious Light and his
disciples beheld it. In his eyes was there nought of disparity
between the wise and them that know not, between the noble and the
lowly born.

227. And now, his time being at hand, Honen Shonin spake:

"Thrice have I taken birth in the Land of Purity, and of these three
times the last hath given unto me the fullness of peace."

228. Once did Honen Shonin speak, saying: "In the glorious day of
our Lord was I among the holy Assemblage on the Peak of Vultures,
and my Spirit was rapt in self-instruction and in the doctrine of
salvation."

229. Having taken birth in that small and remote island, Honen
Shonin spread abroad the doctrine of the Holy Name for the sake of
all men's salvation. And thus had he done not only then, but many
times in ages gone by.

230. That Buddha, whose light is infinite, was made flesh in this
world as Honen Shonin, and when his merciful work was accomplished,
he returned into the Land of Purity.

231. When his life was drawing to a close, light was manifested
about him as a cloud of glory, yea, and music of the heavenly
places, sweet and excelling in harmony, and sweet odours scattered
about him.

232. Following steadfastly after the ensample of the Nirvana of the
Lord, he laid himself upon his right side, his head inclined unto
the north, his face turned unto the west. And the crowding people
attended upon him, even the priests and men and women of the nobles
and of the lowly born.

233. Now the time when Honen Shonin departed from this life was the
twenty-fifth day of the young spring. In the second year of
Kenriyaku he returned in peace unto the Land of the Father.

