
Here is a confidence in the divine presence, manifested by
unquestioning obedience to a divine command.

                       'Theirs not to make reply,
                        Theirs not to reason why.'

Joshua had spoken; God had spoken through him. And so here goes! up
with the Ark and the trumpets, and out on to the hot sand for the
march! It would have been a great deal easier to have stopped in the
tents. It was disheartening work marching round thus. The sceptical
spirit in the host--the folk of whom there are many great-grandchildren
living to-day, who always have objections to urge when disagreeable
duties are crammed up against their faces--would have enough to say on
that occasion, but the bulk of the people were true, and obeyed. Now,
we do not need to put out the eyes of our understanding in order to
practise the obedience of faith. And we have to exercise common-sense
about the things that seem to us to be duties.

But this is plain, that if once we see a thing to be, in Christian
language, the will of our Father in heaven, then everything is settled;
and there is only one course for us, and that is, unquestioning
submission, active submission, or, what is as hard, passive submission.

Then here again is faith manifesting itself by an obedience which was
altogether ignorant of what was coming. I think that is quite plain in
the story, if you will read it carefully, though I think that it is not
quite what people generally understand as its meaning. But it makes the
incident more in accordance with God's uniform way of dealing with us
that the host should be told on the morning of the first day of the
week that they were to march round the city, and told the same on the
second day, and on the third the same, and so on until the sixth; and
that not until the morning of the seventh, were they told what was to
be the end of it all. That is the way in which God generally deals with
us. In the passage of the Jordan, too, you will find, if you will look
at the narrative carefully, that although Joshua was told what was
coming, the people were not told till the morning of the day, when the
priests' feet were dipped in the brink of the water. We, too, have to
do our day's march, knowing very little about tomorrow; and we have to
carry on all through life 'doing the duty that lies nearest us,'
entirely ignorant of the strange issues to which it may conduct. Life
is like a voyage down some winding stream, shut in by hills, sometimes
sunny and vine-clad, like the Rhine, sometimes grim and black, like an
American canon. As the traveller looks ahead he wonders how the stream
will find a passage beyond the next bend; and as he looks back, he
cannot trace the course by which he has come. It is only when he rounds
the last shoulder that he sees a narrow opening flashing in the
sunshine, and making a way for his keel. So, seeing that we know
nothing about the issues, let us make sure of the motives; and seeing
that we do not know what to-morrow may bring forth, nor even what the
next moment may bring, let us see that we fill the present instant as
full as it will hold with active obedience to God, based upon simple
faith in Him. He does not open His whole hand at once; He opens a
finger at a time, as you do sometimes with your children when you are
trying to coax them to take something out of the palm. He gives us
enough light for the moment, He says, 'March round Jericho; and be sure
that I mean something. What I do mean I will tell you some day.' And so
we have to put all into His hands.

Then here, again, is faith manifesting itself by persistency. A week
was not long, but it was a long while during which to do that one
apparently useless thing and nothing else. It would take about an hour
or so to march round the city, and there were twenty-three hours of
idleness. Little progress in reducing Jericho was made by the progress
round it, and it must have got rather wearisome about the sixth day.
Familiarity would breed monotony, but notwithstanding the deadly
influences of habit, the obedient host turned out for their daily
round. 'Let us not be weary in well-doing,' for there is a time for
everything. There is a time for sowing and for reaping, and in the
season of the reaping 'we shall reap, if we faint not.' Dear brethren!
we all get weary of our work. Custom presses upon us, 'with a weight
heavy as frost, and deep almost as life.' It is easy to do things with
a spurt, but it is the keeping on at the monotonous, trivial, and
sometimes unintelligible duties that is the test of a man's grit, and
of his goodness too. So, although it is a very, very threadbare
lesson--one that you may think it was not worth while for me to bring you
all here to receive--I am sure that there are few things needed more by us
all, and especially by those of us who are on the wrong side of middle
life, as people call it--though I think it is the right side in many
respects--than that old familiar lesson. Keep on as you have begun, and
for the six weary days turn out, however hot the sun, however
comfortable the carpets in the tent, however burning the sand, however
wearisome and flat it may seem to be perpetually tramping round the
same walls of the same old city; keep on, for in due season the trumpet
will sound and the walls will fall.

II. So that brings me to the second stage--viz., the sudden victory
which vindicates and explains the protracted trial of faith.

I do not need to tell the story of how, on the seventh day, the host
encompassed the city seven times, and at last they were allowed to
break the long silence with a shout. You will observe the prominence
given to the sacred seven, both in the number of days, of circuits
made, and the number of the priests' trumpets. Probably the last day
was a Sabbath, for there must have been one somewhere in the week, and
it is improbable that it was one of the undistinguished days. That was
a shout, we may be sure, by which the week's silence was avenged, and
all the repressed emotions gained utterance at last. The fierce yell
from many throats, which startled the wild creatures in the hills
behind Jericho, blended discordantly with the trumpets' clang which
proclaimed a present God; and at His summons the fortifications toppled
into hideous ruin, and over the fallen stones the men of Israel
clambered, each soldier, in all that terrible circle of avengers that
surrounded the doomed city, marching straight forward, and so all
converging on the centre.

Now, we can discover good reasons for this first incident in the
campaign being marked by miracle. The fact that it was the first is a
reason. It is a law of God's progressive revelation that each new epoch
is inaugurated by miraculous works which do not continue throughout its
course. For instance, it is observable that, in the _Acts of the
Apostles,_ the first example of each class of incidents recorded there,
such as the first preaching, the first persecution, the first
martyrdom, the first expansion of the Gospel beyond Jews, its first
entrance into Europe, has usually the stamp of miracle impressed on it,
and is narrated at great length, while subsequent events of the same
class have neither of those marks of distinction. Take, for example,
the account of Stephen, the first martyr. He saw 'the heavens opened'
and the Son of Man 'standing at the right hand of God.' We do not read
that the heavens opened when Herod struck off the head of James with
the sword. But was Jesus any the less near to help His servant?
Certainly not.

In like manner it was fitting that the first time that Israel crossed
swords with these deadly and dreaded enemies should be marked by a
miraculous intervention to hearten God's warriors. But let us take care
that we understand the teaching of any miracle. Surely it does not
secularise and degrade the other incidents of a similar sort in which
no miracle was experienced. The very opposite lesson is the true one to
draw from a miracle. In its form it is extraordinary, and presents
God's direct action on men or on nature, so obviously that all eyes can
see it. But the conclusion to be drawn is not that God acts only in a
supernatural' manner, but that He is acting as really, though in a less
obvious fashion, in the 'natural' order. In these turning-points, the
inauguration of new stages in revelation or history, the cause which
always produces all nearer effects and the ultimate effects, which are
usually separated or united (as one may choose to regard it) by many
intervening links, are brought together. But the originating power
works as truly when it is transmitted through these many links as when
it dispenses with them. Miracle shows us in abbreviated fashion, and
therefore conspicuously, the divine will acting directly, that we may
see it working when it acts indirectly. In miracle God makes bare His
arm,' that we may be sure of its operation when it is draped and
partially hid, as by a vesture, by second causes.

We are not to argue that, because there is no miracle, God is not
present or active. He was as truly with Israel when there was no Ark
present, and no blast of the trumpet heard. He was as truly with Israel
when they fought apparently unhelped, as He was when Jericho fell. The
teaching of all the miracles in the Old and the New Testaments is that
the order of the universe is maintained by the continual action of the
will of God on men and things. So this story is a transient revelation
of an eternal fact. God is as much with you and me in our fights as He
was with the Israelites when they marched round Jericho, and as
certainly will He help. If by faith we endure the days of often blind
obedience, we shall share the rapture of the sudden victory.

Now, I have said that the last day of this incident was probably a
Sabbath day. Does not that suggest the thought that we may take this
story as a prophetic symbol? There is for us a week of work, and a
seventh day of victory, when we shall enter, not into the city of
confusion which has come to nought, but into the city which 'hath the
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.' The old fathers of the
Christian Church were not far wrong, when they saw in this story a type
of the final coming of the Lord. Did you ever notice how St. Paul, in
writing to the Thessalonians about that coming, seems to have his mind
turned back to the incident before us? Remember that in this incident
the two things which signalised the fall of the city were the trumpet
and the shout. What does Paul say? 'The Lord Himself shall descend from
heaven with a _shout_, with the voice of the archangel, and with the
_trump_ of God.' Jericho over again! And then, 'Babylon is fallen, is
fallen!' 'And I saw the new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven, like a
bride adorned for her husband.'




RAHAB

'And Joanna paved Rahab the harlot alive... and she dwelleth in Israel
even unto this day.'--JOSHUA vi. 25.


This story comes in like an oasis in these terrible narratives of
Canaanite extermination. There is much about it that is beautiful and
striking, but the main thing is that it teaches the universality of
God's mercy, and the great truth that trust in Him unites to Him and
brings deliverance, how black soever may have been the previous life.

I need not tell over again the story, told with such inimitable
picturesqueness here: how the two spies, swimming the Jordan in flood,
set out on their dangerous mission and found themselves in the house of
Rahab, a harlot; how the king sent to capture them, how she hid them
among the flax-stalks bleaching on the flat roof, confessed faith in
Israel's God and lied steadfastly to save them, how they escaped to the
Quarantania hills, how she 'perished not' in the capture, entered into
the community of Israel, was married, and took her place--hers!--in the
line of David's and Christ's ancestresses.

The point of interest is her being, notwithstanding her previous
position and history, one of the few instances in which heathen were
brought into Israel. The _Epistle to the Hebrews_ and _James_ both
refer to her. We now consider her story as embodying for us some
important truths about faith in its nature, its origin, its power.

I. Faith in its constant essence and its varying objects.

Her creed was very short and simple. She abjured idols, and believed
that Jehovah was the one God. She knew nothing of even the Mosaic
revelation, nothing of its moral law or of its sacrifices. And yet the
_Epistle to the Hebrews_ has no scruple in ascribing faith to her. The
object of that Epistle is to show that Christianity is Judaism
perfected. It labours to establish that objectively there has been
advance, not contradiction, and that subjectively there is absolute
identity. It has always been faith that has bound men to God. That
faith may co-exist with very different degrees of illumination. Not the
creed, but the trust, is the all-important matter. This applies to all
pre-Christian times and to all heathen lands. _Our_ faith has a fuller
gospel to lay hold of. Do not neglect it.

Beware lest people with less light and more love get in before you,
'who shall come from the east and the west.'

II. Faith in its origin in fear.

There are many roads to faith, and it matters little which we take, so
long as we get to the goal. This is one, and some people seem to think
that it is a very low and unworthy one, and one which we should never
urge upon men. But there are a side of the divine nature and a mode of
the divine government which properly evoke fear.

God's moral government, His justice and retribution, are facts.

Fear is an inevitable and natural consequence of feeling that His
justice is antagonistic to us. The work of conscience is precisely to
create such fear. Not to feel it is to fall below manhood or to be
hardened by sin.

That fear is meant to lead us to God and love. Rahab fled to God. Peter
'girt his fisher's coat to him,' and lost his fear in the sunshine of
Christ's face, as a rainbow trembles out of a thunder-cloud when
touched by sunbeams.

We have all grounds enough to _fear_.

Urge these as a reason for _trust_.

III. Faith in its relation to the previous life.

It is a strange instance of blindness that attempts have been made to
soften down the Bible's plain speaking about Rahab's character.

In her story we have an anticipation of New Testament teaching.

The 'woman that was a sinner.'

Mary Magdalene.

'Then drew near all the publicans and sinners for to hear Him.'

She shows us that there is no hopeless guilt. None is so in regard to
the effects of sin on a soul. There is no heart so indurated as that
its capacity for being stirred by the divine message is killed.

There is none hopeless in regard to God.

His love embraces all, however bad. The bond which unites to Him is not
blamelessness of life but simple trust.

The grossest vice is not so thorough a barrier as self-satisfied
self-righteousness.

A thin slice of crystal will bar the entrance of air more effectually
than many folds of stuff.

IV. Faith in its practical effects.

Rahab's story shows how living faith, like a living stream, will cut a
channel for itself, and must needs flow out into the life.

Hence James is right in using her as an example of how 'we are
justified by works and not by faith only,' and the author of the
_Epistle to the Hebrews_ is equally right in enrolling her in his great
muster-roll of heroes and heroines of faith, and asserting that 'by
faith' she 'perished not among them who believed not.' The one writer
fastens on a later stage in her experience than does the other. James
points to the rich fruit, the Epistle to the Hebrews goes deeper and
lays bare the root from which the life rose to the clusters.

The faith that saves is not a barren intellectual process, nor an idle
trust in Christ's salvation, but a practical power. If genuine it
_will_ mould and impel the life.

So Rahab's faith led her, as ours, if real, will lead us, to break with
old habits and associations contrary to itself. She ceased to be 'Rahab
the harlot,' she forsook 'her own people and her father's house.' But
her conquest of her old self was gradual. A lie was a strange kind of
first-fruits of faith. Its true fruit takes time to flower and swell
and come to ripeness and sweetness.

So we should not expect old heads on young shoulders, nor wonder if
people, lifted from the dunghills of the world, have some stench and
rags of their old vices hanging about them still. That thought should
moderate our expectations of the characters of converts from
heathenism, or from the degraded classes at home. And it should be
present to ourselves, when we find in ourselves sad recurrences of
faults and sins that we know should have been cast out, and that we
hoped had been so.

This thought enhances our wondering gratitude for the divine
long-suffering which bears with our slow progress. Our great Teacher
never loses patience with His dull scholars.

V. Faith as the means of deliverance and safety.

From external evils it delivers us or not, as God may will. James was
no less dear, and no less faithful, than John, though he was early
'slain with the sword,' and his brother died in extreme old age in
Ephesus. Paul looked forward to being 'delivered from every evil work,'
though he knew that the time of his being 'offered' was at hand,
because the deliverance that he looked for was his being 'saved _into_
His heavenly kingdom.'

That true deliverance is infallibly ours, if by faith we have made the
Deliverer ours.

There is a more terrible fall of a worse city than Jericho, in that day
when 'the city of the terrible ones shall be laid low,' and _our_
Joshua brings it 'to the ground, even to the dust.' 'In that same day
shall this song be sung in the land of Judah: we have a strong city,
salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks,' and into that
eternal home He will certainly lead all who are joined to Him, and
separated from their foul old selves, and from 'the city of
destruction,' by faith in Him.




ACHAN'S SIN, ISRAEL'S DEFEAT

'But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing:
for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the
tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the anger of the Lord
was kindled against the children of Israel. 2. And Joshua sent men from
Jericho to Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Beth-ei,
and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the country. And the men
went up and viewed Ai. 3. And they returned to Joshua, and said unto
him, Let not all the people go up; but let about two or three thousand
men go up and smite Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither;
for they are but few. 4. So there went up thither of the people about
three thousand men: and they fled before the men of Ai. 5. And the men
of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they chased them from
before the Irate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in the going down;
wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became as water. 6. And
Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the
ark of the Lord until the eventide, he and the elders of Israel, and
put dust upon their heads. 7. And Joshua said, Alas, O Lord God,
wherefore hast Thou at all brought this people over Jordan, to deliver
us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had
been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan! 8. O Lord, what shall
I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies! 9. For the
Canaanites, and all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and
shall environ us round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what
wilt Thou do unto Thy great name? 10. And the Lord said unto Joshua,
Get thee up; wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face? 11. Israel hath
sinned, and they have also trangressed My covenant which I commanded
them: for they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also
stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own
stuff. 12. Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before
their enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because
they were accursed; neither will I be with you any more, except ye
destroy the accursed from among you.'--JOSHUA vii. 1-12.


This passage naturally parts itself into--1. The hidden sin (v. 1); 2.
The repulse by which it is punished (vs. 2-5); 3. The prayer of
remonstrance (vs. 6-9); and 4. The answer revealing the cause (vs.
10-12). We may briefly note the salient points in these four divisions,
and then consider the general lessons of the whole.

I. Observe, then, that the sin is laid at the doors of the whole
nation, while yet it was the secret act of one man. That Is a strange
'for' in verse 1--the people did it; 'for' Achan did it. Observe, too,
with what bitter particularity his descent is counted back through
three generations, as if to diffuse the shame and guilt over a wide
area, and to blacken the ancestors of the culprit. Note also the
description of the sin. Its details are not given, but its inmost
nature is. The specification of the 'Babylonish garment,' the 'shekels
of silver,' and the 'wedge of gold,' is reserved for the sinner's own
confession; but the blackness of the deed is set forth in its principle
in verse 1. It was a 'breach of trust,' for so the phrase 'committed a
trespass' might be rendered. The expression is frequent in the
Pentateuch to describe Israel's treacherous departure from God, and has
this full meaning here. The sphere in which Achan's treason was
evidenced was 'in the devoted thing.' The spoil of Jericho was set
aside for Jehovah, and to appropriate any part of it was sacrilege. His
sin, then, was double, being at once covetousness and robbing God.
Achan, at the beginning of Israel's warfare for Canaan, and Ananias, at
the beginning of the Church's conquest of the world, are brothers alike
in guilt and in doom. Note the wide sweep of 'the anger of the Lord,'
involving in its range not only the one transgressor, but the whole
people.

II. All unconscious of the sin, and flushed with victory, Joshua let no
grass grow under his feet, but was prepared to push his advantage to
the utmost with soldierly promptitude. The commander's faith and
courage were contagious, and the spies came back from their perilous
reconnaissance of Ai with the advice that a small detachment was enough
for its reduction. They had not spied the mound in the middle of
Achan's tent, or their note would have been changed. Three thousand, or
three hundred, would have been enough, if God had been with them. The
whole army would not have been enough since He was not. The site of Ai
seems to have been satisfactorily identified on a small plateau among
the intricate network of wild wadys and bare hills that rise behind
Jericho. The valley to the north, the place where the ambush lay at the
successful assault, and a great mound, still bearing the name 'Et Tel'
(the heap), are all there. The attacking force does not seem to have
been commanded by Joshua. The ark stayed at Gilgal, The contempt for
the resistance likely to be met makes the panic which ensued the more
remarkable. What turned the hearts of the confident assailants to
water? There was no serious fighting, or the slaughter would have been
more than thirty-six. 'There went up ... about three thousand and
they'--did what? fought and conquered? Alas, no, but 'they fled before
the men of Ai,' rushing in wild terror down the steep pass which they
had so confidently breasted in the morning, till the pursuers caught
them up at some 'quarries,' where, perhaps, the ground was difficult,
and there slew the few who fell, while the remainder got away by
swiftness of foot, and brought back their terror and their shame to the
camp. As the disordered fugitives poured in, they infected the whole
with their panic. Such unwieldy undisciplined hosts are peculiarly
liable to such contagious terror, and we find many instances in
Scripture and elsewhere of the utter disorganisation which ensues. The
whole conquest hung in the balance. A little more and the army would be
a mob; and the mob would break into twos and threes, which would get
short shrift from the Amorites.

Ill. Mark, then, Joshua's action in the crisis. He does not try to
encourage the people, but turns from them to God. The spectacle of the
leader and the elders prone before the ark, with rent garments and
dust-bestrewn hair, in sign of mourning, would not be likely to hearten
the alarmed people; but the defeat had clearly shown that something had
disturbed the relation to God, and the first necessity was to know what
it was. Joshua's prayer is perplexed, and not free from a wistful,
backward look, nor from regard to his own reputation; but the soul of
it is an earnest desire to know the 'wherefore' of this disaster. It
traces the defeat to God, and means really, 'Show me wherefore Thou
contendest with me.' No doubt it runs perilously near to repeating the
old complaints at Kadesh and elsewhere, which are almost verbally
reproduced in its first words. But the same things said by different
people are not the same; and Joshua's question is the voice of a faith
struggling to find footing, and his backward look is not because he
doubts God's power to help, or hankers after Egypt, but because he sees
that, for some unknown reason, they have lost the divine protection.
His reference to himself betrays the crushing weight of responsibility
which he felt, and comes not from carefulness for his own good fame so
much as from his dread of being unable to vindicate himself, if the
people should turn on him as the author of their misfortunes. His fear
of the news of the check at Ai emboldening not only the neighbouring
Amorites (highlanders) of the western Palestine, but the remoter
Canaanites (lowlanders) of the coast, to make a combined attack, and
sweep Israel out of existence, was a perfectly reasonable forecast of
what would follow. The naive simplicity of the appeal to God, 'What
wilt Thou do for Thy great name?' becomes the soldier, whose words went
the shortest way to their aim, as his spear did. We cannot fancy this
prayer coming from Moses; but, for all that, it has the ring of faith
in it, and beneath its blunt, simple words throbs a true heart.

IV. The answer sounds strange at first. God almost rebukes him for
praying. He gives Joshua back his own 'wherefore' in the question that
sounds so harsh, 'Wherefore art thou thus fallen upon thy face?' but
the harshness is only apparent, and serves to point the lesson that
follows, that the cause of the disaster is with Israel, not with God,
and that therefore the remedy is not in prayer, but in active steps to
cast out 'the unclean thing.' The prayer had asked two things,--the
disclosure of the cause of God's having left them, and His return. The
answer lays bare the cause, and therein shows the conditions of His
return. Note the indignant accumulation of verbs in verse 11,
describing the sin in all its aspects. The first three of the six point
out its heinousness in reference to God, as sin, as a breach of
covenant, and as an appropriation of what was specially His. The second
three describe it in terms of ordinary morality, as theft, lying, and
concealment; so many black sides has one sin when God's eye scrutinises
it. Note, too, the attribution of the sin to the whole people, the
emphatic reduplication of the shameful picture of their defeat, the
singular transference to them of the properties of 'the devoted thing'
which Achan has taken, and the plain, stringent conditions of God's
return. Joshua's prayer is answered. He knows now why little Ai has
beaten them back. He asked, 'What shall I say?' He has got something of
grave import to say. So far this passage carries us, leaving the
pitiful last hour of the wretched troubler of Israel untouched. What
lessons are taught here?

First, God's soldiers must be pure. The conditions of God's help are
the same to-day as when that panic-stricken crowd ignominiously fled
down the rocky pass, foiled before an insignificant fortress, because
sin clave to them, and God was gone from them. The age of miracles may
have ceased, but the law of the divine intervention which governed the
miracles has not ceased. It is true to-day, and will always be true,
that the victories of the Church are won by its holiness far more than
by any gifts or powers of mind, culture, wealth, eloquence, or the
like. Its conquests are the conquests of an indwelling God, and He
cannot share His temples with idols. When God is with us, Jericho is
not too strong to be captured; when He is driven from us by our own
sin, Ai is not too weak to defeat us. A shattered wall keeps us out, if
we fight in our own strength. Fortifications that reach to heaven fall
flat before us when God is at our side. If Christian effort seems ever
fruitless, the first thing to do is to look for the 'Babylonish
garment' and the glittering shekels hidden in our tents. Nine times out
of ten we shall find the cause in our own spiritual deficiencies. Our
success depends on God's presence, and God's presence depends on our
keeping His dwelling-place holy. When the Church is 'fair as the moon,'
reflecting in silvery whiteness the ardours of the sun which gives her
all her light, and without such spots as dim the moon's brightness, she
will be 'terrible as an army with banners.' This page of Old Testament
history has a living application to the many efforts and few victories
of the churches of to-day, which seem scarce able to hold their own
amid the natural increase of population in so-called Christian lands,
and are so often apparently repulsed when they go up to attack the
outlying heathenism.

            'His strength was as the strength of ten,
             Because his heart was pure,'

is true of the Christian soldier.

Again, we learn the power of one man to infect a whole community and to
inflict disaster on it. One sick sheep taints a flock. The effects of
the individual's sin are not confined to the doer. We have got a fine
new modern word to express this solemn law, and we talk now of
'solidarity,' which sounds very learned and 'advanced.' But it means
just what we see in this story; Achan was the sinner, all Israel
suffered. We are knit together by a mystical but real bond, so that 'no
man,' be he good or bad, 'liveth to himself,' and no man's sin
terminates in himself. We see the working of that unity in families,
communities, churches, nations. Men are not merely aggregated together
like a pile of cannon balls, but are knit together like the myriad
lives in a coral rock. Put a drop of poison anywhere, and it runs by a
thousand branching veins through the mass, and tints and taints it all.
No man can tell how far the blight of his secret sins may reach, nor
how wide the blessing of his modest goodness may extend. We should seek
to cultivate the sense of being members of a great whole, and to ponder
our individual responsibility for the moral and religious health of the
church, the city, the nation. We are not without danger from an
exaggerated individualism, and we need to realise more constantly and
strongly that we are but threads in a great network, endowed with
mysterious vitality and power of transmitting electric impulses, both
of good and evil.

Again, we have one more illustration in this story of the well-worn
lesson,--never too threadbare to be repeated, until it is habitually
realised,--that God's eye sees the hidden sins. Nobody saw Achan carry
the spoil to his tent, or dig the hole to hide it. His friends walked
across the floor without suspicion of what was beneath. No doubt, he
held his place in his tribe as an honourable man, and his conscience
traced no connection between that recently disturbed patch on the floor
and the helter-skelter flight from Ai; but when the lot began to be
cast, he would have his own thought, and when the tribe of Judah was
taken, some creeping fear would begin to coil round his heart, which
tightened its folds, and hissed more loudly, as each step in the lot
brought discovery nearer home; and when, at last, his own name fell
from the vase, how terribly the thought would glare in on him,--'And
God knew it all the while, and I fancied I had covered it all up so
safely.' It is an awful thing to hear the bloodhounds following up the
scent which leads them straight to our lurking-place. God's judgments
may be long in being put on our tracks, but, once loose, they are sure
of scent, and cannot be baffled. It is an old, old thought, 'Thou God
seest me'; but kept well in mind, it would save from many a sin, and
make sunshine in many a shady place.

Again, we have in Achan a lesson which the professing Christians of
great commercial nations, like England, sorely need. I have already
pointed out the singular parallel between him and Ananias and Sapphira.
Covetousness was the sin of all three. It is the sin of the Church
to-day. The whole atmosphere in which some of us live is charged with
the subtle poison of it. Men are estimated by their wealth. The great
aim of life is to get money, or to keep it, or to gain influence and
notoriety by spending it. Did anybody ever hear of church discipline
being exercised on men who committed Achan's sin? _He_ was stoned to
death, but we set _our_ Achans in high places in the Church. Perhaps if
we went and fell on our faces before the ark when we are beaten, we
should be directed to some tent where a very 'influential member' of
Israel lived, and should find that to put an end to his ecclesiastical
life had a wonderful effect in bringing back courage to the army, and
leading to more unmingled dependence on God. Covetousness was stoned to
death in Israel, and struck with sudden destruction in the Apostolic
Church. It has been reserved for the modern Church to tolerate and
almost to canonise it; and yet we wonder how it comes that we are so
often foiled before some little Ai, and so seldom see any walls falling
by our assault. Let us listen to that stern sentence,  'I will not be
with you any more, except ye destroy the devoted thing from among you.'




THE SUN STAYED

Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon.'-JOSHUA x. 12


'The last time,' what a sad sound that has! In all minds there is a
shrinking from the last time of doing even some common act. The walk
down a street that we have passed every day for twenty years, and never
cared in the least about, and the very doorsteps and the children in
the streets, have an interest for us, as pensively we leave the
commonplace familiar scene.

On this last Sunday of another year, there comes a tone of sober
meditation over us, as we think that it _is_ the last. I would fain let
the hour preach. I have little to say but to give voice to its lessons.

My text is only taken as a starting-point, and I shall say nothing
about Joshua and his prayer. I do not discuss whether this was a
miracle or not. It seems, at any rate, to be taken by the writer of the
story as one. What a picture he draws of the fugitives rushing down the
rocky pass, blind in their fear, behind them the flushed and eager
conqueror, the burst of the sudden tempest and far in the west the
crescent moon, the leader on the hilltop with his prayer for but one
hour or two more of daylight to finish the wild work so well begun!
And, says the story, his wish was granted, and no day has been 'like it
before or since, in which the Lord hearkened unto the voice of a man.'
Once, and only once, did time seem to stand still; from the beginning
till now it has been going steadily on, and even then it only seemed to
stand. That day seemed longer, but life was passing all the same.

And so the first thought forced upon us here by our narrative and by
the season is the old one, so commonplace and yet so solemn.

I. Life inexorably slides away from us.

Once, and only once, it seemed to pause. How often since has Joshua's
prayer been prayed again! By the fearful,--the wretch to be hanged at
eight o'clock to-morrow morning, the man whom the next train will part
from all he loves. By the hopeful,--the child wearying for the
holidays, the bridegroom,

             'Gallop apace, ye fiery-footed steeds!'

By the suffering,--

             'Would God it were evening!'

By the martyr amid the flames,

             'Come quickly, Lord Jesus!'

But all in vain. We cannot expand the moments to hours, nor compress
the hours to moments. Leaden or winged, the hours are hours. The
cold-blooded pendulum ticks on, equable and unaltered, and after sixty
minutes, no sooner and no later, the hour strikes. 'There is a time for
every purpose.'

How solemn is the thought of that constant process! It goes on for
ever, like the sea fog creeping up from the wide ocean and burying life
and sunshine in its fatal folds, or like the ever-flowing river, or
like the fall plunging over the edge of the cliff, or like the motions
of the midnight sky. Each moment in its turn passes into the colourless
stony past, and the shadow creeps up the hillside.

And how unnoticed it is! We only know motion by the jolts. The
revolution of the earth and its rush along its orbit are unfelt by us.
We are constantly startled to feel how long ago such and such a thing
took place. The mother sees her little girl at her knee, and in a few
days, as it seems, finds her a woman. How immense is our life in the
prospect, how awfully it collapses in the retrospect! Only by seeing
constellation after constellation set, do we know that the heavens are
in motion. We have need of an effort of serious reflection to realise
that it is of _us_ and of _our_ lives that all these old commonplaces
are true.

That constant, unnoticed progress has an end. Our life is a definite
period, having a bounded past behind it, a present, and a bounded
future before it. We have a sandglass and it runs out. We are like men
sliding down a rope or hauling a boat towards a fixed point. The sea is
washing away our sandy island, and is creeping nearer and nearer to
where we stand, and will wash over us soon. No cries, nor prayers, nor
wishes will avail. It is vain for _us_ to say, 'Sun! stand thou still!'

II. Therefore our chief care should be to finish our work in our day.

Joshua had his day lengthened; we can come to the same result by
crowding ours with service. What is the purpose of life? Is it a shop?
or a garden? a school? No. Our 'chief end' is to become like God and a
little to help forward His cause. All is intended to develop character;
all life is disciplinary.

God's purpose should be our desire. That desire should mould all our
thoughts and acts. There should be no mere sentimental regrets for the
past, but the spirit of consecration should affect our thoughts about
it. There should be penitence, thankfulness, not vain mourning over
what is gone. There should be no waste or selfish use of the present.
What is it given us for but to use for God?

Strenuous work is the true way to lengthen each day. Time is infinitely
elastic. The noblest work is to do 'the works of Him that sent me.'
There should be no care for the future. It is in His hand. There will
be room in it for doing all His will.

                  'Lord, it belongs not to my care,
                   Whether I die or live.'

III. If so, the passing day will have results that never pass.

Joshua's day was long enough for his work, and that work was a victory
which told on future generations. So life, short as it is, will be long
enough for all that we have to do and learn and be.

Christ's servant is immortal till his work is done.

God gives every man time enough for his salvation.

What may we bring out of life? Character, Christ-likeness, thankful
memories, union with God, capacity for heaven. The transient leaves the
abiding. The flood foams itself away, but deposits rich soil on the
plain.

IV. Thus the passing away of what must pass may become a joy.

Why should we be sad? There are reasons enough, as many sad, lonely
hearts among us know too well To some men dark thoughts of death and
judgment make the crumbling away of life too gloomy a fact to be
contemplated, but it may and should be calm joy to us that the weary
world ends and a blessed life begins. We may count the moments and see
them pass, as a bride watches the hours rolling on to her marriage
morning; not, indeed, without tremor and sadness at leaving her old
home, but yet with meek hope and gentle joy.

It is possible for men to see that life is but 'as a shadow that
declineth,' and yet to be glad. By faith in Christ, united to 'Him Who
is for ever and ever,' our souls shall 'triumph over death and thee, O
time.'

We need not cry, 'Sun! stand still!' but rather, 'Come quickly, Lord
Jesus!'

Then Time shall be 'the lackey to eternity,' and Death be the porter of
heaven's gate, and we shall pass from the land of setting suns and
waning moons and change and sorrow, to that land where 'thy sun shall
no more go down,' and 'there shall be no more time.'




UNWON BUT CLAIMED

'There remaineth yet very much land to be possessed, ... them will I
drive out from before the children of Israel; only divide thou it by
lot unto Israel for an inheritance'--Joshua xiii. 1-8.

Joshua was now a very old man and had occupied seven years in the
conquest. His work was over, and now he had only to take steps to
secure the completion by others of the triumph which he would never
see. This incident has many applications to the work of the Church in
the world, but not less important ones to individual progress, and we
consider these mainly now.

I. The clear recognition of present imperfection.

That is essential in all regions, 'Not as though'; the higher up, the
more clearly we see the summit. The ideal grows loftier, as partially
realised. The mountain seems comparatively low and easy till we begin
to climb. We should be continually driven by a sense of our
incompleteness, and drawn by the fair vision of unattained
possibilities. In all regions, to be satisfied with the attained is to
cease to grow.

This is eminently so in the Christian life, with its goal of absolute
completeness.

How blessed this dissatisfaction is! It keeps life fresh: it is the
secret of perpetual youth.

Joshua's work was incomplete, as every man's must be. We each have our
limitations, the defects of our qualities, the barriers of our
environment, the brevity of our day of toil, and we have to be content
to carry the fiery cross a little way and then to give it up to other
hands. There is only One who could say,' It is done.' Let us see that
we do our own fragment.

II. The confident reckoning on complete possession.

Joshua's conquest was very partial. He subdued part of the central
mountain nucleus, but the low-lying stretch of country on the coast,
Philistia and the maritime plain up to Tyre and Sidon and other
outlying districts, remained unsubdued. Yet the whole land was now to
be allotted out to the tribes. That allotment must have strengthened
faith in their ultimate possession, and encouraged effort to make the
ideal a reality, and to appropriate as their own in fact what was
already theirs in God's purpose. So a great part of Christian duty, and
a great secret of Christian progress, is to familiarise ourselves with
the hope of complete victory. We should acquire the habit of
contemplating as certainly meant by God to be ours, complete conformity
to Christ's character, complete appropriation of Christ's gifts. God
bade Jeremiah buy a 'field that was in Anathoth' at the time an
invading army held the land. A Roman paid down money for the ground on
which the besiegers of Rome were encamped. It does not become
Christians to be less confident of victory. But we have to take heed
that our confidence is grounded on the right foundation. God's
commandment to Joshua to allot the land, even while the formidable foes
enumerated in the context held it firmly, was based on the assurance
(verse 6): 'Them will I drive out before the children of Israel.'
Confidence based on self is presumption, and will end in defeat;
confidence based on God will brace to noble effort, which is all the
more vigorous and will surely lead to victory, because it distrusts
self.

III. The vigorous effort animated by both the preceding.

How the habit of thinking the unconquered land theirs would encourage
Israel. Efforts without hope are feeble; hope without effort is
fallacious.

Israel's history is significant. The land was never actually all
conquered. God's promises are all conditional, and if we do not work,
or if we work in any other spirit than in faith, we shall not win our
allotted part in the 'inheritance of the saints in light.' It is
possible to lose 'thy crow.' 'Work out your own salvation.' 'Trust in
the Lord and do good, so shalt thou dwell in the land.'




CALEB--A GREEN OLD AGE

'And Caleb... said unto him (Joshua), Thou knowest the thing that the
Lord said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and thee in
Kadesh-barnea.'--JOSHUA xiv. 6.


Five and forty years had passed since the Lord had 'said this thing.'
It was the promise to these two, now old men, of the prolongation of
their lives, and to Caleb of his inheritance in the land. Seven years
of fighting have been got through, and the preparations are being made
for the division of the land by lot. But, before that is done, it is
fitting that Caleb, whose portion had been specially secured to him by
that old promise, should have the promise specially recognised and
