empty, and the world's cups are all drained dry, He will feed and
satisfy the immortal hunger and the blessed thirst of every spirit
that longs for Him.

The rude speech of the governor of the feast may lend itself to
another aspect of this same thought. He said, in jesting surprise,
'Thou hast kept the good wine until now,' whereas the world gives its
best first, and when the palate is dulled and the appetite diminished,
then 'that which is worse.' How true that is; how tragically true in
some of our lives! In the individual the early days of hope and
vigour, when all things were fresh and wondrous, when everything was
apparelled in the glory of a dream, contrast miserably with the bitter
experiences of life that most of us have made. Habit comes, and takes
the edge off everything. We drag remembrance, like a lengthening
chain, through all our life; and with remembrance come remorse and
regret. 'The vision splendid' no more attends men, as they plod on
their way through the weariness of middle life, or pass down into the
deepening shadows of advancing and solitary old age. The best comes
first, for the men who have no good but this world's. And some of you
have got nothing in your cups but dregs that you scarcely care to
drink.

But Jesus Christ keeps the best till the last. His gifts become
sweeter every day. No time can cloy them. Advancing years make them
more precious and more necessary. The end is better in this course
than the beginning. And when life is over, and we pass into the
heavens, the word will come to our lips, with surprise and with
thankfulness, as we find how much better it all is than we had ever
dreamed it should be: 'Thou hast kept the good wine until now.'

Oh, my brother! do not touch that cup that is offered to you by the
harlot world, spiced and fragrant and foaming; 'at the last it biteth
like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.' But take the pure joys
which the Christ, loved, trusted, obeyed, summoned to your feast and
welcomed in your heart, will bring to you; and these shall grow and
greaten until the perfection of the Heavens.




CHRIST CLEANSING THE TEMPLE

'Take these things hence; make not My Father's house an house of
merchandise.'--JOHN ii. 16.

The other Evangelists do not record this cleansing of the Temple at
the beginning of Christ's ministry, but, as we all know, tell of a
similar act at its very close. John, on the other hand, has no notice
of the latter incident. The question, then, naturally arises, are
these diverse narratives accounts of the same event? The answer seems
to me to be in the negative, because John's Gospel is evidently
intended to supplement the other three, and to record incidents either
unknown to, or unnoticed by, them, and, as a matter of fact, the whole
of this initial visit of our Lord to Jerusalem is omitted by the three
Evangelists. Then the two incidents are distinctly different in tone,
in setting, and in the words with which our Lord accompanies them.
They are both appropriate in the place in which they stand, the one as
the initial and the other as all but the final act of His Messiahship.
So we may learn from the repetition of this cleansing the solemn
lesson: that outward reformation of religious corruptions is of small
and transient worth. For in three years--perhaps in as many weeks--the
abuse that He corrected returned in full force.

Now, this narrative has many points of interest, but I think I shall
best bring out its meaning if I remind you, by way of introduction,
that the Temple of Jerusalem was succeeded by the Temple of the
Christian Church, and that each individual Christian man is a temple.
So there are three things that I want to set before you: what Christ
did in the Temple; what He does in the Church; what He will do to each
of us if we will let Him.

I. First, then, what Christ did in the Temple.

Now, the scene in our narrative is not unlike that which may be
witnessed in any Roman Catholic country in the cathedral place or
outside the church on the saint's day, where there are long rows of
stalls, fitted up with rosaries, and images of the saint, and candles,
and other apparatus for worship.

The abuse had many practical grounds on which it could be defended. It
was very convenient to buy sacrifices on the spot, instead of having
to drag them from a distance. It was no less convenient to be able to
exchange foreign money, possibly bearing upon it the head of an
emperor, for the statutory half-shekel. It was profitable to the
sellers, and no doubt to the priests, who were probably sleeping
partners in the concern, or drew rent for the ground on which the
stalls stood. And so, being convenient for all and profitable to many,
the thing became a recognised institution.

Being familiar it became legitimate, and no one thought of any
incongruity in it until this young Nazarene felt a flash of zeal for
the sanctity of His Father's house consuming Him. Catching up some of
the reeds which served as bedding for the cattle, He twisted them into
the semblance of a scourge, which could hurt neither man nor beast. He
did not use it. It was a symbol, not an instrument. According to the
reading adopted in the Revised Version, it was the sheep and cattle,
not their owners, whom He 'drove out.' And then, dropping the scourge,
He turned to the money-changers, and, with the same hand, overthrew
their tables. And then came the turn of the sellers of doves. He would
not hurt the birds, nor rob their owners. And so He neither overthrew
nor opened the cages, but bade them 'Take these things hence'; and
then came the illuminating words, 'Make not My Father's house a house
of merchandise.'

Now this incident is very unlike our Lord's usual method, even if we
do not exaggerate the violence which He employed. It is unlike in two
respects: in the use of compulsion, and in aiming at mere outward
reformation. And both of these points are intimately connected with
its place in His career.

It was the first public appearance of Jesus before His nation as
Messiah. He inaugurates His work by a claim--by an act of
authority--to be the King of Israel and the Lord of the Temple. If we
remember the words from the last prophet, in which Malachi says that
'the Messenger of the Covenant...shall suddenly come to His Temple,
and purify the sons of Levi,' we get the significance of this
incident. We have to mark in it our Lord's deliberate assumption of
the role of Messiah; His shaping His conduct so as to recall to all
susceptible hearts that last utterance of prophecy, and to recognise
the fact that at the beginning of His career He was fully conscious of
His Son-ship, and inaugurated His work by the solemn appeal to the
nation to recognise Him as their Lord.

And this is the reason, as I take it, why the anomalous incident is in
its place at the beginning of His career no less than the repetition
of it was at the close. And this is the explanation of the anomaly of
the incident. It is His solemn, authoritative claiming to be God's
Messenger, the Messiah long foretold.

Then, further, this incident is a singular manifestation of Christ's
unique power. How did it come that all these sordid hucksters had not
a word to say, and did not lift a finger in opposition, or that the
Temple Guard offered no resistance, and did not try to quell the
unseemly disturbance, or that the very officials, when they came to
reckon with Him, had nothing harsher to say than, 'What sign showest
Thou unto us, seeing that Thou doest these things'? No miracle is
needed to explain that singular acquiescence. We see in lower forms
many instances of a similar thing. A man ablaze with holy indignation,
and having a secret ally in the hearts of those whom He rebukes, will
awe a crowd even if he does not infect them. But that is not the full
explanation. I see here an incident analogous to that strange event at
the close of Christ's ministry, when, coming out from beneath the
shadows of the olives in the garden, He said to the soldiers 'Whom
seek ye?' and they fell backwards and wallowed on the ground. An
overwhelming impression of His personal majesty, and perhaps some
forth-putting of that hidden glory which did swim up to the surface on
the mountain of Transfiguration, bowed all these men before Him, like
reeds before the wind. And though there was no recognition of His
claim, there was something in the Claimant that forbade resistance and
silenced remonstrance.

Further, this incident is a revelation of Christ's capacity for
righteous indignation. No two scenes can be more different than the
two recorded in this chapter: the one that took place in the rural
seclusion of Cana, nestling among the Galilean hills, the other that
was done in the courts of the Temple swarming with excited
festival-keepers; the one hallowing the common joys of daily life, the
other rebuking the profanation of what assumed to be a great deal more
sacred than a wedding festival; the one manifesting the love and
sympathy of Jesus, His power to ennoble all human relationships, and
His delight in ministering to need and bringing gladness, and the
other setting forth the sterner aspect of His character as consumed
with holy zeal for the sanctity of God's name and house. Taken
together, one may say that they cover the whole ground of His
character, and in some very real sense are a summary of all His work.
The programme contains the whole of what is to follow hereafter.

We may well take the lesson, which no generation ever needed more than
the present, both by reason of its excellences and of its defects,
that there were no love worthy of a perfect spirit in which there did
not lie dormant a dark capacity of wrath, and that Christ Himself
would not have been the Joy-bringer, the sympathising Gladdener which
He manifested Himself as being in the 'beginning of miracles in Cana
of Galilee' unless, side by side, there had lain in Him the power of
holy indignation and, if need be, of stern rebuke. Brethren, we must
retain our conception of His anger if we are not to maim our
conception of His love. There is no wrath like the wrath of the Lamb.
The Temple court, with the strange figure of the Christ with a scourge
in His hand, is a revelation which this generation, with its
exaggerated sentimentalism, with its shrinking, by reason of its good
and of its evil, from the very notion of a divine retribution based
upon the eternal antagonism between good and evil, most sorely needs.

II. Now, secondly, notice what Christ does in His Church.

I need not remind you how God's method of restoration is always to
restore with a difference and a progress. The ruined Temple on Zion
was not to be followed by another house of stone and lime, but by 'a
spiritual house,' builded together for 'a habitation of God in the
Spirit.' The Christian Church takes the place of that material
sanctuary, and is the dwelling-place of God.

That being so, let us take the lesson that that house, too, may be
desecrated. There may be, as there were in the original Temple, the
externals of worship, and yet, eating out the reality of these, there
may be an inward mercenary spirit.

Note how insensibly such corruption creeps in to a community. You
cannot embody an idea in a form or in an external association without
immediately dragging it down, and running the risk of degradation. It
is just like a drop of quicksilver which you cannot expose to the air
but instantaneously its brightness is dimmed by the scum that forms on
its surface. A church as an outward institution is exposed to all the
dangers to which other institutions are exposed. And these creep on
insensibly, as this abuse had crept on. So it is not enough that we
should be at ease in our consciences in regard to our practices as
Christian communities. We become familiar with any abuse, and as we
become familiar we lose the power of rightly judging of it. Therefore
conscience needs to be guided and enlightened quite as much as to be
obeyed.

How long has it taken the Christian Church to learn the wickedness of
slavery? Has the Christian Church yet learned the unchristianity of
War? Are there no abuses amongst us, which subsequent generations will
see to be so glaring that they will talk about us as we talk about our
ancestors, and wonder whether we were Christians at all when we could
tolerate such things? They creep on gradually, and they need continual
watchfulness if they are not to assume the mastery.

The special type of corruption which we find in this incident is one
that besets the Church always. Of course, if I were preaching to
ministers, I should have a great deal to say about that. For men that
are necessarily paid for preaching have a sore temptation to preach
for pay. But it is not only we professionals who have need to lay to
heart this incident. It is all Christian communities, established and
non-established churches, Roman Catholic and Protestant. The same
danger besets them all. There must be money to work the outward
business of the house of God. But what about people that 'run'
churches as they run mills? What about people whose test of the
prosperity of a Christian community is its balance-sheet? What about
the people that hang on to religious communities and services for the
sake of what they can make out of them? We have heard a great deal
lately about what would happen 'if Christ came to Chicago.' If Christ
came to any community of professing Christians in this land, do you
not think He would need to have the scourge in His hand, and to say
'Make not My Father's house a house of merchandise'? He will come; He
does come; He is always coming if we would listen to Him. And at long
intervals He comes in some tremendous and manifest fashion, and
overthrows the money-changers' tables.

Ah, brethren! if Jesus Christ had not thus come, over and over again,
to His Church, Christian men would have killed Christianity long ago.
Did you ever think that Christianity is the only religion that has
shown recuperative power and that has been able to fling off its
peccant humours? They used to say--I do not know whether it is true or
not--that Thames water was good to put on board ship because of its
property of corrupting and then clearing itself, and becoming fit to
drink. We and our brethren, all through the ages, have been corrupting
the Water of Life. And how does it come to be sweet and powerful
still? This tree has substance in it when it casts its leaves. That
unique characteristic of Christianity, its power of reformation, is
not self-reformation, but it is a coming of the Lord to His temple to
'purify the sons of Levi, that their offering may be pleasant as in
days of yore.'

So one looks upon the spectacle of churches labouring under all manner
of corruptions; and one need not lose heart. The shortest day is the
day before the year turns; and when the need is sorest the help is
nearest. And so I, for my part, believe that very much of the
organisations of all existing churches will have to be swept away. But
I believe too, with all my heart--and I hope that you do--that, though
the precious wheat is riddled in the sieve, and the chaff falls to the
ground, not one grain will go through the meshes. Whatever becomes of
churches, the Church of Christ shall never have its strength so sapped
by abuses that it must perish, or its lustre so dimmed that the Lord
of the Temple must depart from His sanctuary.

III. Lastly, note what Christ will do for each of us if we will let
Him.

It is not a community only which is the temple of God. For the
Apostles in many places suggest, and in some distinctly say, 'ye are
the temples' individually, as well as the Temple collectively, of the
Most High. And so every Christian soul--by virtue of that which is the
deepest truth of Christianity, the indwelling of Christ in men's
hearts by faith--is a temple of God; and every human soul is meant to
be and may become such. That temple can be profaned. There are many
ways in which professing Christians make it a house of merchandise.
There are forms of religion which are little better than chaffering
with God, to give Him so much service if He will repay us with so much
Heaven. There are too many temptations, to which we yield, to bring
secular thoughts into our holiest things. Some of us, by reason not of
wishing wealth but of dreading penury, find it hard to shut worldly
cares out of our hearts. We all need to be on our guard lest the
atmosphere in which we live in this great city shall penetrate even
into our moments of devotion, and the noise of the market within
earshot of the Holy of Holies shall disturb the chant of the
worshippers. It is Manchester's temptation, and it is one that most of
us need to be guarded against.

So engrossed, and, as we should say, necessarily engrossed--or, at all
events, legitimately engrossed--are we in the pursuits of our daily
commerce, that we have scarcely time enough or leisure of heart and
mind enough to come into 'the secret place of the Most High.' The
worshippers stop outside trading for beasts and doves, and they have
no time to go into the Temple and present their offerings.

It is our besetting danger. Forewarned is forearmed, to some extent.
Would that we could all hear, as we go about our ordinary avocations,
that solemn voice, 'Make not My Father's house a house of
merchandise,' and could keep the inner sanctuary still from the
noises, and remote from the pollutions, of the market hard by!

We cannot cast out these or any other desecrating thoughts and desires
by ourselves, except to a very small degree. And if we do, then there
happens what our Lord warned us against in profound words. The house
may be emptied of the evil tenant in some measure by our own
resolution and self-reformation. But if it is not occupied by Him, it
remains 'empty,' though it is 'swept and garnished.' Nature abhors a
vacuum, and into the empty house there come the old tenant and seven
brethren blacker than himself. The only way to keep the world out of
my heart is to have Christ filling it. If we will ask Him He will come
to us. And if He has the scourge in His hand, let Him be none the less
welcome a guest for that. He will come, and when He enters, it will be
like the rising of the sun, when all the beasts of the forest slink
away and lay them down in their dens. It will be like the carrying of
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord of the whole earth into the temple
of Dagon, when the fish-like image fell prone and mutilated on the
threshold. If we say to Him, 'Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and
the Ark of Thy strength,' He will enter in, and by His entrance will
'make the place of His feet glorious' and pure.




THE DESTROYERS AND THE RESTORER

'Jesus answered and said unto them, Destroy this Temple, and in three
days I will raise it up.'--JOHN ii. 19.

This is our Lord's answer to the Jewish request for a sign which
should warrant His action in cleansing the Temple. There are two such
cleansings recorded in the Gospels; this one His first public act, and
another, omitted by John, but recorded in the other Gospels, which was
almost His last public act.

It has been suggested that these are but two versions of one incident;
and although there is no objection in principle to admitting the
possibility of that explanation, yet in fact it appears to me
insufficient and unnecessary. For each event is appropriate in its own
place. In each there is a distinct difference in tone. The incident
recorded in the present chapter has our Lord's commentary, 'Make not
My Father's house a house of merchandise'; in that recorded in the
Synoptic Gospels the profanation is declared as greater, and the
rebuke is more severe. The 'house of merchandise' has become, by their
refusal to render to Him what was His, 'a den of thieves.' In the
later incident there is a reference in our Lord's quotation from the
Old Testament to the entrance of the Gentiles into the Kingdom. There
is no such reference here. In the other Gospels there is no record of
this question which the Jews asked, nor of our Lord's significant
answer, whilst yet a caricatured and mistaken version of that answer
was known to the other Evangelists, and is put by them into the mouths
of the false witnesses at our Lord's trial. They thus attest the
accuracy of our narrative even while they seem not to have known of
the incident.

All these things being taken into account, I think that we have to do
with a double, of which there are several instances in the Gospels,
the same event recurring under somewhat varied circumstances, and
reflecting varied aspects of truth. But it is to our Lord's words in
vindication of His right to cleanse the Temple rather than to the
incident on which they are based that I wish to turn your attention
now: 'Destroy this Temple,' said our Lord, as His sufficient and only
answer to the demand for a sign, 'and in three days I will raise it
up.'

Now these words, enigmatical as they are, seem to me to be very
profound and significant; and I wish, on this Easter Sunday, to look
at them as throwing a light upon the gladness of this day. They
suggest to me three things: I find in them, first, an enigmatical
forecast of our Lord's own history; second, a prophetic warning of
Israel's; and last, a symbolical foreshadowing of His world-wide work
as the Restorer of man's destructions. 'Destroy this Temple, and in
three days I will raise it up.'

I. First then, I think, we see here an enigmatical forecast of our
Lord's own history.

Notice, first, that marvellous and unique consciousness of our Lord's
as to His own dignity and nature. 'He spake of the temple of His
body.' Think that here is a man, apparently one of ourselves, walking
amongst us, living the common life of humanity, who declares that in
Him, in an altogether solitary and peculiar fashion, there abides the
fulness of Deity. Think that there has been a Man who said, 'In this
place is One greater than the Temple.' And people have believed Him,
and do believe Him, and have found that the tremendous audacity of the
words is simple verity, and that Christ is, in inmost reality, all
which the Temple was but in the poorest symbol. In it there had dwelt,
though there dwelt no longer at the time when He was speaking, a
material and symbolical brightness, the expression of something which,
for want of a better name, we call the 'presence of God.' But what was
that flashing fire between the cherubim that brooded over the
Mercy-seat, with a light that was lambent and lustrous as the light of
love and of life--what was that to the glory, moulded in meekness and
garbed in gentleness, the glory that shone, merciful and hospitable
and inviting--a tempered flame on which the poorest, diseased, blind
eyes could look, and not wince--from the face and from the character
of Jesus Christ the Lord? He is greater than the Temple, for in Him,
in no symbol but in reality, abode and abides the fulness of that
unnameable Being whom we name Father and God. And not only does the
fulness abide, but in Him that awful Remoteness becomes for us a
merciful Presence; the infinite abyss and closed sea of the divine
nature hath an outlet, and becomes a 'river of water of life.' And as
the ancient name of that Temple was the 'Tent of Meeting,' the place
where Israel and God, in symbolical and ceremonial form, met together,
so, in inmost reality in Christ's nature, Manhood and Divinity cohere
and unite, and in Him all of us, the weak, the sinful, the alien, the
rebellious, may meet our Father. 'He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father.' 'In this place is One greater than the Temple.'

And so this Jewish Peasant, at the very beginning of His earthly
career, stands up there, in the presence of the ancestral sanctities
and immemorial ceremonials which had been consecrated by all these
ages and commanded by God Himself, and with autocratic hand sweeps
them all on one side, as one that should draw a curtain that the
statue might be seen, and remains poised Himself in the vacant place,
that all eyes may look upon Him, and on Him alone. 'Destroy this
Temple.... He spake of the temple of His body.'

Still further, notice how here we have, at the very beginning of our
Lord's career, His distinct prevision of how it was all going to end.
People that are willing to honour Jesus Christ, and are not willing to
recognise His death as the great purpose for which He came, tell us
that, like as with other reformers and heroes and martyrs, His death
was the result of the failure of His purpose. And some of them talk to
us very glibly, in their so-called 'Lives of Jesus Christ' about the
alteration in Christ's plan which came when He saw that His message
was not going to be received. I do not enter upon all the reasons why
such a construction of Christ's work cannot hold water, but here is
one--for any one who believes this story before us--that at the very
beginning, before He had gone half a dozen steps in His public career,
when the issues of the experiment, if it was a man that was making the
experiment, were all untried; when, if it were merely a
martyr-enthusiast that was beginning his struggle, some flickering
light of hope that He would be received of His brethren must have
shone, or He would never have ventured upon the path--that then, with
no mistake, with no illusion, with no expectation of a welcome and a
Hosanna, but with the clearest certitude of what lay before Him, our
Lord _beheld_ and accepted His Cross. Its shadow fell upon His path
from the beginning, because the Cross was the purpose for which He
came. 'To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the
world,' said He--when the reality of it was almost within arm's length
of Him--'to bear witness to the Truth,' and His bearing witness to the
truth was perfected and accomplished on the Cross. Here, at the very
commencement of His career, we have it distinctly set forth, 'the Son
of Man came to give His life a ransom for many.'

And, brethren, that fact is important, not only because it helps us to
understand that His death is the centre of His work, but also because
it helps us to a loving and tender thought of Him, how all His life
long, with that issue distinctly before Him, He journeyed towards it
of His own loving will; how every step that He took on earth's flinty
roads, taken with bleeding and pure feet, He took knowing whither He
was going. This Isaac climbs the mountain to the place of sacrifice,
with no illusions as to what He is going up the mountain for. He knows
that He goes up to be the lamb of the offering, and knowing it, He
goes. Therefore let us love Him with love as persistent as was His
own, who discerning the end from the beginning, willed to be born and
to live because He had resolved to die, for you and me and every man.

And then, further, we have here our Lord's claim to be Himself the
Agent of His own resurrection. '_I_ will raise it up in three days.'
Of course, in Scripture, we more frequently find the Resurrection
treated as being the result of the power of God the Father. We more
ordinarily read that Christ was raised; but sometimes we read, as
here, that Christ rises, and we have solemn words of His own, 'I have
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.' Think of a
man saying, 'I am going to bring My own body from the dust of death,'
and think of the man who said that _doing_ it. If that is true, if
this prediction was uttered, and being uttered was fulfilled--what
then? I do not need to answer the question. My brother, this day
declares that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. 'Destroy this
Temple'--there is a challenge--'and in three days I will raise it up';
and He did it. And He is the Lord of the Temple as well as the Temple.
Down on your knees before Him, with all your hearts and with all your
confidence, and worship, and trust, and love for evermore 'the Second
Man,' who 'is the Lord from Heaven!'

II. Now let us turn to the other aspects of these words. I think we
see here, in the next place, a prophetic warning of the history of the
men to whom He was speaking.

There must be a connection between the interpretation of the words
which our Evangelist assures us is the correct one, and the
interpretation which would naturally have occurred to a listener, that
by 'this Temple' our Lord really meant simply the literal building in
which He spoke. There is such a connection, and though our Lord did
not only mean the Temple, He _did_ mean the Temple. To say so is not
forcing double meanings in any fast and loose fashion upon Scripture,
nor playing with ambiguities, nor indulging in any of the vices to
which spiritualising interpretation of Scripture leads, but it is
simply grasping the central idea of the words of my text. Rightly
understood they lead us to this: 'The death of Christ was the
destruction of the Jewish Temple and polity, and the raising again of
Christ from the dead on the third day was the raising again of that
destroyed Theocracy and Temple in a new and nobler fashion.' Let us
then look for a moment, and it shall only be for a moment, at these
two thoughts.

If any one had said to any of that howling mob that stood round Christ
at the judgment-seat of the High Priest, and fancied themselves
condemning Him to death, because He had blasphemed the Temple: 'You,
at this moment, are pulling down the holy and beautiful house in which
your fathers praised; and what you are doing now is the destruction of
your national worship and of yourselves,' the words would have been
received with incredulity; and yet they were simple truth. Christ's
death destroyed that outward Temple. The veil was 'rent in twain from
the top to the bottom' at the moment He died; which was the
declaration indeed that henceforward the Holiest of All was patent to
the foot of every man, but was also the declaration that there was no
more sanctity now within those courts, and that Temple, and
priesthood, and sacrifice, and altar, and ceremonial and all, were
antiquated. That 'which was perfect having come,' Christ's death
having realised all which Temple-worship symbolised, that which was
the shadow was put away when the substance appeared.

And in another fashion, it is also true that the death of our Lord
Jesus Christ, inflicted by Jewish hands, was the destruction of the
Jewish worship, in the way of natural sequence and of divine
chastisement. When the husbandmen rejected the Son who was sent 'last
of all,' there was nothing more for it but that they should be 'cast
out of the vineyard,' and the firebrand which the Roman soldier, forty
years afterwards, tossed into the Holiest of All, and which burned the
holy and beautiful house with fire, was lit on the day when Israel
cried 'Crucify Him! Crucify Him!'

Oh, brethren! What a lesson it is to us all of how blind even
so-called religious zeal may be; how often it is true that men in
their madness and their ignorance destroy the very institutions which
they are trying to conserve! How it warns us to beware lest we,
unknowing what we are about, and thinking that we are fighting for the
honour of God, may really all the while be but serving ourselves and
rejecting His message and His Messenger!

And then let me remind you that another thing is also true, that just
as the Jewish rejection of Christ was their own rejection as the
people of God, and their attempted destruction of Christ the
destruction of the Jewish Temple, so the other side of the truth is
also here, viz. that His rising again is the restoration of the
destroyed Temple in nobler and fairer form. Of course the one real
Temple is the body of Jesus Christ, as we have said, where sacrifice
is offered, where God dwells, where men meet with God. But in a
secondary and derivative sense, in the place of the Jewish Temple has
come the Christian Church, which is, in a far deeper and more inward
fashion, what that ancient system aspired to be.

Christ has builded up the Church on His Resurrection. On His
Resurrection, I say, for there is nothing else on which it could rest.
If men ask me what is the great evidence of Christ's Resurrection, my
answer is--the existence in the world of a Church. Where did it come
from? How is it possible to conceive that without the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ such a structure as the Christian society should have
been built upon a dead man's grave? It would have gone to pieces, as
all similar associations would have gone. What had happened after that
moment of depression which scattered them every man to his own, and
led some of them to say, with pathetic use of the past tense to
describe their vanished expectations, 'We _trusted_ that it had been
He which should have redeemed Israel'? What was the force that instead
of driving them asunder drew them together? What was the power that,
instead of quenching their almost dead hopes, caused them to flame up
with renewed vigour heaven-high? How came it that that band of
cowardly, dispirited Jewish peasants, who scattered in selfish fear
and heart-sick disappointment, were in a few days found bearding all
antagonism, and convinced that their hopes had only erred by being too
faint and dim? The only answer is in their own message, which
explained it all: 'Him hath God raised from the dead, whereof we are
all witnesses.'

The destroyed Temple disappears, and out of the dust and smoke of the
vanishing ruins there rises, beautiful and serene, though incomplete
and fragmentary and defaced with many a stain, the fairer reality, the
Church of the living Christ. 'Destroy this Temple, and in three days I
will raise it up.'

III. Lastly, we have here a foreshadowing of our Lord's world-wide
work as the Restorer of man's destructions.

Man's folly, godlessness, worldliness, lust, sin, are ever working to
the destruction of all that is sacred in humanity and in life, and to
the desecrating of every shrine. We ourselves, in regard to our own
hearts, which are made to be the temples of the 'living God,' are
ever, by our sins, shortcomings, and selfishness, bringing pollution
into the holiest of all; 'breaking down the carved work thereof with
axes and hammers,' and setting up the abomination of desolation in the
holy places of our hearts. We pollute them all--conscience,
imagination, memory, will, intellect. How many a man listening to me
now has his nature like the facade of some of our cathedrals, with the
empty niches and broken statues proclaiming that wanton desecration
and destruction have been busy there?

My brother! what have you done with your heart? 'Destroy this temple.'
Christ spoke to men who did not know what they were doing; and He
speaks to you. It is the inmost meaning of the life of many of you.
Hour by hour, day by day, action by action, you are devastating and
profaning the sanctities of your nature, and the sacred places there
where God ought to live.

Listen to His confident promise. He knows that in me He is able to
restore to more than pristine beauty all which I, by my sin, have
destroyed; to reconsecrate all which I, by my profanity, have
polluted; to cast out the evil deities that desecrate and deform the
shrine; and to make my poor heart, if only I will let Him come in to
the ruined chamber, a fairer temple and dwelling-place of God.

'In three days,' does He do it? In one sense--Yes! Thank God! the
power that hallows and restores the desecrated and cast-down temple in
a man's heart, was lodged in the world in those three days of death
and resurrection. The fact that He 'died for our sins,' the fact that
He was 'raised again for our justification,' are the plastic and
architectonic powers which will build up any character into a temple
of God.

And yet more than 'forty and six years' will that temple have to be
'in building.' It is a lifelong task till the top-stone be brought
forth. Only let us remember this: Christ, who is Architect and
Builder, Foundation and Top-stone; ay! and Deity indwelling in the
temple, and building it by His indwelling--this Christ is not one of
those who 'begin to build and are not able to finish.' He realises all
His plans. There are no ruined edifices in 'the City'; nor any
half-finished fanes of worship within the walls of that great
Jerusalem whose builder and maker is Christ.

If you will put yourselves in His hands, and trust yourselves to Him,
He will take away all your incompleteness, and will make you body,
soul, and spirit, temples of the Lord God; as far above the loftiest
beauty and whitest sanctity of any Christian character here on earth
as is the building of God, 'the house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens,' above 'the earthly house of this tabernacle.'

He will perfect this restoring work at the last, when His Word to His
servant Death, as He points him to us, shall be 'Destroy this temple,
and I will raise it up.'




TEACHER OR SAVIOUR?

'The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto Him, Rabbi, we know
that Thou art a Teacher come from God: for no man can do these
miracles that Thou doest, except God be with him.'--JOHN iii. 2.

The connection in which the Evangelist introduces the story of
Nicodemus throws great light on the aspect under which we are to
regard it. He has just been saying that upon our Lord's first visit to
Jerusalem at the Passover there was a considerable amount of interest
excited, and a kind of imperfect faith in Him drawn out, based solely
on His miracles. He adds that this faith was regarded by Christ as
unreliable; and he goes on to explain that our Lord exercised great
reserve in His dealings with the persons who professed it, for the
reason that 'He knew all men, and needed not that any should testify
of man, for He knew what was in man.'

Now, if you note that reiteration of the word 'man,' you will
understand the description which is given of the person who is next
introduced. 'He knew what was in man. There was a _man_ of the
Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.' It would have been
enough to have said, 'There was a Pharisee.' When John says 'a _man_
of the Pharisees,' he is not merely carried away by the echo in his
ears of his own last words, but it is as if he had said, 'Now, here is
one illustration of the sort of thing that I have been speaking about;
one specimen of an imperfect faith built upon miracles; and one
illustration of the way in which Jesus Christ dealt with it.'

Nicodemus was 'a Pharisee.' That tells us the school to which he
belonged, and the general drift of his thought. He was 'a ruler of the
Jews.' That tells us that he held an official position in the supreme
court of the nation, to which the Romans had left some considerable
shadow of power in ecclesiastical matters. And this man comes to
Christ and acknowledges Him. Christ deals with him in a very
suggestive fashion. His confession, and the way in which our Lord
received it, are what I desire to consider briefly in this sermon.

I. Note then, first, this imperfect confession.

Everything about it, pretty nearly, is wrong. 'He came to Jesus by
night,' half-ashamed and wholly afraid of speaking out the conviction
that was working in him. He was a man in position. He could not
compromise himself in the eyes of his co-Sanhedrists. 'It would be a
grave thing for a man like me to be found in converse with this new
Rabbi and apparent Prophet. I must go cautiously, and have regard to
my reputation and my standing in the world; and shall steal to Him by
night.' There is something wrong with any convictions about Jesus
Christ which let themselves be huddled up in secret. The true
apprehension of Him is like a fire in a man's bones, that makes him
'weary of forbearing' when he locks his lips, and forces him to speak.
If Christians can be dumb, there is something dreadfully wrong with
their Christianity. If they do not regard Jesus Christ in such an
aspect as to oblige them to stand out in the world and say, 'Whatever
anybody says or thinks about it, I am Christ's man,' then be sure that
they do not yet know Him as they ought to do.

Nicodemus 'came to Jesus by night,' and therein condemned himself. He
said, 'Rabbi, we know.' There is more than a _soupcon_ of patronage in
that. He is giving Jesus Christ a certificate, duly signed and sealed
by Rabbinical authority. He evidently thinks that it is no small
matter that he and some of his fellows should have been disposed to
look with favour upon this new Teacher. And so he comes, if not
patronising the young man, at all events extremely conscious of his
own condescension in recognising Him with his 'We know.'

Had he the right to speak for any of his colleagues? If so, then at
that very early stage of our Lord's ministry there was a conviction
beginning to work in that body of ecclesiastics which casts a very
lurid light on their subsequent proceedings. It was a good long while
after, when Jesus Christ's attitude towards them had been a little
more clearly made out than it was at the beginning, that they said
officially, 'As for this fellow, we know not whence He is.' They
'knew' when He did not seem to be trenching on their prerogatives, or
driving His Ithuriel-spear through their traditional professions of
orthodoxy and punctilious casuistries. But when He trod on their toes,
when He ripped up their pretensions, when He began to show His
antagonism to their formalism and traditionalism, _then_ they did not
know where He came from. And there are many of us who are very polite
to Jesus Christ as long as He does not interfere with us, and who
begin to doubt His authority when He begins to rebuke our sins.

The man that said 'We know,' and then proceeded to tell Christ the
grounds upon which He was accepted by him, was not in the position
which becomes sinful men drawing near to their Saviour. 'We know that
Thou art a Teacher'--contrast that, with its ring of complacency, and,
if not superior, at least co-ordinate, authority, with 'Jesus! Master!
have mercy on me,' or with 'Lord! save or I perish,' and you get the
difference between the way in which a formalist, conceited of his
knowledge, and a poor, perishing sinner, conscious of his ignorance
and need, go to the Saviour.

Further, this imperfect confession was of secondary value, because it
was built altogether upon miraculous evidence. Now, there has been a
great deal of exaggeration about the value of the evidence of miracle.
The undue elevation to which it was lifted in the apologetic
literature of the eighteenth century, when it was almost made out as
if there was no other proof that Jesus came from God than that He
wrought miracles, has naturally led, in this generation and in the
last one, to an equally exaggerated undervaluing of its worth. Jesus
Christ did appeal to signs; He did also most distinctly place faith
that rested merely upon miracle as second best; when He said, for
instance, 'If ye believe not Me, yet believe the works.' Nicodemus
says, 'We know that Thou art a Teacher sent from God, because no man
can do these miracles except God be with him.' Ah! Nicodemus! did not
the substance of the teaching reveal the source of the teaching even
more completely than the miracles that accompanied it? Surely, if I
may use an old illustration, the bell that rings in to the sermon
(which is the miracles) is less conclusive as to the divine source of
the teaching than is the sermon itself. Christ Himself is His own best
evidence, and His words shine in their own light, and need no signs in
order to authenticate their source. The signs are there, and are
precious in my eyes less as credentials of His authority than as
revelations of His character and His work. They are wonders; that is
much. They are proofs; as I believe. But, high above both of these
characteristics, they are signs of the spiritual work that He does,
and manifestations of His redeeming power. And so a faith that had no
ears for the ring of the divine voice in the words, and no eyes for
