that virtue and true blessedness were their prerogatives.

The foundation characteristic is poverty of spirit, the
consciousness of one's own weakness, the opposite of the delusion
that we are 'rich and increased with goods.' All true subjection to
the kingdom begins with that accurate, because lowly, estimate of
ourselves. Humility is life, lofty mindedness is death. The heights
are barren, rivers and fertility are down in the valleys.

Luke makes hunger the second characteristic, and weeping the third,
while Matthew inverts that order. Either arrangement suggests
important thoughts. Desire after the true riches naturally follows
on consciousness of poverty, while, on the other hand, sorrow for
one's conscious lack of these may be regarded as preceding and
producing longing. In fact, the three traits of character are
contemporaneous, and imply each other. Outward condition comes into
view, only in so far as it tends to the production of these
spiritual characteristics, and has, in fact, produced them, as it
had done, in some measure, in the disciples. The antithetical
characteristics of the adversaries of the kingdom are, in like
manner, mainly spiritual; and their riches, fullness, and laughter
refer to circumstances only in so far as actual wealth, abundance,
and mirth tend to hide from men their inward destitution,
starvation, and misery.

But what paradoxes to praise all that flesh abhors, and to declare
that it is better to be poor than rich, better to feel gnawing
desire than to be satisfied, better to weep than to laugh! How
little the so-called Christian world believes it! How dead against
most men's theory and practice Christ goes! These Beatitudes have a
solemn warning for all, and if we really believed them, our lives
would be revolutionised. The people who say, 'Give me the Sermon on
the Mount: I don't care for your doctrines, but I can understand
_it,' have not felt the grip of these Beatitudes.

Note that the blessings and woes are based on the future issues of
the two states of mind. These are not wholly in the future life, for
Jesus says, 'Yours _is_ the kingdom.' That kingdom is a state
of obedience to God, complete in that future world, but begun here.
True poverty secures entrance thither, since it leads to submission
of will and trust. True hunger is sure of satisfaction, since it
leads to waiting on God, who 'will fulfil the desire of them that
fear Him.' Sorrow which is according to God, cannot but bring us
near Him who 'will wipe away tears from off all faces.'

On the other hand, they who in condition are prosperous and
satisfied with earth, and in disposition are devoid of suspicion of
their own emptiness, and draw their joys and sorrows from this world
alone, cannot but have a grim awaking waiting for them. Here they
will often feel that earth's goods are no solid food, and that
nameless yearnings and sadness break in on their mirth; and in the
dim world beyond, they will start to find their hands empty and
their souls starving.

The fourth of Luke's Beatitudes contrasts the treatment received
from men by the subjects and the enemies of the kingdom. Better to
be Christ's martyr than the world's favourite! Alas, how few
Christians wear the armour of that great saying! They would not set
so much store by popularity, nor be so afraid of being on the
unpopular side, if they did.

II. The second part of the passage contains the summary of the laws
of the kingdom from the lips of the King. Its keynote is love. The
precept follows strikingly on the predictions of excommunication and
hatred. The only weapon to fight hate is love. 'The hate of hate,
the scorn of scorn,' are not Christian dispositions, though Tennyson
tells us that they are the poet's. So much the worse for him if they
are! First, the commandment, so impossible to us unless our hearts
are made Christlike by much dwelling with Christ, is laid down in
the plainest terms. Enmity should only stimulate love, as a gash in
some tree bearing precious balsam makes the fragrant treasure flow.
Who of us has conformed to that law which in three words sums up
perfection? How few of us have even honestly tried to conform to it!

But the command becomes more stringent as it advances. The sentiment
is worth much, but it must bear fruit in act. So the practical
manifestations of it follow. Deeds of kindness, words of blessing,
and highest of all, and the best help to fulfilling the other two,
prayer, are to be our meek answers to evil. Why should Christians
always let their enemies settle the terms of intercourse? They are
not to be mere reverberating surfaces, giving back echoes of angry
voices. Let us take the initiative, and if men scowl, let us meet
them with open hearts and smiles. 'A soft answer turneth away
wrath.' 'It takes two to make a quarrel.' Frost and snow bind the
earth in chains, but the silent sunshine conquers at last, and evil
can be overcome with good.

Our Lord goes on to speak of another form of love--namely, patient
endurance of wrong and unreasonableness. He puts that in terms so
strong that many readers are fain to pare down their significance.
Non-resistance is commanded in the most uncompromising fashion, and
illustrated in the cases of assault, robbery, and pertinacious
mendicancy. The world stands stiffly on its rights; the Christian is
not to bristle up in defence of his, but rather to suffer wrong and
loss. This is regarded by many as an impossible ideal. But it is to
be observed that the principle involved is that love has no limits
but itself. There may be resistance to wrong, and refusal of a
request, if love prompts to these. If it is better for the other man
that a Christian should not let him have his way or his wish, and if
the Christian, in resisting or refusing, is honestly actuated by
love, then he is fulfilling the precept when he says 'No' to some
petition, or when he resists robbery. We must live near Jesus Christ
to know when such limitations of the precept come in, and to make
sure of our motives.

The world and the Church would be revolutionised if even approximate
obedience were rendered to this commandment. Let us not forget that
it _is_ a commandment, and cannot be put aside without disloyalty.

Christ then crystallises His whole teaching on the subject of our
conduct to others into the immortal words which make our wishes for
ourselves the standard of our duty to others, and so give every man
an infallible guide. We are all disposed to claim more from others
than we give to them. What a paradise earth would be if the two
measuring-lines which we apply to their conduct and to our own were
exactly of the same length!




THREE CONDENSED PARABLES


    'And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy
    brother's eye, but perceiveth not the beam that is in
    thine own eye? 42. Either, how canst thou say to thy
    brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in
    thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam
    that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out
    first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt
    thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy
    brother's eye. 43. For a good tree bringeth not forth
    corrupt fruit; neither doth a corrupt tree bring forth
    good fruit. 44. For every tree is known by his own
    fruit: for of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a
    bramble-bush gather they grapes. 45. A good man, out
    of the good treasure of his heart, bringeth forth that
    which is good; and an evil man, out of the evil
    treasure of his heart, bringeth forth that which is
    evil; for of the abundance of the heart his mouth
    speaketh, 46. And why call ye Me, Lord, Lord, and do
    not the things which I say? 47. Whosoever cometh to
    Me, and heareth My sayings, and doeth them, I will
    shew you to whom he is like: 48. He is like a man
    which built an house, and digged deep, and laid the
    foundation on a rock: and when the flood arose, the
    stream beat vehemently upon that house, and could not
    shake it; for it was founded upon a rock. 49. But he
    that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that,
    without a foundation, built an house upon the earth;
    against which the stream did beat vehemently, and
    immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house was
    great.'--LUKE vi. 41-49.

Three extended metaphors, which may almost be called parables, close
Luke's version of the Sermon on the Mount, and constitute this
passage. These are the mote and the beam, the good and bad trees,
the houses on the rock and on the sand. Matthew puts the first of
these earlier in the sermon, and connects it with other precepts
about judging others. But whichever order is the original, that
adopted by Luke has a clear connection of thought underlying it
which will come out as we proceed.

I. The striking and somewhat ludicrous image of the beam and the
mote is found in Rabbinical writings, and may have been familiar to
Christ's hearers. But His use of it is deeper and more searching
than the rabbis' was. He has just been speaking of blind guides and
their blind followers. That 'parable,' as Luke calls it, naturally
images another defect which may attach to the eye. A man may be
partly blind because some foreign body has got in. If we might
suppose a tacit reference to the Pharisees in the blind guides,
their self-complacent censoriousness would be in view here; but the
application of the saying is much wider than to them only.

Verse 41 teaches that the accurate measurement of the magnitude of
our own failings should precede our detection of our brother's.
Christ assumes the commonness of the opposite practice by asking
'why' it is so. And we have all to admit that the assumption is
correct. The keenness of men's criticism of their neighbour's faults
is in inverse proportion to their familiarity with their own. It is
no unusual thing to hear some one, bedaubed with dirt from head to
foot, declaiming with disgust about a speck or two on his
neighbour's white robes.

Satan reproving sin is not an edifying sight, but Satan criticising
sin is still less agreeable. If only 'he that is without sin among
you' would fling stones, there would be fewer reputations pelted
than there are. Most men know less about their own faults than about
their brother's. They use two pairs of spectacles--one which
diminishes, and is put on for looking at themselves; one which
magnifies, and is worn for their neighbour's benefit. But when their
respective good qualities are to be looked at, the other pair is
used in each case. That is men's way, all the world over.

Christ's question asks the reason for this all but universal
dishonesty of having two weights and measures for faults. He would
have us ponder on the cause, that we may discover the remedy. He
would have us reflect, that we may get a vivid conviction of the
unreasonableness of the practice. There is nothing in the fact that
a fault is mine which should make it small in my judgment; nor, on
the other hand, in the accident that it is another's, which should
make it seem large. A fault is a fault, whoever it belongs to, and
we should judge ourselves and others by the same rule. Only we
should be most severe in its application to ourselves, for we cannot
tell how much our brother has had, to diminish the criminality of
his sin, and we can tell, if we will be honest, how much we have
had, to aggravate that of ours. So the conscience of a true
Christian works as Paul's did when he said 'Of whom I am chief,' and
is more disposed to make its own motes into beams than to censure
its brother's.

The reason, so far as there is a reason, can only lie in our
diseased selfishness, which is the source of all sin. And the
blindness to our 'beams' is partly produced by their very presence.
All sin blinds conscience. A man with a beam in his eye would not be
able to see much. One device of sin, practised in order to withdraw
the doer's attention from his own deed, is to make him censorious of
his fellows, and to compound for the sins he is inclined to by
condemning other people's.

Verse 42 teaches that the conquest of our own discovered evils must
precede efficient attempts to cure other people's. To pose as a
curer of them while we are ignorant of our own faults is,
consciously or unconsciously, hypocrisy, for it assumes a hatred of
evil, which, if genuine, would have found first a field for its
working in ourselves. An oculist with diseased eyes would not be
likely to be a successful operator. 'Physician, heal thyself' would
fit him well, and be certainly flung at him. A cleansed eye will
see the brother's mote clearly, but only in order to help its
extraction. It is a delicate bit of work to get it out, and needs a
gentle hand.

Our discernment of others' faults must be compassionate, not to be
followed by condemnation nor self-complacency but by loving efforts
to help to a cure. And such will not be made unless we have learned
our own sinfulness, and can go to the wrongdoer in brotherly
humility, and win him to use the 'eye-salve' which our conduct shows
has healed us.

II. The second compressed parable of the two trees springs from the
former naturally, as stating the general law of which verse 42 gives
one case, namely, that good deeds (such as casting out the mote) can
only come from a good heart (made good by confession of its own
evils and their ejection). It is often said that Christ's teaching
is unlike that of His Apostles in that He places stress on works,
and says little of faith. But how does He regard works? As fruits.
That is to say, they are of value in His eyes only as being products
and manifestations of character. He does not tell us in this parable
how the character which will effloresce in blossoms and set in
fruits of goodness is produced. That comes in the next parable. But
here is sufficiently set forth the great central truth of Christian
ethics that the inward disposition is the all-important thing, and
that deeds are determined as to their moral quality by the character
from which they have proceeded.

Our actions are our self-revelations. The words are not to be
pressed, as if they taught the entire goodness of one class of men,
so that all their acts were products of their good character, nor
the unmingled evil of another, so that no good of any kind or in any
degree is in them or comes from them. They must be read as embodying
a general truth which is not as yet fully exemplified in any
character or conduct.

In verse 45 the same idea is presented under a different figure--that
of a wealthy man who brings his possessions out of his store-house.
The application of the figure is significantly varied so as to include
the other great department of human activity. Speech is act. It, too,
will be according to the cast of the inner life. Of course, feigned
speech of all sorts is not in view. The lazy judgment of men thinks
less of words than of deeds. Christ always attaches supreme importance
to them. Intentional lying being excluded, speech is an even more
complete self-revelation than act. When one thinks of the floods of
foul or idle or malicious talk which half drown the world as being
revelations of the sort of hearts from which they have gushed, one
is appalled. What a black, seething fountain that must be which
spurts up such inky waters!

III. The third parable, of the two houses, shows in part how hearts may
be made 'good.' It is attached to the preceding by verse 46. Speech
does not always come from 'the abundance of the heart.' Many call Him
Lord who do not act accordingly. Deeds must confirm words. If the two
diverge, the latter must be taken as the credible self-revelation. Now
the first noticeable thing here is Christ's bold assumption that His
words are a rock foundation for any life. He claims to give an absolute
and all-sufficient rule of conduct, and to have the right to command
every man.

And people read such words and then talk about their Christianity
not being the belief of His divinity, but the practice of the Sermon
on the Mount! His words are the foundation for every firm, lasting
life. They are the basis of all true thought about God, ourselves,
our duties, our future. 'That rock was Christ.' Every other
foundation is as sand. Unless we build on Him, we build on
changeable inclinations, short-lived desires, transitory aims,
evanescent circumstances. Only the Christ who ever liveth, and is
ever 'the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever,' is fit to be
the foundation of lives that are to be immortal.

Note the two houses built on the foundations. The metaphor suggests
that each life is a whole with a definite character. Alas, how many
of our lives are liker a heap of stones tilted at random out of a cart
than a house with a plan. But there is a character stamped on every
life, and however the man may have lived from hand to mouth without
premeditation, the result has a character of its own, be it temple
or pig-sty. Each life, too, is built up by slow labour, course by
course. Our deeds become our dwelling-places. Like coral-insects, we
live in what we build. Memory, habit, ever-springing consequences,
shape by slow degrees our isolated actions into our abodes. What do
we build?

One storm tries both houses. That may refer to the common trials of
every life, but it is best taken as referring to the future
judgment, when God 'will lay judgment to the line, and righteousness
to the plummet';  and whatever cannot stand that test will be
swept away. Who would run up a flimsy structure on some windy
headland in northern seas? The lighthouses away out in ocean are
firmly bonded into living rock. Unless our lives are thus built on
and into Christ, they will collapse into a heap of ruin. 'Behold I
lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner stone, a sure foundation: he that believeth shall not make
haste.'




WORTHY-NOT WORTHY


    '... They besought Him ... saying, That he was worthy
    for whom He should do this:... 6. I am not worthy that
    Thou shouldest enter under my roof: 7. Wherefore
    neither thought I myself worthy to come unto Thee....'
    --LUKE vii. 4. 6. 7.

A Roman centurion, who could induce the elders of a Jewish village
to approach Jesus on his behalf, must have been a remarkable person.
The garrison which held down a turbulent people was not usually
likely to be much loved by them. But this man, about whom the
incident with which our texts are connected is related, was
obviously one of the people of whom that restless age had many, who
had found out that his creed was outworn, and who had been drawn to
Judaism by its lofty monotheism and its austere morality. He had
gone so far as to build a synagogue, and thereby, no doubt, incurred
the ridicule of his companions, and perhaps the suspicions of his
superiors. What would the English authorities think of an Indian
district officer that conformed to Buddhism or Brahminism, and built
a temple? That is what the Roman officials would think of our
centurion. And there were other beautiful traits in his character.
He had a servant 'that was dear to him.' It was not only the nexus
of master and servant and cash payments that bound these two
together. And very beautiful is this story, when he himself speaks
about this servant. He does not use the rough word which implies a
bondservant, and which is employed throughout the whole of the rest
of the narrative, but a much gentler one, and speaks of him as his
'boy.' So he had won the hearts of these elders so far as to make
them swallow their dislike to Jesus, and deign to go to Him with a
request which implied His powers at which at all other times they
scoffed.

Now, we owe to Luke the details which show us that there was a
double deputation to our Lord--the first which approached Him to ask
His intervention, and the second which the centurion sent when he
saw the little group coming towards his house, and a fresh gush of
awe rose in his heart. The elders said, 'He is worthy'; he said, 'I
am not worthy.' The verbal resemblance is, indeed, not so close in
the original as in our versions, for the literal rendering of the
words put into the centurion's mouth is 'not fit.' But still the
evident antithesis is preserved: the one saying expresses the
favourable view that partial outsiders took of the man, the other
gives the truer view that the man took of himself. And so, putting
away the story altogether, we may set these two verdicts side by
side, as suggesting wider lessons than those which arise from the
narrative itself.

I. And, first, we have here the shallow plea of worthiness.

These elders did not think loftily of Jesus Christ. The conception
that we have of Him goes a long way to settle whether it is possible
or not for us to approach Him with the word 'worthy' on our lips.
The higher we lift our thought of Christ, the lower becomes our
thought of ourselves. These elders saw the centurion from the
outside, and estimated him accordingly. There is no more frequent,
there is no more unprofitable and impossible occupation, than that
of trying to estimate other people's characters. Yet there are few
things that we are so fond of doing. Half our conversation consists
of it, and a very large part of what we call literature consists of
it; and it is bound to be always wrong, whether it is eulogistic or
condemnatory, because it only deals with the surface.

Here we have the shallow plea advanced by these elders in reference
to the centurion which corresponds to the equally shallow plea that
some of us are tempted to advance in reference to ourselves. The
disposition to do so is in us all. Luther said that every man was
born with a Pope in his belly. Every man is born with a Pharisee in
himself, who thinks that religion is a matter of barter, that it is
so much work, buying so much favour here, or heaven hereafter.
Wherever you look, you see the working of that tendency. It is the
very mainspring of heathenism, with all its penances and
performances. It is enshrined in the heart of Roman Catholicism,
with its dreams of a treasury of merits, and works of supererogation
and the like. Ay! and it has passed over into a great deal of what
calls itself Evangelical Protestantism, which thinks that, somehow
or other, it is all for our good to come here, for instance on a
Sunday, though we have no desire to come and no true worship in us
when we have come, and to do a great many things that we would much
rather not do, and to abstain from a great many things that we are
strongly inclined to, and all with the notion that we have to bring
some 'worthiness' in order to move Jesus Christ to deal graciously
with us.

And then notice that the religion of barter, which thinks to earn
God's favour by deeds, and is, alas! the only religion of
multitudes, and subtly mingles with the thoughts of all, tends to
lay the main stress on the mere external arts of cult and ritual.
'He loveth our nation, and hath built us a synagogue'; not, 'He is
gentle, good, Godlike.' 'He has built a synagogue.' That is the type
of work which most people who fall into the notion that heaven is to
be bought, offer as the price. I have no doubt that there are many
people who have never caught a glimpse of any loftier conception than
that, and who, when they think--which they do not often do--about
religious subjects at all, are saying to themselves, 'I do as well
as I can,' and who thus bring in some vague thought of the mercy of
God as a kind of make-weight to help out what of their own they put
in the scale. Ah, dear brethren! that is a wearying, an endless, a
self-torturing, an imprisoning, an enervating thought, and the plea
of 'worthiness' is utterly out of place and unsustainable before God.

II. Now let me turn to the deeper conviction which silences that
plea.

'I am not worthy that Thou shouldest enter under my roof, wherefore
neither thought I myself worthy to come unto Thee.' This man had a
loftier conception of who and what Christ was than the elders had.
To them He was only one of themselves, perhaps endowed with some
kind of prophetic power, but still one of themselves. The centurion
had pondered over the mystic power of the word of command, as he
knew it by experience in the legion, or in the little troop of which
he, though a man under the authority of his higher officers, was the
commander; and he knew that even his limited power carried with it
absolute authority and compelled obedience. And he had looked at
Christ, and wondered, and thought, and had come at last to a dim
apprehension of that great truth that, somehow or other, in this Man
there did lie a power which, by the mere utterance of His will,
could affect matter, could raise the dead, could still a storm,
could banish disease, could quell devils. He did not formulate his
belief, he could not have said exactly what it led to, or what it
contained, but he felt that there was something divine about Him.
And so, seeing, though it was but through mists, the sight of that
great perfection, that divine humanity and human divinity, he bowed
himself and said, 'Lord! I am not worthy.'

When you see Christ as He is, and give Him the honour due to His
name, all notions of desert will vanish utterly.

Further, the centurion saw himself from the inside, and that makes
all the difference. Ah, brethren! most of us know our own characters
just as little as we know our own faces, and find it as difficult to
form a just estimate of what the hidden man of the heart looks like
as we find it impossible to form a just estimate of what we look to
other people as we walk down the street. But if we once turned the
searchlight upon ourselves, I do not think that any of us would long
be able to stand by that plea, 'I am worthy.' Have you ever been on
a tour of discovery, like what they go through at the Houses of
Parliament on the first day of each session, down into the cellars
to see what stores of explosive material, and what villains to fire
it, may be lurking there? If you have once seen yourself as you are,
and take into account, not only actions but base tendencies, foul,
evil thoughts, imagined sins of the flesh, meannesses and basenesses
that never have come to the surface, but which you know are bits of
you, I do not think that you will have much more to say about 'I am
worthy.' The flashing waters of the sea may be all blazing in the
sunshine, but if they were drained off, what a frightful sight the
mud and the ooze at the bottom would be! Others look at the dancing,
glittering surface, but you, if you are a wise man, will go down in
the diving-bell sometimes, and for a while stop there at the bottom,
and turn a bull's-eye straight upon all the slimy, crawling things
that are there, and that would die if they came into the light.

'I am not worthy that Thou shouldest enter under my roof.' But then,
as I have said, most of us are strangers to ourselves. The very fact
of a course of action which, in other people, we should describe
with severe condemnation, being ours, bribes us to indulgence and
lenient judgment. Familiarity, too, weakens our sense of the
foulness of our own evils. If you have been in the Black Hole all
night, you do not know how vitiated the atmosphere is. You have to
come out into the fresh air to find out that. We look at the errors
of others through a microscope; we look at our own through the wrong
end of the telescope; and the one set, when we are in a cynical
humour, seem bigger than they are; and the other set always seem
smaller.

Now, that clear consciousness of my own sinfulness ought to underlie
all my religious feelings and thoughts. I believe, for my part, that
no man is in a position to apprehend Christianity rightly who has
not made the acquaintance of his own bad self. And I trace a very
large proportion of the shallow Christianity of this day as well as
of the disproportion in which its various truths are set forth, and
the rising of crops of erroneous conceptions just to this, that this
generation has to a large extent lost--no, do not let me say this
generation, _you and I_--have to a large extent lost, that
wholesome consciousness of our own unworthiness and sin.

But on the other hand, let me remind you that the centurion's deeper
conviction is not yet the deepest of all, and that whilst the
Christianity which ignores sin is sure to be impotent, on the other
hand the Christianity which sees very little but sin is bondage and
misery, and is impotent too. And there are many of us whose type of
religion is far gloomier than it should be, and whose motive of
service is far more servile than it ought to be, just because we
have not got beyond the centurion, and can only say, 'I am not
worthy; I am a poor, miserable sinner.'

III. And so I come to the third point, which is not in my text, but
which both my texts converge upon, and that is the deepest truth of
all, that worthiness or unworthiness has nothing to do with Christ's
love.

When these elders interceded with Jesus, He at once rose and went
with them, and that not because of their intercession or of the
certificate of character which they had given, but because His own
loving heart impelled Him to go to any soul that sought His help. So
we are led away from all anxious questionings as to whether we are
worthy or no, and learn that, far above all thoughts either of undue
self-complacency or of undue self-depreciation, lies the motive for
Christ's gracious and healing approach in

  'His ceaseless, unexhausted love,
  Unmerited and free.'

This is the truth to which the consciousness of sinfulness and
unworthiness points us all, for which that consciousness prepares
us, in which that consciousness does not melt away, but rather is
increased and ceases to be any longer a burden or a pain. Here,
then, we come to the very bed-rock of everything, for

  'Merit lives from man to man,
  But not from man, O Lord, to Thee.'

Jesus Christ comes to us, not drawn by our deserts, but impelled by
His own love, and that love pours itself out upon each of us. So we
do not need painfully to amass a store of worthiness, nor to pile up
our own works, by which we may climb to heaven. 'Say not, who shall
ascend up into heaven,' to bring Christ down again, 'but the word is
nigh thee, that if thou wilt believe with thine heart, thou shalt be
saved.' Worthiness or unworthiness is to be swept clean out of the
field, and I am to be content to be a pauper, to owe everything to
what I have done nothing to procure, and to cast myself on the sole,
all-sufficient mercy of God in Jesus Christ our Lord.

And then comes liberty, and then comes joy. If the gift is given
from no consideration of men's deserts, then the only thing that men
have to do is to exercise the faith that takes it. As the Apostle
says in words that sound very hard and technical, but which, if you
would only ponder them, are throbbing with vitality, 'It is of faith
that it might be by grace.' Since He gives simply because He loves,
the only requisites are the knowledge of our need, the will to
receive, the trust that, in clasping the Giver, possesses the gift.

The consciousness of unworthiness will be deepened. The more we know
ourselves to be sinful, the more we shall cleave to Christ, and the
more we cleave to Christ, the more we shall know ourselves to be
sinful. Peter caught a glimpse of what Jesus was when he sat in the
boat, and he said, 'Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord!'
But Peter saw both himself and his Lord more clearly, that is more
truly, when, subsequent to his black treachery, his brother Apostle
said to him concerning the figure standing on the beach in the grey
morning, 'It is the Lord,' and he flung himself over the side and
floundered through the water to get to his Master's feet. For that
is the place for the man who knows himself unworthy. The more we are
conscious of our sin, the closer let us cling to our Lord's
forgiving heart, and the more sure we are that we have that love
which we have not earned, the more shall we feel how unworthy of it
we are. As one of the prophets says, with profound meaning, 'Thou
shalt be ashamed and confounded, and never open thy mouth any more
because of thy transgression, when I am pacified towards thee for
all that thou hast done.' The child buries its face on its mother's
breast, and feels its fault the more because the loving arms clasp
it close.

And so, dear brethren, deepen your convictions, if you are deluded
by that notion of merit; deepen your convictions, if you see your
own evil so clearly that you see little else. Come into the light,
come into the liberty, rise to that great thought, 'Not by works of
righteousness which we have done, but by His mercy He saved us.'
Have done with the religion of barter, and come to the religion of
undeserved grace. If you are going to stop on the commercial level,
'the wages of sin is death'; rise to the higher ground: 'the gift of
God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.'




JESUS AT THE BIER


    'And when the Lord saw her, He had compassion on her,
    and said unto her, Weep not. 14. And He came and
    touched the bier: and they that bare him stood still.
    And He said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise.
    15. And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak.
    And He delivered him to his mother.'--LUKE vii. 13-15.

We owe our knowledge of this incident to Luke only. He is the
Evangelist who specially delights in recording the gracious
relations of our Lord with women, and he is also the Evangelist who
delights in telling us of unasked miracles which Christ performed.
Both of these characteristics unite in this story, and it may have
been these, rather than the fact of its being a narrative of a
resurrection, that found for it a place in this Gospel.

Be that as it may, it is obvious to remark that this miracle was not
wrought with any intention of establishing Christ's claims thereby.
Its motive was simply pity; its purpose was merely to comfort a
desolate woman whose hope and love and defence were lying stretched
on her boy's bier. Was that a sufficient reason for a miracle?
People tell us that a test of a spurious miracle is that it is done
without any adequate purpose to be served. Jesus Christ thought that
to comfort one poor, sorrowful heart was reason enough for putting
His hand out, and dragging the prey from the very jaws of death, so
loftily did He think of human sorrow and of the comforting thereof.

Now I think we unduly limit the meaning of our Lord's miracles when we
regard them as specially intended to authenticate His claims. They are
not merely the evidences of revelation; they are themselves a large
part of revelation. My purpose in this sermon is to look at this
incident from that one point of view, and to try to set clearly before
our minds what it shows us of the character and work of Jesus Christ.
And there are three things on which I desire to touch briefly. We have
Him here revealed to us as the compassionate Drier of all tears; the
life-giving Antagonist of death; and as the Re-uniter of parted hearts.

Note, then, these three things.

I. First of all, look at that wonderful revelation that lies here of
Jesus Christ as the compassionate Drier of all tears.

The poor woman, buried in her grief, with her eyes fixed on the
bier, has no thought for the little crowd that came up the rocky
road, as she and her friends are hurrying down it to the place of
graves. She was a stranger to Christ, and Christ a stranger to her.
The last thing that she would have thought of would have been
eliciting any compassion from those who thus fortuitously met her on
her sad errand. But Christ looks, and His eye sees far more deeply
and far more tenderly into the sorrow of the desolate, childless
widow than any human eyes looked. And as swift as was His perception
of the sorrow, so swiftly does He throw Himself into sympathy with
it. The true human emotion of unmingled pity wells up in His heart
and moves Him to action.

And just because the manhood was perfect and sinless, therefore the
sympathy of Christ was deeper than any human sympathy, howsoever
tender it may be; for what unfits us to feel compassion is our
absorption with ourselves. That makes our hearts hard and
insensitive, and is the true, 'witches' mark'--to recur to the old
fable--the spot where no external pressure can produce sensation.
The ossified heart of the selfish man is closed against divine
compassion. Since Jesus Christ forgot Himself in pitying men, and
Himself 'took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses,' He must have
been what none of us are--free from all taint of selfishness, and
from all insensibility born of sin.

But there is another step to be taken. That pitying Christ, on the
rocky road outside the little Galilean village, feeling all the pain
and sorrow of the lonely mother--that is God! 'Lo! this is our God;
and we have waited for Him.' Ay! waited through all the
uncompassionating centuries, waited in the presence of the false
gods, waited whilst men have been talking about an impassive Deity
careless in the heavens, over whose serene blessedness no shadow can
ever pass. This is our God. No impassive monster that no man can
love or care for, but a God with a heart, a God that can pity, a God
who, wonderful as it is, can and does enter, in the humanity of
Jesus Christ, into a fellow-feeling of our infirmities.

If Jesus Christ in His pity was only a perfect and lovely example of
unselfish sympathy such as man can exercise, what in the name of
common-sense does it matter to me how much, or how tenderly, He
pitied those past generations? The showers and the sunshine of this
summer will do as much good to the springing corn in the fields to-day
as the pity of a dead, human Christ will do for you and me. In our
weaknesses, in our sorrows great and small, in our troubles and
annoyances, you and I need, dear brethren, a living Jesus to pity
us, there in the heavens, just as He pitied that poor woman outside
the gate of Nain. Blessed be God!, we have Him. The human Christ is
the manifestation of the Divine, and as we listen to the Evangelist
that says, 'When He saw her He had compassion upon her,' we bow our
heads and feel that the old psalmist spoke a truth when He said,
'His compassions fail not,' and that the old prophet spoke a truth,
the depth of which his experience did not enable him to fathom, when
he said that 'in all their afflictions He was afflicted.'

Then, note that the pitying Christ dries the tears before He raises
the dead. That is beautiful, I think. 'Weep not,' He says to the
woman--a kind of a prophecy that He is going to take away the
occasion for weeping; and so He calls lovingly upon her for some
movement of hope and confidence towards Himself. With what an
ineffable sweetness of cadence in His sympathetic voice these words
would be spoken! How often, kindly and vainly, men say to one
another, 'Weep not,' when they are utterly powerless to take away or
in the smallest degree to diminish the occasion for weeping! And how
often, unkindly, in mistaken endeavour to bring about resignation
and submission, do well-meaning and erring good people say to
mourners in the passion of their sorrow, 'Weep not!' Jesus Christ
never dammed back tears when tears were wholesome, and would bring
blessing. And Jesus Christ never said, 'Dry your tears,' without
stretching out His own hand to do it.

How does He do it? First of all by the assurance of His sympathy.
Ah! in that word there came a message to the lonely heart, as there
comes a message, dear brethren, to any man or woman among us now who
may be fighting with griefs and cares or sorrows, great or small--the
assurance that Jesus Christ knows all about your pain and will help
you to bear it if you will let Him. The sweet consciousness of
Christ's sympathy is the true antidote to excessive grief.

And He dries the tears, not only by the assurance of His sympathy,
but by encouraging expectation and hope. When He said, 'Weep not,'
He was pledging Himself to do what was needed in order to stay the
flow of weeping. And He would encourage us, in the midst of our
cares and sorrows and loneliness, not indeed to suppress the natural
emotion of sorrow, nor to try after a fantastic and unreal
suppression of its wholesome signs, but to weep as though we wept
not, because beyond the darkness and the dreariness we see the
glimmering of the eternal day. He encourages expectation as the
antagonist of sorrow, for the curse of sorrow is that it is ever
looking backwards, and the true attitude for all men who have an
immortal Christ to trust, and an immortality for themselves to
claim, is that not 'backward' should their 'glances be, but forward
to their Father's home.' These are the thoughts that dry our tears,
the assurance of the sympathy of Christ, and the joyous expectation
of a great good to be ours, where beyond those voices there is
peace.

Brother! it may be with all of us--for all of us carry some burden
of sorrow or care--as it is with the hedgerows and wet ploughed
fields to-day; on every spray hangs a raindrop, and in every
raindrop gleams a reflected sun. And so all our tears and sorrows
may flash into beauty, and sparkle into rainbowed light if the smile
of His face falls upon us.

And then, still further, this pitying Christ is moved by His pity to
bring unasked gifts. No petition, no expectation, not the least
trace of faith or hope drew from Him this mighty miracle. It came
welling up from His own heart. And therein it is of a piece with all
His work. For the divine love of which Christ is the Bearer, the
Agent, and the Channel for us men, 'tarries not for men, nor waiteth
for the sons of men,' but before we ask, delights to bestow itself,
and gives that which no man ever sought, even the miracles of the
Incarnation and Crucifixion of Jesus Christ our Lord. If heaven had
waited until men's prayers had forced its gates ere it sent forth
its greatest gift, it had waited for ever, and all mankind had
perished. God's love flows out of its own expansive and diffusive
nature. Its necessity is to impart itself, and its nature and
property is to give. A measureless desire to bestow itself, and in
itself all good, is the definition of the love of God. And Christ
comes 'to the unthankful and to the evil,' bringing a gift which
none of us have asked, and giving as much of Himself as He can give,
undesired, to every heart, that thereby we may be led to desire
these better gifts which cannot be bestowed unless we seek them.

So here we have the compassion of the human Christ, which is the
divine compassion, drying all tears and giving unasked blessings.

II. Note, secondly, the further revelation of our Lord here as being
the life-giving Antagonist of Death.

There is something exceedingly picturesque, and if I might use the
word, dramatic, in the meeting of these two processions outside the
city gate, the little crowd of mourners hurrying, according to the
Eastern fashion, down the hill to the place of tombs, and the other
little group toiling up the hill to the city. There Life and Death
stand face to face. Jesus Christ puts out His hand, and lays it upon
the bier, not to communicate anything, but simply to arrest its
progress. Is it not a parable of His work in the world? His great
work is to stop the triumphant march of Death--that grim power which
broods like a thundercloud over humanity, and sucks up all
brightness into its ghastly folds, and silences all song. He comes
and says 'Stop'; and it stands fixed upon the spot. He arrests the
march of Death. Not indeed that He touches the mere physical fact.
The physical fact is not what men mean by death. It is not what they
cower before. What the world shrinks from is the physical fact plus
its associations, its dim forebodings, its recoilings from the
unknown regions into which the soul goes from out of 'the warm
precincts of the cheerful day,' and plus the possibilities of
retribution, the certainty of judgment. All these Christ sweeps
away, so that we may say, 'He hath abolished Death,' even though we
all have to pass through the mere externals of dying, for the dread
of Death is gone for ever, if we trust Him.

And then note, still further, we have Christ here as the Life-giver.
'Young man, I say unto thee, Arise!'

Christ took various methods of imparting His miraculous power. These
methods varied, as it would appear, according to the religious
necessities of the subjects or beholders of the miracle. Sometimes
He touched, sometimes He employed still more material vehicles, such
as the clay with which He moistened the eyes of the blind man, and
the spittle with which He touched the ears of the deaf. But all
these various methods were but helps to feeble faith, and in the
case of all the raisings from the dead it is the voice alone that is
employed.

So, then, what is the meaning of that majestic 'I say unto thee,
Arise'? He claims to work by His own power. Unless Jesus Christ
wielded divine authority in a fashion in which no mere human
representative and messenger of God ever has wielded it, for Him to
stand by that bier and utter, 'I say unto thee, Arise!' was neither
more nor less than blasphemy. And yet the word had force. He assumed
to act by His own power, and the event showed that He assumed not
too much. 'The Son quickeneth whom He will.'

Further, He acts by His bare word. So He did on many other
occasions--rebuking the fever and it departs, speaking to the wind
and it ceases, calling to the dead and they come forth. And who is
He, the bare utterance of whose will is supreme, and has power over
material things? Let that centurion whose creed is given to us in
the earlier portion of this chapter answer the question. 'I say to
my servant, Go! and he goeth; Come! and he cometh; Do this! and he
doeth it. Speak Thou, and all the embattled forces of the universe
will obey Thine autocratic and sovereign behest,' they 'hearken to
His commandments, and do the voice of His word.'

Then note, still further, that this voice of Christ's has power in
the regions of the dead. Wherever that young man was, he heard; in
whatsoever state or condition he was, his personality felt and
obeyed the magnetic force of Christ's will. The fact that the Lord
spake and the boy heard, disposes, if it be true, of much error, and
clears away much darkness. Then the separation of body and soul
_is_ a separation and not a destruction. Then consciousness is
not a function of the brain, as they tell us. Then man lives wholly
after he is dead. Then it is possible for the spirit to come out of
some dim region, where we know not, in what condition we know not.
Only this we know--that, wherever it is, Christ's will has authority
there; and there, too, is obedience to His commandment.

And so let me remind you that this Voice is not only revealing as to
