not instead of them employ our neighbour's disgrace; no worldly good 
is worth purchasing at such a rate, no project worth achieving by 
such foul ways.

Neither should we out of malignity, to cherish or gratify ill 
humour, use this practice.  It is observable of some persons, that 
not out of any formed displeasure, grudge, or particular 
disaffection, nor out of any particular design, but merely out of a 
[Greek], an ill disposition, springing up from nature, or contracted 
by use, they are apt to carp at any action, and with sharp reproach 
to bite any man that comes in their way, thereby feeding and 
soothing that evil inclination.  But as this inhuman and currish 
humour should be corrected, and extirpated from our hearts; so 
should the issues thereof at our mouths be stopped; the bespattering 
our neighbour's good name should never afford any satisfaction or 
delight unto us.

Nor out of wantonness should we speak ill, for our divertisement or 
sport.  For our neighbour's reputation is too great and precious a 
thing to be played with, or offered up to sport; we are very foolish 
in so disvaluing it, very naughty in so misusing it.  Our wits are 
very barren, our brains are ill furnished with store of knowledge, 
if we can find no other matter of conversation.

Nor out of negligence and inadvertency should we sputter out 
reproachful speech; shooting ill words at rovers, or not regarding 
who stands in our way.  Among all temerities this is one of the most 
noxious, and therefore very culpable.

In fine, we should never speak concerning our neighbour from any 
other principle than charity, or to any other intent but what is 
charitable; such as tendeth to his good, or at least is consistent 
therewith.  "Let all your things," saith St. Paul, "be done in 
charity;" and words are most of the THINGS we do concerning our 
neighbour, wherein we may express charity.  In all our speeches, 
therefore, touching him, we should plainly show that we have a care 
of his reputation, that we tender his interest, that we even desire 
his content and repose.  Even when reason and need do so require 
that we should disclose and reprehend his faults, we may, we should 
by the manner and scope of our speech signify thus much.  Which 
rule, were it observed, if we should never speak ill otherwise than 
out of charity, surely most ill-speaking would be cut off; most, I 
fear, of our tattling about others, much of our gossiping would be 
marred.

Indeed, so far from bitter or sour our language should be, that it 
ought to be sweet and pleasant; so far from rough and harsh, that it 
should be courteous and obliging; so far from signifying wrath, ill-
will, contempt, or animosity, that it should express tender 
affection, good esteem, sincere respect towards our brethren; and be 
apt to produce the like in them towards us.  The sense of them 
should be grateful to the heart; the very sound and accent of them 
should be delightful to the ear.  Every one should please his 
neighbour for his good to edification.  Our words should always be 
[Greek], with grace, seasoned with salt; they should have the grace 
of courtesy, they should be seasoned with the salt of discretion, so 
as to be sweet and savoury to the hearers.  Commonly ill language is 
a certain sign of inward enmity and ill-will.  Good-will is wont to 
show itself in good terms; it clotheth even its grief handsomely, 
and its displeasure carrieth favour in its face; its rigour is civil 
and gentle, tempered with pity for the faults and errors which it 
disliketh, with the desire of their amendment and recovery whom it 
reprehendeth.  It would inflict no more evil than is necessary; it 
would cure its neighbour's disease without exasperating his 
patience, troubling his modesty, or impairing his credit.  As it 
always judgeth candidly, so it never condemneth extremely.


II.  But so much for the explication of this precept, and the 
directive part of our discourse.  I shall now briefly propound some 
inducements to the observance thereof.

1.  Let us consider that nothing more than railing and reviling is 
opposite to the nature, and inconsistent with the tenor of our 
religion; which (as even a heathen did observe of it) nil nisi 
justum suadet, et lene, doth recommend nothing but what is very just 
and mild; which propoundeth the practices of charity, meekness, 
patience, peaceableness, moderation, equity, alacrity, or good 
humour, as its principal laws, and declareth them the chief fruits 
of the Divine spirit and grace; which chargeth us to curb and 
compose all our passions; more particularly to restrain and repress 
anger, animosity, envy, malice, and such-like dispositions, as the 
fruits of carnality and corrupt lust; which consequently drieth up 
all the sources or dammeth up the sluices of bad language.  As it 
doth above all things oblige us to bear no ill-will in our hearts, 
so it chargeth us to vent none with our mouths.

2.  It is therefore often expressly condemned and prohibited as 
evil.  'Tis the property of the wicked; a character of those who 
work iniquity, to "whet their tongues like a sword, and bend their 
bows to shoot their arrows, even bitter words."

3.  No practice hath more severe punishments denounced to it than 
this.  The railer (and it is indeed a very proper and fit punishment 
for him, he being exceedingly bad company) is to be banished out of 
all good society; thereto St. Paul adjudgeth him:  "I have," saith 
he, "now written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is 
called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a 
railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, with such an one not to 
eat."  Ye see what company the railer hath in the text, and with 
what a crew of people he is coupled; but no good company he is 
allowed elsewhere; every good Christian should avoid him as a blot, 
and a pest of conversation; and finally he is sure to be excluded 
from the blessed society above in heaven; for "neither thieves, nor 
covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners shall 
inherit the kingdom of God;" and "without" (without the heavenly 
city) "are dogs," saith St. John in his Revelation; that is, those 
chiefly who out of currish spite or malignity do frowardly bark at 
their neighbours, or cruelly bite them with reproachful language.

4.  If we look upon such language in its own nature, what is it but 
a symptom of a foul, a weak, a disordered and a distempered mind?  
'Tis the smoke of inward rage and malice:  'tis a stream that cannot 
issue from a sweet spring; 'tis a storm that cannot bluster out of a 
calm region.  "The words of the pure are pleasant words," as the 
wise man saith.

5.  This practice doth plainly signify low spirit, ill-breeding, and 
bad manners; and thence misbecometh any wise, any honest, any 
honourable person.  It agreeth to children, who are unapt and 
unaccustomed to deal in matters considerable, to squabble; to women 
of meanest rank (apt, by nature, or custom, to be transported with 
passion) to scold.  In our modern languages it is termed villainy, 
as being proper for rustic boors, or men of coarsest education and 
employment; who, having their minds debased by being conversant in 
meanest affairs, do vent their sorry passions, and bicker about 
their petty concernments, in such strains; who also, being not 
capable of a fair reputation, or sensible of disgrace to themselves, 
do little value the credit of others, or care for aspersing it.  But 
such language is unworthy of those persons, and cannot easily be 
drawn from them, who are wont to exercise their thoughts about 
nobler matters, who are versed in affairs manageable only by calm 
deliberation and fair persuasion, not by impetuous and provocative 
rudeness; which do never work otherwise upon masculine souls than so 
as to procure disdain and resistance.  Such persons, knowing the 
benefit of a good name, being wont to possess a good repute, prizing 
their own credit as a considerable good, will never be prone to 
bereave others of the like by opprobrious speech.  A noble enemy 
will never speak of his enemy in bad terms.

We may further consider that all wise, all honest, all ingenuous 
persons have an aversion from ill-speaking, and cannot entertain it 
with any acceptance or complacence; that only ill-natured, unworthy, 
and naughty people are its willing auditors, or do abet it with 
applause.  The good man, in Psalm xv., non accipit opprobrium, doth 
not take up, or accept, a reproach against his neighbour:  "but a 
wicked doer," saith the wise man, "giveth heed to false lips, and a 
liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue."  And what reasonable man will 
do that which is disgustful to the wise and good, is grateful only 
to the foolish and baser sort of men?  I pretermit that using this 
sort of language doth incapacitate a man for benefiting his 
neighbour, and defeateth his endeavours for his edification, 
disparaging a good cause, prejudicing the defence of truth, 
obstructing the effects of good instruction and wholesome reproof; 
as we did before remark and declare.  Further--

6.  He that useth this kind of speech doth, as harm and trouble 
others, so create many great inconveniences and mischiefs to himself 
thereby.  Nothing so inflameth the wrath of men, so provoketh their 
enmity, so breedeth lasting hatred and spite, as do contumelious 
words.  They are often called swords and arrows; and as such they 
pierce deeply, and cause most grievous smart; which men feeling are 
enraged, and accordingly will strive to requite them in the like 
manner and in all other obvious ways of revenge.  Hence strife, 
clamour, and tumult, care, suspicion, and fear, danger and trouble, 
sorrow and regret, do seize on the reviler; and he is sufficiently 
punished for this dealing.  No man can otherwise live than in 
perpetual fear of reciprocal like usage from him whom he is 
conscious of having so abused.  Whence, if not justice, or charity 
towards others, yet love and pity of ourselves should persuade us to 
forbear it as disquietful, incommodious, and mischievous to us.

We should indeed certainly enjoy much love, much concord, much 
quiet, we should live in great safety and security, we should be 
exempted from much care and fear, if we would restrain ourselves 
from abusing and offending our neighbour in this kind:  being 
conscious of so just and innocent demeanour towards him, we should 
converse with him in a pleasant freedom and confidence, not 
suspecting any bad language or ill usage from him.

7.  Hence with evidently good reason is he that useth such language 
called a fool:  and he that abstaineth from it is commended as wise.  
"A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calleth for 
strokes.  A fool's mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the 
snare of his soul.  He that refraineth his tongue is wise.  In the 
tongue of the wise is health.  He that keepeth his lips, keepeth his 
life:  but he that openeth wide his mouth" (that is, in evil-
speaking, gaping with clamour and vehemency) "shall have 
destruction.  The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious:  but the 
lips of a fool will swallow up himself.  Death and life are in the 
power of the tongue; and they that love it shall eat the fruit 
thereof;" that is, of the one or the other, answerably to the kind 
of speech they choose.

In fine, very remarkable is that advice, or resolution of the grand 
point concerning the best way of living happily, in the psalmist:  
"What man is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he 
may see good?  Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking 
guile."  Abstinence from ill-speaking he seemeth to propose as the 
first step towards the fruition of a durably happy life.

8.  Lastly, we may consider that it is a grievous perverting of the 
design of speech, that excellent faculty, which so much 
distinguisheth us from, so highly advanceth us above other 
creatures, to use it to the defaming and disquieting of our 
neighbour.  It was given us as an instrument of beneficial commerce 
and delectable conversation; that with it we might assist and 
advise, might cheer and comfort one another:  we, therefore, in 
employing it to the disgrace, vexation, damage or prejudice in any 
kind of our neighbour, do foully abuse it; and so doing, render 
ourselves indeed worse than dumb beasts:  for better far it were 
that we could say nothing, than that we should speak ill.

"Now the God of grace and peace .  . . make us perfect in every good 
work to do His will, working in us that which is well-pleasing in 
His sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever.  
Amen."



THE FOLLY OF SLANDER.



Part 1.

"He that uttereth slander is a fool."--Prov. x. 18.

General declamations against vice and sin are indeed excellently 
useful, as rousing men to consider and look about them:  but they do 
often want effect, because they only raise confused apprehensions of 
things, and indeterminate propensions to action; which usually, 
before men thoroughly perceive or resolve what they should practise, 
do decay and vanish.  As he that cries out "Fire!" doth stir up 
people, and inspireth them with a kind of hovering tendency every 
way, yet no man thence to purpose moveth until he be distinctly 
informed where the mischief is; then do they, who apprehend 
themselves concerned, run hastily to oppose it:  so, till we 
particularly discern where our offences lie (till we distinctly know 
the heinous nature and the mischievous consequences of them), we 
scarce will effectually apply ourselves to correct them.  Whence it 
is requisite that men should be particularly acquainted with their 
sins, and by proper arguments be dissuaded from them.

In order whereto I have now selected one sin to describe, and 
dissuade from, being in nature as vile, and in practice as common, 
as any other whatever that hath prevailed among men.  It is slander, 
a sin which in all times and places hath been epidemical and rife; 
but which especially doth seem to reign and rage in our age and 
country.

There are principles innate to men, which ever have, and ever will 
incline them to this offence.  Eager appetites to secular and 
sensual goods; violent passions, urging the prosecution of what men 
affect; wrath and displeasure against those who stand in the way of 
compassing their desires; emulation and envy towards those who 
happen to succeed better, or to attain a greater share in such 
things; excessive self-love; unaccountable malignity and vanity, are 
in some degrees connatural to all men, and ever prompt them to this 
dealing, as appearing the most efficacious, compendious, and easy 
way of satisfying such appetites, of promoting such designs, of 
discharging such passions.  Slander thence hath always been a 
principal engine whereby covetous, ambitious, envious, ill-natured, 
and vain persons have striven to supplant their competitors, and 
advance themselves; meaning thereby to procure, what they chiefly 
prize and like, wealth, or dignity, or reputation, favour and power 
in the court, respect and interest with the people.

But from especial causes our age peculiarly doth abound in this 
practice; for, besides the common dispositions inclining thereto, 
there are conceits newly coined, and greedily entertained by many, 
which seem purposely levelled at the disparagement of piety, 
charity, and justice, substituting interest in the room of 
conscience, authorising and commending for good and wise, all ways 
serving to private advantage.  There are implacable dissensions, 
fierce animosities, and bitter zeals sprung up; there is an extreme 
curiosity, niceness, and delicacy of judgment:  there is a mighty 
affectation of seeming wise and witty by any means; there is a great 
unsettlement of mind, and corruption of manners, generally diffused 
over people:  from which sources it is no wonder that this flood 
hath so overflown, that no banks can restrain it, no fences are able 
to resist it; so that ordinary conversation is full of it, and no 
demeanour can be secure from it.

If we do mark what is done in many (might I not say, in most?) 
companies, what is it but one telling malicious stories of, or 
fastening odious characters upon another?  What do men commonly 
please themselves in so much, as in carping and harshly censuring, 
in defaming and abusing their neighbours?  Is it not the sport and 
divertisement of many, to cast dirt in the faces of all they meet 
with; to bespatter any man with foul imputations?  Doth not in every 
corner a Momus lurk, from the venom of whose spiteful or petulant 
tongue no eminency of rank, dignity of place, or sacredness of 
office, no innocence or integrity of life, no wisdom or 
circumspection in behaviour, no good-nature or benignity in dealing 
and carriage, can protect any person?  Do not men assume to 
themselves a liberty of telling romances, and framing characters 
concerning their neighbour, as freely as a poet doth about Hector or 
Turnus, Thersites or Draucus?  Do they not usurp a power of playing 
with, or tossing about, of tearing in pieces their neighbour's good 
name, as if it were the veriest toy in the world?  Do not many 
having a form of godliness (some of them, demurely, others 
confidently, both without any sense of, or remorse for what they do) 
backbite their brethren?  Is it not grown so common a thing to 
asperse causelessly that no man wonders at it, that few dislike, 
that scarce any detest it? that most notorious calumniators are 
heard, not only with patience, but with pleasure; yea, are even held 
in vogue and reverence as men of a notable talent, and very 
serviceable to their party? so that slander seemeth to have lost its 
nature, and not to be now an odious sin, but a fashionable humour, a 
way of pleasing entertainment, a fine knack, or curious feat of 
policy; so that no man at least taketh himself or others to be 
accountable for what is said in this way?  Is not, in fine, the case 
become such, that whoever hath in him any love of truth, any sense 
of justice or honesty, any spark of charity towards his brethren, 
shall hardly be able to satisfy himself in the conversations he 
meeteth; but will be tempted, with the holy prophet, to wish himself 
sequestered from society, and cast into solitude; repeating those 
words of his, "Oh, that I had in the wilderness a lodging-place of 
wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them:  for 
they are . . . . an assembly of treacherous men, and they bend their 
tongues like their bow for lies"?  This he wished in an age so 
resembling ours, that I fear the description with equal patness may 
suit both:  "Take ye heed" (said he then, and may we not advise the 
like now?) "every one of his neighbour, and trust ye not in any 
brother:  for every brother will utterly supplant, and every 
neighbour will walk with slanders.  They will deceive every one his 
neighbour, and will not speak the truth; they have taught their 
tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to commit iniquity."

Such being the state of things, obvious to experience, no discourse 
may seem more needful, or more useful, than that which serveth to 
correct or check this practice:  which I shall endeavour to do (1) 
by describing the nature, (2) by declaring the folly of it:  or 
showing it to be very true which the wise man here asserteth, "He 
that uttereth slander is a fool."  Which particulars I hope so to 
prosecute, that any man shall be able easily to discern, and ready 
heartily to detest this practice.


I.  For explication of its nature, we may describe slander to be the 
uttering false (or equivalent to false, morally false) speech 
against our neighbour, in prejudice to his fame, his safety, his 
welfare, or concernment in any kind, out of malignity, vanity, 
rashness, ill-nature, or bad design.  That which is in Holy 
Scripture forbidden and reproved under several names and notions:  
of bearing false witness, false accusation, railing censure, 
sycophantry, tale-bearing, whispering, backbiting, supplanting, 
taking up reproach:  which terms some of them do signify the nature, 
others denote the special kinds, others imply the manners, others 
suggest the ends of this practice.  But it seemeth most fully 
intelligible by observing the several kinds and degrees thereof; as 
also by reflecting on the divers ways and manners of practising it.

The principal kinds thereof I observe to be these:

1.  The grossest kind of slander is that which in the Decalogue is 
called, bearing false testimony against our neighbour; that is, 
flatly charging him with facts which he never committed, and is 
nowise guilty of.  As in the case of Naboth, when men were suborned 
to say, "Naboth did blaspheme God and the king:" and as was David's 
case, when he thus complained, "False witnesses did rise up, they 
laid to my charge things that I knew not of."  This kind in the 
highest way (that is, in judicial proceedings) is more rare; and of 
all men, they who are detected to practise it, are held most vile 
and infamous; as being plainly the most pernicious and perilous 
instruments of injustice, the most desperate enemies of all men's 
right and safety that can be.  But also out of the court there are 
many knights-errant of the post, whose business it is to run about 
scattering false reports; sometimes loudly proclaiming them in open 
companies, sometimes closely whispering them in dark corners; thus 
infecting conversation with their poisonous breath:  these no less 
notoriously are guilty of this kind, as bearing always the same 
malice, and sometimes breeding as ill effects.

2.  Another kind is, affixing scandalous names, injurious epithets, 
and odious characters upon persons, which they deserve not.  As when 
Corah and his accomplices did accuse Moses of being ambitious, 
unjust, and tyrannical:  when the Pharisees called our Lord an 
impostor, a blasphemer, a sorcerer, a glutton and wine-bibber, an 
incendiary and perverter of the people, one that spake against 
Caesar, and forbade to give tribute:  when the apostles were charged 
with being pestilent, turbulent, factious and seditious fellows.  
This sort being very common, and thence in ordinary repute not so 
bad, yet in just estimation may be judged, even worse than the 
former; as doing to our neighbour more heavy and more irreparable 
wrong.  For it imposeth on him really more blame, and that such 
which he can hardly shake off:  because the charge signifieth habit 
of evil, and includeth many acts; then, being general and 
indefinite, can scarce be disproved.  He, for instance, that calleth 
a sober man drunkard, doth impute to him many acts of such 
intemperance (some really past, others probably future), and no 
particular time or place being specified, how can a man clear 
himself of that imputation, especially with those who are not 
thoroughly acquainted with his conversation?  So he that calleth a 
man unjust, proud, perverse, hypocritical, doth load him with most 
grievous faults, which it is not possible that the most innocent 
person should discharge himself from.

3.  Like to that kind is this:  aspersing a man's actions with harsh 
censures and foul terms, importing that they proceed from ill 
principles, or tend to bad ends; so as it doth not or cannot appear.  
Thus when we say of him that is generously hospitable, that he is 
profuse; of him that is prudently frugal, that he is niggardly; of 
him that is cheerful and free in his conversation, that he is vain 
or loose; of him that is serious and resolute in a good way, that he 
is sullen or morose; of him that is conspicuous and brisk in 
virtuous practice, that it is ambition or ostentation which prompts 
him; of him that is close and bashful in the like good way, that it 
is sneaking stupidity, or want of spirit; of him that is reserved, 
that it is craft; of him that is open, that it is simplicity in him; 
when we ascribe a man's liberality and charity to vainglory, or 
popularity; his strictness of life, and constancy, in devotion, to 
superstition, or hypocrisy.  When, I say, we pass such censures, or 
impose such characters on the laudable or innocent practice of our 
neighbours, we are indeed slanderers, imitating therein the great 
calumniator, who thus did slander even God Himself, imputing His 
prohibition of the fruit unto envy towards men; "God," said he, 
"doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be 
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil;" who thus 
did ascribe the steady piety of Job, not to a conscientious love and 
fear of God, but to policy and selfish design:  "Doth Job fear God 
for nought?"

Whoever, indeed, pronounceth concerning his neighbour's intentions 
otherwise than as they are evidently expressed by words, or 
signified by overt actions, is a slanderer; because he pretendeth to 
know, and dareth to aver, that which he nowise possibly can tell 
whether it be true; because the heart is exempt from all 
jurisdiction here, is only subject to the government and trial of 
