
As valuable as are all these illustrations, examples, and figures of
speech, still all must of necessity fall short of the truth in the case
of the Soul of Man--that wondrous something which has been built up by
the Absolute after aeons and aeons of time, and which is destined to
play an important part in the great Cosmic Drama which it has pleased
the Absolute to think into existence. Drawing its Life from the
Universal Life, it has the roots of its being still further back in the
Absolute itself, as we shall see in the next lesson. Great and
wonderful is it all, and our minds are but illy fitted to receive the
truth, and must be gradually accustomed to the glare of the Sun. But it
will come to all--none can escape his glorious destiny.

The Oriental writings are full of allusions to the underlying Oneness,
in fact the entire Oriental philosophies rest upon it. You may find it
everywhere if you will but look for it. The experience of Cosmic
Consciousness, which is naught but a sudden or gradual "awareness" of
the underlying Unity of Life, is evidenced everywhere in the
_Upanishads_, that wonderful series of teachings in the Hindu classics.
Every writer in the collection gives his evidence regarding this
awareness of Unity and Oneness, and the experiences and mental
characteristics arising from the same. The following quotations will
give an idea of the prevalence of this thought:

"He that beholds all beings in the Self, and the Self in all things, he
never turns away from it."

"When to a man who understands, the Self has become all things, what
sorrow, what trouble, can there be to him who once beheld that unity."

The Hindu father explains to his son that the One Life is in all forms
and shapes, points out object after object, saying to the boy: "_Tat
tuam asi_, Thou art that; That thou art."

And the Mystics have added their testimony to that of others who have
experienced this consciousness. Plotinus said: "Knowledge has three
degrees: opinion, science, and illumination. The last is absolute
knowledge founded upon the identity of the knowing mind with the known
object."

And Eckhardt, the German mystic, has told his pupils that: "God is the
soul of all things. He is the light that shines in us when the veil is
rent."

And Tennyson, in his wonderful verse describing the temporary lifting
of the veil for him, has described a phase of Cosmic Consciousness in
the following words:

     "For knowledge is the swallow on the lake
     That sees and stirs the surface-shadow there,
     But never yet hath dippt into the abysm,
     The Abysm of all Abysms, beneath, within
     The blue of sky and sea, the green of earth,
     And in the million-millionth of a grain
     Which cleft and cleft again for evermore
     And ever vanishing, never vanishes. . .

     And more, my son, for more than once when I
     Sat all alone, revolving in myself
     That word which is the symbol of myself,
     The mortal symbol of the Self was loosed,
     And past into the Nameless, as a cloud
     Melts into Heaven. I touched my limbs, the limbs
     Were strange, not mine--and yet no shadow of doubt,
     But utter clearness, and through loss of Self
     The gain of such large life as matched with ours
     Were Sun to spark, unshadowable in words,
     Themselves but shadows of a shadow-world."

And not only among the mystics and poets is this universal truth
experienced and expressed, but among the great philosophers of all ages
may we find this teaching of the Unity of Life originally voiced in the
_Upanishads_. The Grecian thinkers have expressed the thought; the
Chinese philosophers have added their testimony; the modern
philosophers, Spinoza, Berkeley, Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer, Hartman,
Ferrier, Royce, although differing widely in their theories, all have
expressed as a fundamental truth the Unity of Life--a One Life
underlying. The basic teachings of the Vedas are receiving confirmation
at the hands of Modern Science, which while calling itself
Rationalistic and inclining to a Materialistic conception of the
Universe, still finds itself compelled to say, "At the last, All is
One."

And in nearly every human soul there is a secret chamber in which the
text of this knowledge lies hidden, and in the rare moments in which
the chamber door is opened in response to poetry, music, art, deep
religious feeling, or those unaccountable waves of uplift that come to
all, the truth is recognized for the moment and the soul feels at peace
and is content in the feeling that it is at harmony with the All. The
sense of Beauty, however expressed, when keenly experienced, has a
tendency to lift us out of our consciousness of separateness into
another plane of mind in which the keynote is Unity. The higher the
human feeling, the nearer is the conscious realization of the
underlying Unity.

This realization of the Unity of Life--the Oneness of Life--the Great
Life--even when but faintly experienced, renders Life quite a different
thing to the person. He feels no longer that he is a mere "part" of
something that may be destroyed--or that he is a tiny personal
something, separate from and opposed to all the rest of the
Universe--but that he is, instead, a Unit of Expression--a Centre of
Consciousness--in the Great One Life. He realizes that he has the
Power, and Strength, and Life, and Wisdom of the Whole back of him,
upon which he may learn to draw as he unfolds. He realizes that he is
at Home, and that he cannot be thrust out, for there is no outside of
the All. He feels within himself the certainty of infinite Life and
being, for his Life is the all Life, and that cannot die. The petty
cares, and worries, and griefs, and pains of everyday personal life are
seen for what they are, and they cease to threaten and dominate him as
of old. He sees the things of personality as merely the costume and
trappings of the part in the play of life that he is acting out, and he
knows that when he discards them he will still be "I."

When one really feels the consciousness of the One Life underlying, he
acquires a confident trust and faith, and a new sense of freedom and
strength comes to him, for is he not indeed delivered from the bondage
of fear that has haunted him in his world of separateness. He feels
within him the spiritual pulse of the Universal Life, and at once he
thrills with a sense of new-found power and being. He becomes
reconciled with Life in all its phases, for he knows these things as
but temporary phases in the working out of some great Universal plan,
instead of things permanent and fixed and beyond remedy. He begins to
feel the assurance of Ultimate Justice and God, and the old ideas of
Injustice and Evil begin to fade from him. He who enters into the
consciousness of the Universal Life, indeed enters into a present
realization of the Life Everlasting. All fear of being "lost" or
"eternally damned" fades away, and one instinctively realizes that he
is "saved" because he is of the One Life and cannot be lost. All the
fear of being lost arises from the sense of illusion of separateness or
apartness from the One Life. Once the consciousness of Unity is gained,
fear drops from the soul like a wornout garment.

When the idea and consciousness of the Unity takes possession of one,
he feels a new sense of cheerfulness and optimism entirely different
from any other feeling that he has ever experienced. He loses that
distrust and hardness which seems to cling to so many in this age who
have arrived at the Intellectual stage of development, and have been
unable to progress further. A new sense of peace and harmony comes to
one, and illuminates his entire character and life. The bitterness
engendered by the illusion of separateness is neutralized by the
sweetness of the sense of Unity. When one enters into this
consciousness he finds that he has the key to many a riddle of life
that has heretofore perplexed him. Many dark corners are
illuminated--many hard sayings are made clear. Paradoxes become
understandable truths, and the pairs of opposites that dwell in all
advanced intellectual conceptions, seem to bend around their ends and
form themselves into a circle.

To the one who understands the Unity, all Nature seems akin and
friendly. There is no sense of antagonism or opposition--everything is
seen to fit into its place, and work out its appointed task in the
Universal plan. All Nature is seen to be friendly, when properly
understood, and Man regains that sense of harmonious environment and
at-home-ness that he lost when he entered the stage of
self-consciousness. The lower animal and the children feel this Unity,
in their poor imperfect way, but Man lost this Paradise when he
discovered Good and Evil. But Paradise Lost becomes Paradise Regained
when Man enters into this new stage of consciousness. But unlike the
animal or child, which instinctively feels the Unity, the awakened soul
of man possesses the Unity consciousness, coupled with intelligent
comprehension, and unfolding spiritual power. He has found that which
he lost, together with the accumulated interest of the ages. This new
kingdom of Consciousness is before the race. All must enter into it in
time--all will enter into it--many are entering into it now, by gradual
stages. This dawning sense of Unity is that which is causing the
spiritual unrest which is now agitating the world, and Which in time
will bring the race to a realization of the Fatherhood of God and the
Brotherhood of Man, and his kinship to Every Living Thing. We are
entering into this new cycle of human unfoldment, and the greatest
changes are before the race. Ye who read these words are in the
foremost ranks of the new dispensation, else you would not be
interested in this subject. You are the leaven which is designed to
lighten the heavy mass of the world-mind. Play well your parts. You are
not alone. Mighty forces and great Intelligences are behind you in the
work. Be worthy of them. Peace be with you.

Carry with you the Central Thought of this lesson:

CENTRAL THOUGHT. _There is but One Life--a Universal Life--in the
world. This One Life is an emanation from the Absolute. It infills all
forms, shapes and manifestations of Life, and is the Real Life that
each imagines to be his personal property. There is but One--and you
are centres of consciousness and expression in that One. There is a
Unity and Harmony which becomes apparent to those who enter into the
consciousness of the One Life. There is Peace and Calm in the thought.
There is Strength and Power in the knowledge. Enter ye into your
Kingdom of Power--possess yourselves of your Birthright of Knowledge.
In the very center of your being you will find a holy of holies in
which dwells the Consciousness of the One Life, underlying. Enter into
the Silence of the Shrine within_.




THE FIFTH LESSON


THE ONE AND THE MANY.

As we have stated in previous Lessons, all philosophies which thinkers
have considered worthy of respect, find their final expression of Truth
in the fundamental thought that there is but _One Reality_, underlying
all the manifold manifestations of shape and form. It is true that the
philosophers have differed widely in their conception of that One, but,
nevertheless, they have all agreed upon the logical necessity of the
fundamental conception that there is, at least, but One Reality,
underlying All.

Even the Materialists have conceded this conclusion, and they speak and
think of a something called "Matter," as the One--holding that,
inherent in Matter, is the potentiality of all Life. The school of
Energists, holding that Matter in itself is non-existent, and that it
is merely a mode of manifestation of a something called "Energy,"
asserts that this something called Energy is One, fundamental, real,
and self-sufficient.

The various forms of Western religious thought, which hold to the
various conceptions of a Personal Deity, also hold to a Oneness,
inasmuch as they teach that in the beginning there was God, only, and
that all the Universe has been _created_ by Him. They do not go into
details regarding this creation, and, unlike the Oriental teachers,
they fail to distinguish between the conception of the _creation of
shape and form_, on the one hand; and the _creation of the substance of
these shapes and forms_, on the other hand. But, even accepting the
premises of these people who hold to the Personal Deity conception, it
will be seen that the Reason requires the acceptance of one or two
ideas, _viz._, (1) That the Deity created the substance of these shapes
and forms from _Nothing_; or else (2) that he created them out of _his
own substance_--out of Himself, in fact. Let us consider, briefly,
these two conceptions.

In the first conception, _i.e._, Creation from Nothing, we are brought
face to face with an impregnable obstacle, inasmuch as the human reason
positively refuses to think of Anything coming from Nothing. While it
is perfectly true that the finite human mind cannot undertake to limit
the powers of the Infinite; or to insist that the possibilities of the
Divine Power must be measured and limited by the finite power of
Man--still it must hearken to the report of its own highest faculties,
and say "I cannot Think it," or else blindly accept the teachings of
other finite minds which are equally unable to "Think it," and which
have no superior sources of information. The Infinite Power has endowed
us with reasoning faculties, and evidently expects us to use them to
their full capacity--else the gift were a mockery. And in the absence
of information from higher sources than the Reason, we must use the
Reason in thinking of this matter, or else refuse to think of it at
all.

In view of the above thought, let us then consider the report of the
Reason, regarding this matter, And then, after having done so, let us
apply the test of this report of the Reason, to the highest teaching of
the Yogi Philosophy, and see how the latter stands the test. And, after
having done this, we will apply the test of the Higher Consciousness to
the same teachings. Remember this always, that while there is knowledge
that transcends Reason--that is knowledge that comes from the Higher
Regions of the Mind--still even such information of the Spiritual Mind
_does not run contrary to Reason_, although it goes beyond it. There is
harmony between the Spiritual Mind and the Highest Reason.

Returning to the consideration of the matter of Creation of Substance
from Nothing, we again assert that _the Reason is unable to think of
the creation of Something from Nothing_. It finds the statement
unthinkable, and contrary to all the laws of thought. It is true that
the Reason is compelled to accept as a final truth, many things that it
cannot _understand_ by reason of its finitude--but this is not one of
them. There is no logical necessity for the Reason to accept any such
conception as this--there is no warrant in the Reason for any such
theory, idea or conclusion. Let us stop here, for a moment, and examine
into this difference--it may help us to think clearer, hereafter.

We find it impossible to _understand_ the fact of the Infinite Being
having always existed--and Being without Cause. We find it impossible
to conceive of the nature of an Eternal, Causeless, and Infinite
Being--to conceive the _nature of_, such a Being, remember.

But, while this is so, still our Reason, by its own laws, compels us to
think that there _must be_ such a Being, so long as we think at all.
For, if we think at all, we _must_ think of there being a Fundamental
Reality--and we _must_ think of that Reality as being without Cause
(because there can be no Cause for the First Cause); and we _must_
think of that Reality as being Eternal (because It could not have
sprung into Being from Nothing, and therefore must have always been);
and we _must_ think of that Reality as Infinite (because there is
nothing outside of Itself to limit It). Think over this statement for a
moment--until you grasp it fully.

But there is no such necessity, or compulsion, in the case of the
question of Creation from Nothingness. On the contrary, the necessity
and compulsion is all the other way. Not only is the Reason unable to
_think of_ Creation from Nothing--not only does all its laws forbid it
to hold such a conception--but, more than this, it finds within itself
a conception, full-grown and potent, which contradicts this idea. It
finds within itself the strong certainty that _Whatever Really Is has
Always Been_, and that all transient and finite shapes, forms, and
manifestations, _must_ proceed from that which is Real, Infinite,
Causeless, and Infinite--and moreover _must be composed of the
substance of that Reality_, for there is nothing else Real from which
they could have been composed; and their composition from Nothing is
unthinkable, for Nothing is Nothing, and always will be Nothing.
"Nothing" is merely a name of denial of existence--an absolute denial
of substantiality of any degree, kind or form--an absolute denial of
Reality. And from such could come only Nothing--from Nothing, Nothing
comes.

Therefore, finding within itself the positive report that All, and
Anything There Is, must be composed of the Substance of the Reality,
the Reason is compelled to think that the Universe is composed of the
Substance of the One Reality--whether we call that One Reality, by the
name of The Absolute; or whether we call it God. _We must believe that
from this Absolute-God all things in the Universe have flown out, or
been emanated, rather than created--begotten, rather than "made."_

This does not mean the Pantheistic idea that the Universe _is_ God--but
rather that God, while existing separate and apart from His Universe,
in his Essence, and Being, is nevertheless _in_ His Universe, and His
Universe _in_ Him. And this, no matter what conception of God or Deity
is had--or whether one thinks of The Absolute as Principle. The Truth
is the same--Truth no matter by what names it is called, or by what
misconception it is surrounded. The Truth is that _One is in All, and
All is in One_--such is the report of the highest Reason of Man--such
is the report of the Illumined--such is the Highest Teachings that have
come down to the race from the great souls that have trodden The Path
of Attainment.

And now let us submit the Yogi Philosophy to these conceptions, and
reports of the Reason. And let us discover just what more the Yogi
Philosophy has to say concerning the _nature of_ the Substance of the
Divine, which infills all Life--and how it solves the Riddle of the
Sphinx, concerning the One in All; and All in One. We hope to show you
that the Riddle is capable of solution, and that the old Yogi teachers
have long ago grasped that for which the human mind has ever sought.
This phase of the Teachings is the highest, and it is usually hinted
at, rather than expressed, in the writings on the subject--owing to
danger of confusion and misconception. But in these Lessons we shall
speak the Truth plainly, and without fear--for such is the Message
which has been given us to deliver to our students--and we will perform
the Right action, leaving the Result, or Fruits of the Action, where it
belongs, according to the higher teachings found in the "_Bhagavad
Gita_," and in the Higher Teachings of the Yogi Philosophy.

The fundamental Truth embedded in the Wisdom-Philosophies of the
East--the Higher Yogi Teachings--is the impregnable doctrine of the One
Self in the many selves--the many selves in the One Self. This
fundamental Truth underlies all the Oriental Philosophies which are
esoteric in their nature.

Notwithstanding the crude and often repulsive conceptions and practices
of the masses of the people who represent the exoteric, or popular,
phase of the teachings (and these two phases are to be found in _all_
regions) still there is always this Inner Doctrine of the One Self, to
be found to those who look for it.

Not only is this true among the Hindus; but even among the Mahommedans,
of all countries, there is an Inner Circle of Mystics, known as the
_Sufis_, holding to this Truth. And the inner teachings of the
philosophies of all ages and races, have held likewise. And the highest
thought of the philosophers of the Western races, has found refuge in
this idea of the Over-soul, or Universal Self. But, it is only among
the Yogis that we find an attempt made to explain the real nature of
the manifestation of the One in Many--the holding of the Many forms in
the One Self.

Before proceeding to the consideration of _how_ the One becomes as
Many, as expounded by the Higher Yogi Teachings, it becomes necessary
to speak of a matter upon which there has been much confusion and
misunderstanding, not only on the part of the students of various
Oriental Philosophies, but also upon the part of some of the teachers
themselves. We allude to the connection between THE ONE--THE
ABSOLUTE--in Its ESSENCE--and that which has been called the One Life;
the Universal Life, etc.

Many writers have spoken of the Universal Life, and The One, as being
identical--but such is a grievous error, finding no warrant in the
Highest Yogi Teachings. It is true that all living forms dwell in, and
are infilled with the Universal Life--that All Life is One. We have
taught this truth, and it is indeed Truth, without qualification. But
there is still a Higher Truth--the Highest Truth, in fact--and that is,
that even this Universal Life is not the One, but, instead, is in
itself a manifestation of, and emanation from, THE ONE. There is a
great difference here---see that you perceive and understand it, before
proceeding further.

THE ONE--THE ABSOLUTE--according to the Highest Teachings, is Pure
Spirit, and not Life, Mind, or Being as we understand them in our
finite and mortal expressions. But, still all Life, Mind, and Being, as
we understand them, spring from, flow from, and emanate from, the
One--and more than this, may be spoken of as _reflections_ of the Life,
Mind, and Being of The One, if we may be permitted to apply the names
of finite manifestations to the Infinite Reality.

So, the Highest Teaching is that the Universal Life infilling all
living things, is not, in itself, the Being and Life of THE ONE--but is
rather a great fundamental emanation of The One, the manner and nature
of which will be spoken of as we proceed. Remember this, please.
