false-swearing by the juryman and murder by the fugitive _right_!

It is a most marvellous thing, what a number of clergymen north of
Mason and Dixon's line, have, all of a sudden, become such great
_Constitutional lawyers_! Never before was anything like it! It is a
modern miracle! A decision upon a great constitutional question is
nothing to them! How amazingly these profound legalists, these
clergyman jurists, would adorn the high courts of the country if
they would only consent to take their seat upon the bench! The
Judges of the United States Supreme Court ought to be thankful, that
these clergymen Judges have done their duty for them in advance,
deciding the law to be unconstitutional and no more is to be done!
Benevolent men, these clergymen! Some have done the duty of the
jurors for them and others the duty of the judges--the verdict and
the decision are both recorded! yea indeed, in advance, and without
pay!

But seriously, it were far better, that these clergymen should
attend to their own appropriate duties to which their Master has
bidden them, than to be engaged in fostering excitements among their
people, which _never can_ result in any good, civil or religious. If
we shall have the rebellion, disunion, and civil war, to which these
evil principles and these excitements tend, the guilt of such
clergymen will not be small! I would not have their accountability
for all the gold of Ophir!

But it is not all the clergymen of this part of the country, nor the
most of them, nor the half of them, who have turned Constitutional
lawyers, or turned law opposers. I hesitate not to say, it is only a
small minority, and those in general who are not entitled to the
most respect for erudition, sense, or excellence of character. The
(New School) Synod of New York and New Jersey, as respectable a body
of ministers and elders as is to be found in the Presbyterian
Church, at their late meeting in this city, had good sense enough,
and good religion enough, to "leave the constitutionality of the
recent enactment" (the Fugitive Slave Law) "to be adjudicated by the
civil tribunals of the country." They deserve the thanks of the
country and of all mankind. The solid sense and real religion of the
land will respect their decision.

I have nothing to do with politics or party. I am only insisting
upon religious obedience to Law. I am preaching the texts before me.
Such obedience is a religious duty. It is the will of God. I appeal
to the texts. They proclaim the Law of God. Peaceful subjection to
government _is_ his law; and men are guilty of sophistry and
falsehood, when, to excuse wicked evasion of Law or violent
resistance, they pretend to appeal to what they call "the higher
laws of God." _There are no such higher laws._ The texts before me
are his law. If one man has a moral right, either cunningly to evade
or openly to violate Law, under such pleading, then another man has
the same right to violate _another_ Law; and thus any villainy on
earth may be perpetrated under the sacred names of "conscience," and
"the higher laws of God!" Nothing is _safe_ in the hands of men of
such principles. These principles undermine the foundations _of all
society among men_! As I told you last Wednesday evening in my
lecture, the question before the country is _not_, (as the deceivers
pretend,) whether God's laws are not higher than man's, or whether
God's laws are to be obeyed. Nobody disputes either of these things.
Nobody ever did. But the question is, whether it is the will of God
that men should submit to the laws of the land, or aim to paralyze
law, cheat it, cripple it, resist it, and thus overthrow the
government of the country--a government at this moment more
beneficial than any other that ever existed.

Nor is it true, that the fugitive slave is made an "outlaw," and on
_that_ ground justifiable for bloody and murderous resistance of
Law. He is under the protection of Law; and if any man injures him
or kills him, the Law will avenge him, just as soon as it would you
or me. He is _not_ made an outlaw: common sense knows better.

The matter before us is a very serious matter. The wicked
principles of which I have spoken, disguise it as you will, tend
directly to anarchy, confusion, and civil war! The question _is
not_, whether slavery is right, or the Fugitive Slave Law right. It
draws deeper. The question is, shall Law be put in force, and the
government of the country stand; or shall Law be resisted, and the
government of the country disobeyed, and the nation plunged into all
the horrors of civil war? If Law cannot be executed, it is time to
write the epitaph of your country!

Suffer me to utter a few words of earnest counsel to you, my beloved
people.

1. Beware of the influence of _mere feeling_ on this serious
subject. Your feelings may be with the slave,--so are mine, so are
those of most of the Southern people. We all want men to be free;
and _no more_ do we want it now, than did the inhabitants of this
country before we were born: the extravagant fanaticism and noisy
zeal of the Northern abolitionists have not increased the sentiment
of the country in favour of freedom a single item. But what can we
_do_? This is a very grave and difficult subject. One thing is
certain,--the perpetual abuse of our Southern brethren, violence,
disunion, and bloody murder will do us no good,--whether we are
bondmen or freemen. And when we think on this subject, let us aim to
be cool, unimpassioned, deliberate, and give reason and religion
their just influence over us.

2. Beware of prejudice. Do not make up your mind hastily, and under
the impulses of mere feeling, without any just and extensive
information. Study the matter calmly, extensively, and on all sides
and aspects of it.

3. Study it _religiously_. Keep it, in your mind, aloof from all the
excitements and influences of party and party spirit. Let me say to
you, my beloved people, study it on your knees, in earnest prayer to
God. Learn your duty from God's word, praying in the Holy Ghost.

4. Aim to cultivate the entire spirit of your Lord and Master, Jesus
Christ. Feel as he felt. Act as he acted. Pray as he prayed. Seek
the _salvation_ of sinners, as he sought it,--evidently putting more
value upon _that_ for every dying son of Adam, than upon all things
earthly. Oh remember, you _will be the best citizens, just when you
are the best Christians_;--and I do believe in my heart, you will do
most earthly good to your fellow-men, just when you do them most
spiritual good,--leading them, by example, by precept, and prayer,
to "seek _first_ the kingdom of God."

5. Be obedient to the laws of your land. Do not resist these
_ordinances of God_. Stand by the Constitution of your country. If
that die, _the most_ of your happiness and your hopes die with
it!--yea, it would be a calamity to the civilized world!
Christianity herself would be hindered a whole century in her march!
Respect your rulers. Frown indignantly upon the low and vile abuse
now heaped so liberally upon the great men of your country. Be
peaceful Citizens. Be a _law-abiding people_, with all your
