by the report of the Meccan success, began to treat Moslem emissaries
with scant courtesy, and went so far as to murder some. Mohammed
retaliated by sending men to balance the scales in the same criminal
way, particularly in treating with the Jews. An idea had grown up in
his mind that these people had determined to murder him. This, with
matters of minor importance, already referred to, at last led to an
organised attempt to subjugate them. A large, influential tribe was
besieged; their date trees, lands, and property wantonly destroyed.
Eventually the whole tribe surrendered, and were glad to march away
with what possessions their camels could carry. This led to a
combination of other Jewish tribes, which laid siege to Medinah. The
siege was not successful, and barbarous treatment was meted out to the
besiegers. After much skirmishing and general fighting, a number of
the Jews who had been captured were decapitated, while their women and
children were enslaved. Those who were unwilling to embrace Islam,
were compelled to pay tribute. So the prosperity and success of Islam
was assured. The Jews were no longer bold enough to cause the prophet
any anxiety as to the validity of his prophetic claims, nor were they
of a mind that would arouse fear as to their fighting abilities. They
were true descendants of Isaac and Jacob, who were both men of peace,
and were not qualified for success in war against the posterity of the
active warlike Ishmael and Esau.

Freed from all anxiety in this direction, the prophet, realising that
the security of Medinah could never be assured while the Meccans were
opposed to him, began to formulate plans for the conquest of their
city. His first step was to try and conciliate them, with a view to
sending a pilgrim band into the city, but the citizens were far too
cautious and suspicious to allow that. At last, however, they were
prevailed upon to receive his son-in-law, Omar, who succeeded in
persuading a section of the Meccans of the injustice of barring the
Holy Temple to those who, although their enemies, were, after all,
their kinsmen. This led to a treaty, in which Mohammed brought shame
upon his followers because of his concessions. The arrangements were
that for ten years, peace between the prophet and the Meccans should
be maintained, and that within a year a party of the Moslems were to
be allowed to make a pilgrimage to the Kaaba.

The humiliation to which the prophet compelled his followers to submit
gave rise to considerable indignation, which was allayed only when he
himself submitted to the shaving of his head and the offering of
sacrifice. He knew that the humiliation was worthy of the advantage
gained--indeed, it was but the furtherance of his policy, in which no
action that was expedient could possibly be disgraceful. To him such
a treaty involved no sacred obligation to his enemies. He was God's
prophet, and as such was free of all obligation to those who did not
follow him, a principle deeply rooted in Islam, which makes the
violation of all virtuous relations with unbelievers highly
meritorious.




V.--WORLD CONQUEST.


Not long after the treaty with the Meccans, Mohammed revealed the fact
that he had elaborated a scheme of world conquest, by sending
representatives to earthly monarchs of whom he had heard. His
messengers carried letters bearing the seal, "Mohammed, Prophet of
God," and urging the addressees to acknowledge his claims by embracing
Islam. These overtures were in some cases favourably received; in
others with contempt; but, of course, did not lead to compliance with
the demands, except, perhaps, on the part of a few of the rulers of
some Arabic tribes.

The eighth year of the flight is famous in the history of the
prophet's life, because his followers, for the first time, came into
conflict with the forces of the Christian empire. The battle of Mutah
resulted in defeat of the Moslems, and, consequently, details have
been suppressed. It was part of Mohammed's policy to counteract the
demoralising influence of defeat by immediately attempting a fight in
which victory was assured. This, to my mind, justified war on any
pretext or grievance. In this case he conceived the idea of invading
Mecca, and, although minor incidents justify his decision to a slight
degree, his breach of the treaty adds to the evidence that is
derogatory to his character.

The pilgrimage of the year before had been organised by him with the
view of impressing the Meccans of his power, and was decidedly
successful. When he with his ten thousand troops approached the city,
fear caused submission on the part of the leader of the city forces,
and after some slight skirmishing with a section of the community,
which preferred to show active disapproval of the ignominious
surrender, the city was won. Every idolatrous element of the Kaaba
worship was swept away, and, although its pagan associations were
negatived, it was sanctified to the service of Islam, and is still its
only altar. The city was invested with a more sacred significance than
it had ever occupied under the pagan system. It was never again to be
defiled by the spilling of human blood, the prophet insisting upon
this with admirable inconsistency! He showed his gratification in many
acts of statesmanlike condescension, and seems at this time to have
considered himself to be the ruler of all Arabs. Although it is
improbable that Mohammed was aware of it, the significance he attached
to the Holy City, by teaching that the Caaba was a heavenly built
edifice, was to become the means of consolidating his system, in spite
of national and racial distinctions. In its precincts, pilgrims from
India, Persia, China, Russia, Turkey, and other lands where Islam has
its devotees, mingle with the wild Bedouin of the desert in one common
brotherhood, and worship, in unity of faith and form, Allah, the great
and merciful.

After its capture, the fierce warlike Bedouin nomadic tribes made
strenuous and courageous attempts to win back the city, but the Moslem
forces were invariably successful, and, in time, Mohammed returned to
Medinah more triumphant than ever. Eventually Taif, which had
successfully resisted a siege, submitted peacefully to the prophet's
claims, and the subjugation of the whole of Arabia followed.

An ingenious system of taxation was imposed upon all tribes submitting
to Mohammed. The natural prejudice that universally exists against
taxation (!) was overcome, because it was instituted as a religious
rather than a statutory obligation. Thus the regular payments of alms
became one of the five acts of faith imposed upon all believers. The
other acts are: confession of creed, prayer, fasting, and pilgrimage.




VI.--MOHAMMED AND WOMEN.


The prophet's domestic life exerted considerable influence upon his
religion; effects of which are to be seen in the Mohammedan home of
to-day. His numerous marriages afforded experience which led to the
framing of many "divine" laws referring to women. As has already been
hinted, Kadijah, his first wife, exercised considerable influence over
his prophetic career. She evidently had a strong affection for him,
which feeling was heartily reciprocated. She had a personality strong
enough to curb his natural passion, and to preserve her place in spite
of it in his regard. Her encouragement and support when success and
failure were trembling in the balance, urged him to persist in the
development of his ideas. He was faithful to her during their married
life, and to her memory afterwards, and promised her, upon her
deathbed, that she should share his heavenly chamber after his death,
with the Mother of Jesus and the sister of Moses. Within a month of
her death he was betrothed to Ayesha, a child of seven. He did not
actually marry her until she was nine years of age, and during the
interval consoled himself by wedding a widow who had acted as nurse to
one of his daughters. This marriage seems to have been more a matter
of convenience than of affection on his part, and in later days she
was able to keep her position as his wife only by the yielding of
certain of her privileges to other members of the harem.

Seven months after his arrival in Medinah, during the time of poverty,
the marriage with Ayesha was celebrated, the child of nine being
united to the man of fifty-three! a marriage defended on the ground of
political expediency, whereby the devotion of Abu Bakr, the child's
father was strengthened. She seems to have been second only to
Khadijah in the prophet's affections, and exercised a petty tyranny
over him, which was submitted to even when it affected his
revelations. She excited the envy of the other wives because of her
privileges, and in spite of intrigue, was able to hold her own. She
was extremely sarcastic in regard to some of the revelations, and even
went so far on one occasion as to jeer the prophet on his faithfulness
in recording them. This sarcasm was prompted by jealousy, because of
Mohammed's marriage with Zainab, which was so illegal as to cause him
to throw the responsibility on God. Zainab was the wife of the
prophet's adopted son Zaid, who, having discovered his foster-father's
love, thought it wise to divorce her in his favour. The revelation
