    De Gayangos' translation.

    [2] De Gayangos on Al Makk., i. 368, says the cathedral was at
    first guaranteed to the Christians. Some time later than 750
    they had to surrender half of it; in 784 they were obliged to
    sell the other half, and in return were allowed to rebuild the
    destroyed churches. For the "church of the burnt" see above, p.
    29, note 1.

    [3] This was not finished till 793. The original structure cost
    80,000 dinars. Several Khalifs added to it, and Hakem II.
    (961-976) alone spent on it 160,000 dinars.

Besides these within the walls, there were ten or twelve monasteries and
churches in the immediate neighbourhood of Cordova: among them the
monastery of St Christopher, the famous one of Tabanos, suppressed as
above mentioned, in 854;[1] those of St Felix at Froniano, of St Martin
at Royana, of the Virgin Mary at Cuteclara, of St Salvator at
Pegnamellar; and the churches of SS. Justus and Pastor, and of St
Sebastian.

We have given the names of these churches and monasteries[2] at or near
Cordova, both to shew how numerous they were, and also because from one
or other of them came nearly all the self-devoted martyrs, of whom we
are about to consider the claims. Except in cases like that
above-mentioned, the Christians were not allowed to build new
churches,[3] but considering the diminution in the numbers of the
Christians owing to the conquest, and the apostasy of a great many, this
could not be reckoned a great hardship. Moreover the Christian churches,
it was ordained, should be open to Moslems as well as Christians, though
during the performance of mass it seems that they had to be kept closed.
The Mosques were never to be polluted by the step of an infidel.[4]

    [1] Dozy, ii. 162.

    [2] Monasteries were established in Spain 150 years before the
    Saracen conquest. They mostly fared badly at the hands of the
    Arabs, in spite of the injunctions of the Khalif Abubeker (see
    Conde, i. 37, and Gibbon), but that of Lorban at Coimbra
    received a favourable charter in 734 (Fleury, v. 89; but
    Dunham, ii. 154, doubts the authenticity of the charter).

    [3] Cp. the stipulation of Omar at the fall of Jerusalem.

    [4] See Charter of Coimbra, apud Fleury, v. 89.

The religious ferment, which manifested itself so strongly at Cordova,
did not extend to other parts of Spain. For instance, at Elvira, the
cradle of Spanish Christianity, it was shortly after the Cordovan
martyrdoms (in 864) that the mosque, founded in the year of the
conquest, and left unbuilt for 150 years, was finally finished. What we
hear about the Christians at Elvira at this time is not to their credit,
their bishop, Samuel, being notorious as an evil liver.[1] It is in
Cordova that the main interest at this period centres; and to Cordova we
will for the present confine our attention.

There is abundant evidence to show that the party of enthusiasts, both
those who offered themselves for martyrdom, and those who aided and
abetted their more impulsive brethren, were a comparatively small body
in the Church of Spain; and that their proceedings awakened little short
of dismay in the minds of the more sensible portion of the Christian
community, both in the Arab part of Spain, and perhaps in a less degree
in the free North.[2] The chief leaders of the party of zealots--as far
as we find mention of them--were Saul, bishop of Cordova (850-861),
Eulogius, and Samson, abbot of the monastery of Pegnamellar; while
Reccafredus, bishop of Seville, and Hostegesis of Malaga, were the
prominent ecclesiastics on the other side.

    [1] Ibn Khatib, apud Dozy, ii. 210.

    [2] Yonge, p. 63.

Before relating what steps the latter took in conjunction with the
Moslem authorities to put down the dangerous outbreak of fanaticism, it
will be interesting to note what was the attitude of the different
sections of the Church towards the misguided men who gave themselves up
to death, and their claims to the crown of martyrdom. Those who denied
the validity of these claims, rested their contention on the grounds,
that the so-called martyrs had compassed their own destruction, there
being no persecution at the time; that they had worked no miracles in
proof of their high claims; that they had been slain by men who believed
in the true God; that they had suffered an easy and immediate death; and
that their bodies had corrupted like those of other men.

It was an abuse of words, said the party of moderation, to call these
suicides by the holy name of martyrs, when no violence in high places
had forced them to deny their faith,[1] or interfered with their due
observance of Christianity. It was merely an act of ostentatious
pride--and pride was the root of all evil--to court danger. Such conduct
had never been enjoined by Christ, and was quite alien from the meekness
and humility of His character.[2]

They might have added that such voluntary martyrdoms had been expressly
condemned,

(_a._) By the circular letter of the Church of Smyrna to the other
churches, describing Polycarp's martyrdom, in the terms: "We commend not
those who offer themselves of their own accord, for that is not what the
gospel teacheth us:"[3]

(_b._) By St Cyprian,[4] who, when brought before the consul and
questioned, said "our discipline forbiddeth that any should offer
themselves of their own accord;" and in his last letter he says: "Let
none of you offer himself to the pagans, it is sufficient if he speak
when apprehended:"

(_c._) By Clement of Alexandria: "We also blame those who rush to death,
for there are some, not of us, but only bearing the same name, who give
themselves up:"[5]

(_d._) Implicitly by the synod of Elvira, or Illiberis (_circa_ 305),
one of the canons of which forbade him to be ranked as a martyr, who
was killed on the spot for breaking idols:

(_e._) By Mensurius, bishop of Carthage, who, when consulted on the
question of reducing the immense lists of acknowledged martyrs, gave it
as his opinion that those should be first excluded who had courted
martyrdom.[6] One bishop alone, and he a late one, Benedict XIV. of
Rome,[7] has ventured to approve what the Church has condemned. Nor is
this the only instance in which the Roman Church has set aside the
decisions of an earlier Christendom.

    [1] Eul., "Mem. Sanct.," i., sec. 18, "Quos nulla praesidalis
    violentia fidem suam negare compulit, nec a cultu sanctae
    piaeque religionis amovit:" sec. 23, "Quos liberalitas regis
    suum incolere iusserat Christianismum."

    [2] Quoting such texts as Matt. v. 44, "Bless them that curse
    you, and pray for them that despitefully use you:" Pet. ii. 23,
    "Submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's
    sake."

    [3] Eusebius iv. 15. See Neander, i. p. 150. (A.D. 167.)

    [4] Martyred 258.

    [5] See Long's "M. Aurelius Antoninus," Introd., p. 21.

    [6] Burton's "History of the Christian Church," p. 336.

    [7] 1740-1748: in his "De Servorum Dei beatificatione et
    beatorum canonizatione," Bk. iii. 16, sec. 7. Fleury, v. 541.

The charges against the zealots were twofold, that there had been no
persecution worthy of the name, such as to justify their doings, and
that those doings themselves were contrary to the teaching and spirit of
Christianity. The latter part of the charge has already been dealt with,
and may be considered sustained. As to the other part, the apologists,
it must be confessed, answer with a very uncertain sound. Sometimes,
indeed, they deny it point-blank:[1] "as if," says Eulogius, "the
destruction of our churches,[2] the insults heaped upon our clergy, the
monthly tax[3] which we pay, the perils of a hard life, lived on
sufferance, are nothing." These insults and affronts are continually
referred to. "No one," says the same author,[4] "can go out or come in
amongst us in security, no one pass a knot of Moslems in the street
without being treated with contumely. They mock at the marks[5] of our
order. They hoot at us and call us fools and vain. The very children
jeer at us, and even throw stones and potsherds at the priests. The
sound of the church-going bell[6] never fails to evoke from Moslem
hearers the foulest and most blasphemous language. They even deem it a
pollution to touch a Christian's garment." Alvar adds that the Moslems
would fall to cursing when they saw the cross;[7] and when they
witnessed a burial according to Christian rites, would say aloud, "Shew
them no mercy, O God," throwing stones withal at the Lord's people, and
defiling their ears with the filthiest abuse.[8] "Yet," he indignantly
exclaims, "you say that this is not a time of persecution; nor is it, I
answer, a time of apostles. But I affirm that it is a deadly time[9] ...
are we not bowed beneath the yoke of slavery, burdened with intolerable
taxes, spoiled of our goods, lashed with the scourges of their abuse,
made a byword and a proverb, aye, a spectacle to all nations?"[10]

    [1] Eul., "Mem. Sanct.," i. sec. 21: Alvar, "Ind. Lum.," sec.
    3.

    [2] _Ibid._; and Alvar, "Ind. Lum.," sec. 7.

    [3] Leovigild, "De habitu Clericorum." "Migne," 121, p. 565.

    [4] Eul., l.l.

    [5] Stigmata.

    [6] Alvar, "Ind. Lum.," sec. 6, "Derisioni et contemptui
    inhiantes capita moventes infanda iterando congeminant." He
    adds: "Daily and nightly from their minarets they revile the
    Lord by their invocation of Allah and Mohammed!" Eul., "Lib.
    Ap.," sec. 19, confesses that hearing their call to prayer
    always moved him to quote Psalm xcvi. 7: "Confounded be all
    they that worship carved images"--a very irrelevant
    malediction, as applied to the Moslems.

    [7] Alvar, l.l., "Fidei signum opprobrioso elogio decolorant."

    [8] "Spurcitiarum fimo."--_Ibid._

    [9] "Mortiferum."--"Ind. Lum.," sec. 3.

    [10] Alvar, "Ind. Lum.," sec. 31, gives us a very savage
    picture of the Moslem character: "Sunt in superbia tumidi, in
    tumore cordis elati, in delectatione carnalium operum fluidi,
    in comestione superflui ... sine misericordia crudeles, sine
    iustitia invasores, sine honore absque veritate, benignitatis
    nescientes affectum ... humilitatem velut insaniam deridentes,
    castitatem velut spurcitiam respuentes."

That there was a certain amount of social ill-treatment, and that the
lower classes of Moslems did not take any pains to conceal their dislike
and scorn of such Christian beliefs and rites as were at variance with
their own creed, and moreover regarded priests and monks with especial
aversion, there can be no doubt. But, on the other hand, there is no
want of evidence to show that the condition of the Christians was by no
means so bad as the apologists would have us suppose. Petty annoyances
could not fail to exist anywhere under such circumstances, as were
actually to be found in Spain at this time, and we may be sure that the
Christian priests in particular did not bear themselves with that
humility which might have ensured a mitigation of the annoyances.
Organised opposition to Christianity, unless the Moslem rule can itself
be called such, there was none, till it was called into being by the
action of the fanatics themselves. But apart from all the other facts
which point to this conclusion, we can call the apologists themselves in
evidence that there was no real persecution going on at the time of the
first martyrdoms.

Eulogius[1] admits that the Christians were not let or hindered in the
free exercise of their religion by saying that this state of things[2]
was not due to the forbearance (forsooth!) of the Moslems, but to the
Divine mercy. Alvar, too, in a passage which seems to contradict the
whole position which he is trying to defend, says[3]:--"Though many were
the victims of persecution, very many others--and you cannot deny
it--offered themselves a voluntary sacrifice to the Lord. Is it not
clear that it was not the Arabs who began persecuting, but we who began
preaching? Read the story of the martyrs, and you will see that they
rushed voluntarily on their fate, not waiting the bidding of
persecutors, nor the snares of informers; aye, and--what is made so
strong a charge against them--that they tired out the forbearance of
their rulers and princes by insult upon insult."[4]

    [1] "Mem. Sanct.," i. sec. 29.

    [2] Viz., "Quod inter ipsos sine molestia fidei degimus."

    [3] "Ind. Lum.," sec. 3.

    [4] "Fatigasse praesides et principes multis
    contumeliis."--_Ibid._

As to the other part of the accusation, that voluntary martyrs were no
martyrs, Eulogius could only declaim against the Scriptures quoted by
his opponents,[1] and refer to the morally blind, who make evil their
good, and take darkness to be their light;[2] while he brought forward a
saying of certain wise men that "those martyrs will hold the first rank
in the heavenly companies who have gone to their death unsummoned."[3]

He also sought to defend the practice of reviling Mohammed by the plea
that exorcism was allowed against the devil, which is sufficiently
ridiculous; but Alvar goes further, and calmly assures us that these
insults and revilings of the prophet were merely a form of preaching[4]
to the poor benighted Moslems, naively remarking that the Scriptures
affirm that the Gospel of Christ must be preached to all nations.
Whereas, then, the Moslems had not been preached to, these martyred
saints had taken upon themselves the sacred duty of rendering them
"debtors to the faith."

The second count[5] against the martyrs was that they had worked no
miracles--a serious deficiency in an age when miracles were almost the
test of sanctity. Eulogius[6] could only meet the charge by admitting
the fact, but adding that miracles were frequent in the early ages, in
order to establish Christianity on a firm basis; and that the constancy
of the martyrs was in itself a miracle (which was true, but not to the
point). Had he been content with this, he had done wisely; but he goes
on: "Moreover, miracles are no sign of truth, as even the unbelievers
can work them."[7] Now, by trying to show why these martyrs did not
perform any miracles, he admits by implication that they were deficient
in this particular;[8] and yet in other parts of his work he mentions
miracles performed by these very martyrs, as, for instance, by Isaac,
and by Flora, and Maria.[9] So that the worthy priest is placed in this
dilemma: If miracles are really no sign of truth, why attribute them to
the martyrs, when, as is allowed elsewhere, they were unable to work
them? if, on the other hand, they did perform these miracles, why not
adduce them in evidence against the detractors?

    [1] Eul., "Mem. Sanct.," i. sec. 19.

    [2] Isaiah v. 20.

    [3] Eul., "Mem. Sanct.," i. sec. 24. Taken from some "Acts of
    the Saints," probably those of SS. Emetherius and Caledonius--a
    book obviously of no authority.

    [4] "Ind. Lum.," sec. 10, "In hac Israelitica gente nullus
    hactenus exstitit praedicator, per quod debitores fidei
    tenerentur. Isti enim (_i.e._, the martyrs) apostolatus vicem
    in eosdem et evangelicam praedicationem impleverunt, eosque
    fidei debitores reddiderunt."

    [5] Eul., "Mem. Sanct.," i. 13.

    [6] "Lib. Apol.," sec 7.

    [7] "Lib. Apol.," sec. 10.

    [8] Cp. "Mem. Sanct.," i. sec. 13.

    [9] "Mem. Sanct.," Pref., sec. 4.

The third objection is a curious one, that the martyrs were not put to
death by idolaters, but by men worshipping God and acknowledging a
divine law,[1] and therefore were not true martyrs. Eulogius misses the
true answer, which is obvious enough, and scornfully exclaims:--"As if
they could be said to believe in God, who persecute His Church, and deem
it hateful to believe in a Christ who was very God and very man."[2]

Fourthly, the martyrs died a quick and easy death. But, as Eulogius
points out,[3] pain and torture give no additional claim to the martyr's
crown.

Lastly, it was objected that the bodies of these martyrs, as indeed was
to be expected, corrupted, and were even, in some cases, devoured by
dogs. "What matter," says Eulogius,[4] "since their souls are borne away
to celestial mansions."

    [1] Eul. "Lib. Apol.," sec. 3.

    [2] _Ibid._, sec. 12.

    [3] _Ibid._, sec. 5.

    [4] "Mem. Sanct.," i. sec. 17.

But it was not objections brought by fellow-Christians only that
Eulogius took upon himself to answer, but also the taunts and scoffs of
the Moslems. "Why," said they, "if your God is the true God, does He not
strike terror into the executioners of his saints by some great
prodigy? and why do not the martyrs themselves flash forth into miracles
while the crowd is round them? You rush upon your own destruction, and
yet you work no wonders that might induce us to change our opinion of
your creed, thereby doing your own side no good, and ours no harm."[1]

Yet the constancy of the martyrs affected the Moslems more than they
cared to confess, as we may infer from the taunts levelled at the
Christians, when, in Mohammed's reign, some Christians, from fear of
death, even apostatized. "Whither," they triumphantly asked,[2] "has
that bravery of your martyrs vanished? What has become of the rash
frenzy with which they courted death?" Yet though they affected to
consider the martyrs as fools or madmen, they could not be blind to the
effect that their constancy was likely to produce on those who beheld
their death, and to the reverence with which their relics were regarded
by the Christians. They therefore expressly forbade the bodies of
martyrs to be preserved[3] and worshipped, and did their best to make
this in certain cases impossible by burning the corpses and scattering
the ashes on the river, though sometimes they contented themselves with
throwing the bodies, unburnt, into the stream.

    [1] "Mem. Sanct.," i. sec. 12.

    [2] Eulog., "Mem. Sanct.," iii. sec. 6.

    [3] See "De Translatione corporum Sanctorum Martyrum," etc.,
    sec. 11. "Non enim, quos martyres faciunt, venerari Saraceni
    permittunt." See above, p. 38. The bodies of earlier martyrs
    were more freely given up at the request of the Christians. See
    "Chron. Silen.," secs. 95-100; Dozy, iv. 119, for the surrender
    of the body of Justus; and Eul., "Ad Wiliesindum," sec. 9,
    where Eulogius mentions that he had taken the bodies of Saints
    Zoilus and Austus to Pampluna. Later, Hakem II. (961-976) gave
    up the body of the boy Pelagius at Ramiro III.'s request.
    Mariana, viii. 5.

However, in spite of these regulations, many bodies were secretly
carried off and entombed in churches, where they were looked upon as
the most precious of possessions; and martyrs, who, by the admission of
their admirers themselves, had never worked any miracles when living,
were enabled, when dead, to perform a series of extraordinary ones,
which did not finally cease till modern enlightenment had dissipated the
darkness of the Middle Ages.

We happen to possess a very interesting account of the circumstances
under which the relics of three of these Cordovan martyrs were
transferred from the troubled scene of their passion to the more
peaceful and more superstitious cloisters of France.[1]

It was in 858 that Hilduin, the abbot of the monastery of St Vincent and
the Holy Cross, near Paris, learning that the body of their patron
saint, St Vincent, was at Valencia, sent two monks, Usuard and Odilard,
with the king's[2] permission, to procure the precious relics for their
own monastery. On their way to perform this commission, the monks learnt
that the body was no longer at Valencia. It had been, in fact,
carried[3] by a monk named Andaldus to Saragoza. Senior, the bishop of
