Christian Science gives vitality to religion, which is no longer buried in
materiality. It raises men from a material sense into the spiritual
understanding and scientific demonstration of God.




THE HUMAN CONCEPT


Sin existed as a false claim before the human concept of sin was formed;
hence one's concept of error is not the whole of error. The human thought
does not constitute sin, but _vice versa_, sin constitutes the human or
physical concept.

Sin is both concrete and abstract. Sin was, and _is_, the lying supposition
that life, substance, and intelligence are both material and spiritual, and
yet are separate from God. The first iniquitous manifestation of sin was a
finity. The finite was self-arrayed against the infinite, the mortal
against immortality, and a sinner was the antipode of God.

Silencing self, _alias_ rising above corporeal personality, is what reforms
the sinner and destroys sin. In the ratio that the testimony of material
personal sense ceases, sin diminishes, until the false claim called sin is
finally lost for lack of witness.

The sinner created neither himself nor sin, but sin created the sinner;
that is, error made its man mortal, and this mortal was the image and
likeness of evil, not of good. Therefore the lie was, and _is_, collective
as well as individual. It was in no way contingent on Adam's thought, but
supposititiously self-created. In the words of our Master, it, the "devil"
(_alias_ evil), "was a liar, and the father of it."

This mortal material concept was never a creator, although as a serpent it
claimed to originate in the name of "the Lord," or good,--original evil;
second, in the name of human concept, it claimed to beget the offspring of
evil, _alias_ an evil offspring. However, the human concept never was,
neither indeed can be, the father of man. Even the spiritual idea, or ideal
man, is not a parent, though he reflects the infinity of good. The great
difference between these opposites is, that the human material concept is
_unreal_, and the divine concept or idea is spiritually real. One is false,
while the other is true. One is temporal, but the other is eternal.

Our Master instructed his students to "call no man your father upon the
earth: for one is your Father, which is in heaven." (Matt. xxiii. 9.)

Science and Health, the textbook of Christian Science, treats of the human
concept, and the transference of thought, as follows:--

    "How can matter originate or transmit mind? We answer that it
    cannot. Darkness and doubt encompass thought, so long as it bases
    creation on materiality" (p. 551).

    "In reality there is no _mortal_ mind, and consequently no
    transference of mortal thought and will-power. Life and being are
    of God. In Christian Science, man can do no harm, for scientific
    thoughts are true thoughts, passing from God to man" (pp. 103,
    104).

    "Man is the offspring of Spirit. The beautiful, good, and pure
    constitute his ancestry. His origin is not, like that of mortals,
    in brute instinct, nor does he pass through material conditions
    prior to reaching intelligence. Spirit is his primitive and
    ultimate source of being; God is his Father, and Life is the law
    of his being" (p. 63).

    "The parent of all human discord was the Adam-dream, the deep
    sleep, in which originated the delusion that life and intelligence
    proceeded from and passed into matter. This pantheistic error, or
    so-called _serpent_, insists still upon the opposite of Truth,
    saying, 'Ye shall be as gods;' that is, I will make error as real
    and eternal as Truth.... 'I will put spirit into what I call
    matter, and matter shall seem to have life as much as God, Spirit,
    who _is_ the only Life.' This error has proved itself to be error.
    Its life is found to be not Life, but only a transient, false
    sense of an existence which ends in death" (pp. 306, 307).

    "When will the error of believing that there is life in matter,
    and that sin, sickness, and death are creations of God, be
    unmasked? When will it be understood that matter has no
    intelligence, life, nor sensation, and that the opposite belief is
    the prolific source of all suffering? God created all through
    Mind, and made all perfect and eternal. Where then is the
    necessity for recreation or procreation?" (p. 205).

    "Above error's awful din, blackness, and chaos, the voice of Truth
    still calls: 'Adam, where art thou? Consciousness, where art thou?
    Art thou dwelling in the belief that mind is in matter, and that
    evil is mind, or art thou in the living faith that there is and
    can be but one God, and keeping His commandment?'" (pp. 307,
    308). "Mortal mind inverts the true likeness, and confers animal
    names and natures upon its own misconceptions. Ignorant of the
    origin and operations of mortal mind,--that is, ignorant of
    itself,--this so-called mind puts forth its own qualities, and
    claims God as their author;... usurps the deific prerogatives and
    is an attempted infringement on infinity" (pp. 512, 513).

We do not question the authenticity of the Scriptural narrative of the
Virgin-mother and Bethlehem babe, and the Messianic mission of Christ
Jesus; but in our time no Christian Scientist will give chimerical wings to
his imagination, or advance speculative theories as to the recurrence of
such events.

No person can take the individual place of the Virgin Mary. No person can
compass or fulfil the individual mission of Jesus of Nazareth. No person
can take the place of the author of Science and Health, the Discoverer and
Founder of Christian Science. Each individual must fill his own niche in
time and eternity.

The second appearing of Jesus is, unquestionably, the spiritual advent of
the advancing idea of God, as in Christian Science.

And the scientific ultimate of this God-idea must be, will be, forever
individual, incorporeal, and infinite, even the reflection, "image and
likeness," of the infinite God.

The right teacher of Christian Science lives the truth he teaches.
Preeminent among men, he virtually stands at the head of all sanitary,
civil, moral, and religious reform. Such a post of duty, unpierced by
vanity, exalts a mortal beyond human praise, or monuments which weigh
dust, and humbles him with the tax it raises on calamity to open the gates
of heaven. It is not the forager on others' wisdom that God thus crowns,
but he who is obedient to the divine command, "Render to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."

Great temptations beset an ignorant or an unprincipled mind-practice in
opposition to the straight and narrow path of Christian Science.
Promiscuous mental treatment, without the consent or knowledge of the
individual treated, is an error of much magnitude. People unaware of the
indications of mental treatment, know not what is affecting them, and thus
may be robbed of their individual rights,--freedom of choice and
self-government. Who is willing to be subjected to such an influence? Ask
the unbridled mind-manipulator if he would consent to this; and if not,
then he is knowingly transgressing Christ's command. He who secretly
manipulates mind without the permission of man or God, is not dealing
justly and loving mercy, according to pure and undefiled religion.

Sinister and selfish motives entering into mental practice are dangerous
incentives; they proceed from false convictions and a fatal ignorance.
These are the tares growing side by side with the wheat, that must be
recognized, and uprooted, before the wheat can be garnered and Christian
Science demonstrated.

Secret mental efforts to obtain help from one who is unaware of this
attempt, demoralizes the person who does this, the same as other forms of
stealing, and will end in destroying health and morals.

In the practice of Christian Science one cannot impart a mental influence
that hazards another's happiness, nor interfere with the rights of the
individual. To disregard the welfare of others is contrary to the law of
God; therefore it deteriorates one's ability to do good, to benefit himself
and mankind.

The Psalmist vividly portrays the result of secret faults, presumptuous
sins, and self-deception, in these words: "How are they brought into
desolation, as in a moment! They are utterly consumed with terrors."




PERSONALITY


The immortal man being spiritual, individual, and eternal, his mortal
opposite must be material, corporeal, and temporal. Physical personality is
finite; but God is infinite. He is without materiality, without finiteness
of form or Mind.

Limitations are put off in proportion as the fleshly nature disappears and
man is found in the reflection of Spirit.

This great fact leads into profound depths. The material human concept grew
beautifully less as I floated into more spiritual latitudes and purer
realms of thought.

From that hour personal corporeality became less to me than it is to people
who fail to appreciate individual character. I endeavored to lift thought
above physical personality, or selfhood in matter, to man's spiritual
individuality in God,--in the true Mind, where sensible evil is lost in
supersensible good. This is the only way whereby the false personality is
laid off.

He who clings to personality, or perpetually warns you of "personality,"
wrongs it, or terrifies people over it, and is the sure victim of his own
corporeality. Constantly to scrutinize physical personality, or accuse
people of being unduly personal, is like the sick talking sickness. Such
errancy betrays a violent and egotistical personality, increases one's
sense of corporeality, and begets a fear of the senses and a perpetually
egotistical sensibility.

He who does this is ignorant of the meaning of the word _personality_, and
defines it by his own _corpus sine pectore_ (soulless body), and fails to
distinguish the individual, or real man from the false sense of
corporeality, or egotistic self.

My own corporeal personality afflicteth me not wittingly; for I desire
never to think of it, and it cannot think of me.




PLAGIARISM


The various forms of book-borrowing without credit spring from this
ill-concealed question in mortal mind, Who shall be greatest? This error
violates the law given by Moses, it tramples upon Jesus' Sermon on the
Mount, it does violence to the ethics of Christian Science.

Why withhold my name, while appropriating my language and ideas, but give
credit when citing from the works of other authors?

Life and its ideals are inseparable, and one's writings on ethics, and
demonstration of Truth, are not, cannot be, understood or taught by those
who persistently misunderstand or misrepresent the author. Jesus said, "For
there is no man which shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak
evil of me."

If one's spiritual ideal is comprehended and loved, the borrower from it is
embraced in the author's own mental mood, and is therefore _honest_. The
Science of Mind excludes opposites, and rests on unity.

It is proverbial that dishonesty retards spiritual growth and strikes at
the heart of Truth. If a student at Harvard College has studied a textbook
written by his teacher, is he entitled, when he leaves the University, to
write out as his own the substance of this textbook? There is no warrant in
common law and no permission in the gospel for plagiarizing an author's
ideas and their words. Christian Science is not copyrighted; nor would
protection by copyright be requisite, if mortals obeyed God's law of
_manright_. A student can write voluminous works on Science without
trespassing, if he writes honestly, and he cannot dishonestly compose
_Christian Science_. The Bible is not stolen, though it is cited, and
quoted deferentially.

Thoughts touched with the Spirit and Word of Christian Science gravitate
naturally toward Truth. Therefore the mind to which this Science was
revealed must have risen to the altitude which perceived a light beyond
what others saw.

The spiritually minded meet on the stairs which lead up to spiritual love.
This affection, so far from being personal worship, fulfils the law of Love
which Paul enjoined upon the Galatians. This is the Mind "which was also in
Christ Jesus," and knows no material limitations. It is the unity of good
and bond of perfectness. This just affection serves to constitute the
Mind-healer a wonder-worker,--as of old, on the Pentecost Day, when the
disciples were of one accord.

He who gains the God-crowned summit of Christian Science never abuses the
corporeal personality, but uplifts it. He thinks of every one in his real
quality, and sees each mortal in an impersonal depict.

I have long remained silent on a growing evil in plagiarism; but if I do
not insist upon the strictest observance of moral law and order in
Christian Scientists, I become responsible, as a teacher, for laxity in
discipline and lawlessness in literature. Pope was right in saying, "An
honest man's the noblest work of God;" and Ingersoll's repartee has its
moral: "An honest God's the noblest work of man."




ADMONITION


The neophyte in Christian Science acts like a diseased physique,--being too
fast or too slow. He is inclined to do either too much or too little. In
healing and teaching the student has not yet achieved the entire wisdom of
Mind-practice. The textual explanation of this practice is complete in
Science and Health; and scientific practice makes perfect, for it is
governed by its Principle, and not by human opinions; but carnal and
sinister motives, entering into this practice, will prevent the
demonstration of Christian Science.

I recommend students not to read so-called scientific works, antagonistic
to Christian Science, which advocate materialistic systems; because such
works and words becloud the right sense of metaphysical Science.

The rules of Mind-healing are wholly Christlike and spiritual. Therefore
the adoption of a worldly policy or a resort to subterfuge in the statement
of the Science of Mind-healing, or any name given to it other than
