"Paul was suffered to dwell by himself with a soldier that kept him."
[147:5] But though he enjoyed this comparative liberty, he was chained
to his military care-taker, so that his position must still have been
very far from comfortable. And yet even thus he continued his ministry
with as much ardour as if he had been without restraint, and as if he
had been cheered on by the applause of his generation. Three days after
his arrival in the city he "called the chief of the Jews together,"
[148:1] and gave them an account of the circumstances of his committal,
and of his appeal to the imperial tribunal. They informed him that his
case had not been reported to them by their brethren in Judea; and then
expressed a desire to hear from him a statement of the claims of
Christianity. "And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to
him into his lodging; to whom he expounded and testified the kingdom of
God, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of the law of Moses and
out of the prophets from morning till evening." [148:2] His appeals
produced a favourable impression upon only a part of his audience. "Some
believed the things which were spoken, and some believed not." [148:3]

Several years prior to this date a Christian Church existed in the
Western metropolis, and at this time there were probably several
ministers in the city; but the apostle, in all likelihood, now entered
upon some field of labour which had not hitherto been occupied. He
"dwelt two whole years in his own hired house, and received all that
came in unto him--preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching those
things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ with all confidence, no man
forbidding him." [148:4] All this time Paul's right hand was chained to
the left hand of a soldier, who was responsible for the safe keeping of
his prisoner. The soldiers relieved each other in this duty. [148:5] It
would appear that Paul's chain might be relaxed at meal-times, and
perhaps he was occasionally granted some little additional indulgence;
but day and night he and his care-taker must have remained in close
proximity, as the life of the soldier was forfeited should his ward
escape. We can well conceive that the very appearance of the preacher at
this period invited special attention to his ministrations. He was now
"Paul the aged;" [149:1] he had perhaps passed the verge of threescore
years; and though his detractors had formerly objected that "his bodily
presence was weak," [149:2] all would at this time have, probably,
admitted, that his aspect was venerable. His life had been a career of
unabated exertion; and now, though worn down by toils, and hardships,
and imprisonments, his zeal burned with unquenched ardour. As the
soldier who kept him belonged to the Praetorian guards, it has been
thought that the apostle spent much of his time in the neighbourhood of
their quarters on the Palatine hill, [149:3] and that as he was now so
much conversant with military sights and sounds, we may in this way
account for some of the allusions to be found in his epistles written
during his present confinement. Thus, he speaks of Archippus and
Epaphroditus as his "fellow-soldiers;" [149:4] and he exhorts his
brethren to "put on the whole armour of God," including "the breastplate
of righteousness, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the
sword of the Spirit." [149:5] As the indefatigable old man, with the
soldier who had charge of him, passed from house to house inviting
attendance on his services, the very appearance of such "yoke-fellows"
[149:6] must have created some interest; and, when the congregation
assembled, who could remain unmoved as the apostle stretched forth his
chained hand, [149:7] and proceeded to expound his message! He seems
himself to have thought that the very position which he occupied, as
"the prisoner of the Lord," [149:8] imparted somewhat to the power of
his testimony. Hence we find him saying--"I would ye should understand,
brethren, that the things which happened unto me have fallen out rather
unto _the furtherance of the gospel_, so that my bonds in Christ are
manifest in all the Praetorium, [150:1] and in all other places; and
many of the brethren in the Lord waxing confident by my bonds are much
more bold to speak the word without fear." [150:2]

During this imprisonment at Rome, Paul dictated a number of his
epistles. Of these, the letter to Philemon, a Christian of Colosse,
seems to have been first written. The bearer of this communication was
Onesimus, who had at one time been a slave in the service of the
individual to whom it is addressed; and who, as it appears, after
robbing his master, had left the country. The thief made his way to
Rome, where he was converted under the ministry of the apostle; and
where he had since greatly recommended himself as a zealous and
trustworthy disciple. He was now sent back to Colosse with this Epistle
to Philemon, in which the writer undertakes to be accountable for the
property that had been pilfered, [150:3] and entreats his correspondent
to give a kindly reception to the penitent fugitive. Onesimus, when
conveying the letter to his old master, was accompanied by Tychicus,
whom the apostle describes as "a beloved brother and a faithful minister
and fellow-servant in the Lord" [150:4] who was entrusted with the
Epistle to the Colossians. Error, in the form of false philosophy and
Judaizing superstition, had been creeping into the Colossian Church,
[150:5] and the apostle in this letter exhorts his brethren to beware of
its encroachments. About the same time Paul wrote the Epistle to the
Ephesians; and Tychicus was also the bearer of this communication.
[150:6] Unlike most of the other epistles, it has no salutations at the
close; it is addressed, not only "to the saints which are at Ephesus" in
particular, but also "to the faithful in Christ Jesus" [151:1] in
general; and as its very superscription thus bears evidence that it was
originally intended to be a circular letter, it is probably "the epistle
from Laodicea" mentioned in the Epistle to the Colossians. [151:2] The
first division of it is eminently distinguished by the profound and
comprehensive views of the Christian system it exhibits; whilst the
latter portion is no less remarkable for the variety, pertinency, and
wisdom, of its practical admonitions. The Epistle to the Philippians was
likewise written about this period. Paul always took a deep interest in
the well-being of his earliest European converts, and here he speaks in
most hopeful terms of their spiritual condition. [151:3] They were less
disturbed by divisions and heresies than perhaps any other of the
Apostolic Churches.





CHAPTER X.

PAUL'S SECOND IMPRISONMENT, AND MARTYRDOM; PETER, HIS EPISTLES, HIS
MARTYRDOM, AND THE ROMAN CHURCH.


The Book of the Acts terminates abruptly; and the subsequent history of
Paul is involved in much obscurity. Some have contended that the apostle
was never released from his first imprisonment at Rome, and accordingly
consider that he was one of the earliest Christian martyrs who suffered
under the Emperor Nero. But this theory is encumbered with insuperable
difficulties. In his letters written after his first appearance in Rome,
Paul evidently anticipates his liberation; [152:1] and in some of them
he apparently speaks prophetically. Thus, he says to the Philippians--"I
am in a strait betwixt two, having a desire to depart and to be with
Christ, which is far better--nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more
needful for you--and having this confidence _I know that I shall abide
and continue_ with you all for your furtherance and joy of faith."
[152:2] The apostle had long cherished a desire to visit Spain; [152:3]
and there is evidence that he actually preached the gospel in that
country; for Clemens Romanus, who was his contemporary and
fellow-labourer, positively affirms that he travelled "to the extremity
of the west." [153:1] Clemens appears to have been himself a native of
the great metropolis; [153:2] and as he makes the statement just quoted
in a letter written from Rome, it cannot be supposed that, under such
circumstances, he would have described Italy as the boundary of the
earth. The Second Epistle to Timothy, which is generally admitted to
have been written immediately before Paul's death, contains several
passages which obviously indicate that the author had been very recently
at liberty. Thus, he says-"The cloak [153:3] (or, as some render it,
_the case_) [153:4] that I left at Troas, with Carpus, when thou comest
bring with thee, and the books, but especially the parchments." [153:5]
These words suggest that the apostle had lately visited Troas on the
coast of Asia Minor. Again, he remarks--"Erastus abode at Corinth, but
Trophimus have I left at Miletum sick." [153:6] Any ordinary reader
would at once infer from this observation that the writer had just
arrived from Miletum. [153:7] The language of the concluding verses of
the Acts warrants the impression that Paul's confinement had ended some
time before the book was completed; for had the apostle been still in
bondage, it would scarcely have been said that, when a prisoner, he
dwelt for two whole years in his own hired house--thereby implying that
the period of his residence, at least in that abode, had terminated. And
if Paul was released at the expiration of these two years, we can well
understand why the sacred historian may have deemed it inexpedient to
give an account of his liberation. The subjects of Rome at that time
were literally living under a reign of terror; and it would perhaps have
been most unwise to have proceeded farther with the narrative. Paul, as
Peter once before, [154:1] may have been miraculously delivered; and
prudence may have required the concealment of his subsequent movements.
Or, the history of his release may have been so mixed up with the freaks
of the tyrant who then oppressed the Roman world, that its publication
might have brought down the imperial vengeance on the head of the
evangelist.

We have seen that Paul arrived in Rome as a prisoner in the beginning of
A.D. 61; and if at this time his confinement continued only two years,
he must have been liberated in the early part of A.D. 63. Nero had not
then commenced his memorable persecution of the Church; for the burning
of the city took place in the summer of A.D. 64; and, until that date,
the disciples do not appear to have been singled out as the special
objects of his cruelty. It is probable that Paul, after his release,
accomplished his intention of visiting the Spanish Peninsula; and, on
his return to Italy, he appears to have written the Epistle to the
Hebrews. [154:2] The destruction of Jerusalem was at this time
approaching; and, as the apostle demonstrates in this letter that the
law was fulfilled in Christ, he thus prepares the Jewish Christians for
the extinction of the Mosaic ritual. In all likelihood he now once more
visited Jerusalem, travelling by Corinth, [155:1] Philippi, [155:2] and
Troas, [155:3] where he left for the use of Carpus the case with the
books and parchments which he mentions in his Second Epistle to Timothy.
Passing on then to Colosse, [155:4] he may have visited Antioch in
Pisidia and other cities of Asia Minor, the scenes of his early
ministrations; and reached Jerusalem [155:5] by way of Antioch in Syria.
He perhaps returned from Palestine to Rome by sea, leaving Trophimus
sick [155:6] at Miletum in Crete. The journey did not probably occupy
much time; and, on his return to Italy, he seems to have been
immediately incarcerated. His condition was now very different from what
it had been during his former confinement; for he was deserted by his
friends, and treated as a malefactor. [155:7] When he wrote to Timothy
he had already been brought before the judgment-seat, and had narrowly
escaped martyrdom. "At my first answer," says he, "no man stood with me,
but all men forsook me. I pray God that it may not be laid to their
charge. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, that
by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles
might hear; [155:8] and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion."
[155:9] The prospect, however, still continued gloomy; and he had no
hope of ultimate escape. In the anticipation of his condemnation, he
wrote those words so full of Christian faith and heroism, "I am now
ready to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have
fought a good fight--I have finished my course--I have kept the faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the
Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give me in that day, and not to me
only, but unto all them also that love his appearing." [156:1]

Paul was martyred perhaps about A.D. 66. Tradition reports that he was
beheaded; [156:2] and as he was a Roman citizen, it is not probable that
he suffered any more ignominious fate. About the third or fourth
century, a statement appeared to the effect that he and Peter were put
to death at Rome on the same day; [156:3] but all the early documentary
evidence we possess is quite opposed to such a representation. If Peter
really finished his career in the Western metropolis, it would seem that
he did not arrive there until very shortly before the decapitation of
the Apostle of the Gentiles; for Paul makes no reference, in any of his
writings, to the presence of such a fellow-labourer in the capital of
the Empire. In the Epistle to the Romans, containing so many salutations
to the brethren in the great city, the name of Peter is not found; and
in none of the letters written _from_ Rome is he ever mentioned. In the
last of his Epistles--the Second to Timothy--the writer says--"_only
Luke_ is with me" [156:4]--and had Peter then been in the place, Paul
would not have thus ignored the existence of the apostle of the
circumcision.

But still there is a very ancient and apparently a well authenticated
tradition that Peter suffered martyrdom at Rome; [156:5] and if, as is
not improbable, Paul met him in Jerusalem, during his visit to that city
after his release from his first imprisonment, it may be that he was
then encouraged to undertake a journey to the West. [156:6] It is not
improbable that he was recommended, at the same time, to visit the
Churches of Asia Minor for the purpose of using his influence to defeat
the efforts of the Judaizing zealots; and if, after passing through
Galatia, Bithynia, and other districts, he continued his course to Home,
we can well understand why, on reaching the seat of Empire, he addressed
his first epistle to the Christians with whom he had so recently held
intercourse. The tradition that the "Babylon" from which this letter was
written, [157:1] is no other than Rome, or the mystical Babylon of the
Apocalypse, [157:2] is unquestionably of great antiquity; [157:3] and
some of the announcements it contains are certainly quite in unison with
such an interpretation. Thus, Peter tells his brethren of "the fiery
trial" which was "to try" them, [157:4] alluding, in all likelihood, to
the extension of the Neronian persecution to the provinces; and it may
be presumed that, in the capital, and in communication with some of
"Caesar's household," he had means of information in reference to such
matters, to which elsewhere he could have had no access, Mark, who
probably arrived in Rome about the time of the death of Paul, [157:5]
was with Peter when this letter was written; [157:6] and we have thus
additional evidence that the apostle of the circumcision was now in the
Western capital. It is also worthy of remark that this epistle was
transmitted to its destination by Silas, or Silvanus, [157:7] apparently
the same individual who had so frequently accompanied the Apostle Paul
on his missionary journeys. [157:8] Silvanus had been for many years
acquainted with the brethren to whom the letter is addressed, and
therefore was well suited to be its bearer. But though he had long
occupied a prominent position in the Church, he seems to have been very
little known to Peter; and hence the somewhat singular manner in which
he is noticed towards the close of this epistle--"By Silvanus, a
faithful brother unto you, as I suppose, I have written briefly,
exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God wherein ye
stand." [158:1]

If this letter was written from Rome about the time of the death of
Paul, it is not strange that Peter deemed it prudent to conceal his
place of residence under the designation of Babylon. Nero was then
seeking the extermination of the Christians in the capital; and they had
enemies in all quarters who would have rejoiced to point out to him such
a distinguished victim as the aged apostle. And how could Peter more
appropriately describe the seat of Empire than by naming it _Babylon?_
Nebuchadnezzar, who reigned so gloriously in the great Eastern capital,
had destroyed the temple of God; and now Nero, who ruled in the Western
metropolis, was seeking to ruin the Church of God. Nebuchadnezzar had
led the Jews into captivity; but Rome now enthralled both Jews and
Gentiles. If Nebuchadnezzar had an antitype in Nero, assuredly Babylon
had an antitype in Rome. [158:2]

The Second Epistle of Peter was written soon after the first, and was
addressed to the same Churches. [158:3] The author now contemplated the
near approach of death, so that the advices he here gives may be
regarded as his dying instructions. "I think it meet," says he, "_as
long as I am in this tabernacle_, [158:4] to stir you up by putting you
in remembrance--knowing that _shortly_ I must put off this my
tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ hath shewed me." [159:1] If
then Peter was martyred at Rome, we may infer that this letter must have
been written somewhere in the same neighbourhood, and probably in the
same city. We have thus a corroborative proof that the Babylon of the
first letter is no other than the great metropolis.

It deserves notice that in this second epistle, Peter bears emphatic
testimony to the character and inspiration of Paul. The Judaizing party,
as there is reason to think, were in the habit of pleading that they
were supported by the authority of the apostle of the circumcision; and
as many of these zealots were to be found in the Churches of Asia Minor,
[159:2] such a recognition of the claims of the Apostle of the Gentiles
was calculated to exert a most salutary influence. "The strangers
scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,"
[159:3] were thus given to understand that all the true heralds of the
gospel had but "one faith;" and that any attempt to create divisions in
the Church, by representing the doctrine of one inspired teacher as
opposed to the doctrine of another, was most unwarrantable. The
reference to Paul, to be found in the Second Epistle of Peter, is
favourable to the supposition that the Apostle of the Gentiles was now
dead; as, had he been still living to correct such misinterpretations,
it would scarcely have been said that in all his epistles were things
"hard to be understood" which "the unlearned and unstable" wrested
"unto their own destruction." [159:4] It would seem, too, that Peter
here alludes particularly to the Epistle to the Hebrews--a letter, as we
have seen, addressed to Jewish Christians, and written after Paul's
liberation from his first Roman imprisonment. It must be admitted that
this letter contains passages [159:5] which have often proved perplexing
to interpreters; but, notwithstanding, it bears the impress of a divine
original; and Peter, who maintains that all the writings of Paul were
dictated by unerring wisdom, places them upon a level with "the _other
Scriptures_" [160:1] either of the evangelists or of the Old Testament.

According to a current tradition, Peter suffered death at Rome by
crucifixion. [160:2] He was not a Roman citizen; and was, therefore,
like our Lord himself, consigned to a mode of punishment inflicted on
slaves and the lowest class of malefactors. The story that, at his own
request, he was crucified with his head downwards as more painful and
ignominious than the doom of his Master, [160:3] is apparently the
invention of an age when the pure light of evangelical religion was
greatly obscured; for the apostle was too well acquainted with the truth
to believe that he was at liberty to inflict upon himself any
unnecessary suffering. The tradition that he died on the same day of the
same month as Paul, but exactly a year afterwards, [160:4] is not
destitute of probability. According to this statement he suffered A.D.
67; and he may have been about a year in Rome before his martyrdom.

In the New Testament it is impossible to find a trace of either the
primacy of Peter or the supremacy of the Pope; but the facts already
stated throw some light on the history of that great spiritual despotism
whose seat of government has been so long established in the city of the
Caesars. It is obvious that at a very early period various circumstances
contributed to give prominence to the Church of Rome. The epistle
addressed to it contains a more complete exhibition of Christian
doctrine than any other of the apostolical letters; and, in that
remarkable communication, Paul expresses an earnest desire to visit a
community already celebrated all over the world. Five or six of his
letters, now forming part of the inspired canon, were dictated in the
capital of the Empire. The two epistles of the apostle of the
circumcision appear to have emanated from the same metropolis. There is
every reason to believe that the book of the Acts was written at Rome;
and it is highly probable that the great city was also the birthplace of
the Gospels of Mark and Luke. Thus, a large portion of the New Testament
issued from the seat of Empire. Rome could also boast that it was for
some time the residence of two of the most eminent of the apostles. Paul
was there for at least two years as a prisoner; and Peter may have
resided for twelve months within its walls. Some of the most illustrious
of the early converts were members of the Church of Rome; for in the
days of the Apostle of the Gentiles there were disciples in "Caesar's
household." [161:1] And when Nero signalised himself as the first
Imperial persecutor of the Christians, the Church of Rome suffered
terribly from his insane and savage cruelty. Even the historian Tacitus
acknowledges that the tortures to which its adherents were exposed
excited the commiseration of the heathen multitude. Paul and Peter were
cut off in his reign; and the soil of Rome absorbed the blood of these
apostolic martyrs. [161:2] It was not strange, therefore, that the Roman
Church was soon regarded with peculiar respect by all the disciples
throughout the Empire. As time passed on, it increased rapidly in
numbers and in affluence; and circumstances, which properly possessed
nothing more than an historic interest, began to be urged as arguments
in favour of its claims to pre-eminence. At first these claims assumed
no very definite form; and, at the termination of a century after the
days of Paul and Peter, they amounted simply to the recognition of
something like an honorary precedence. At that period it was, perhaps,
deemed equally imprudent and ungracious to quarrel with its pretensions,
more especially as the community by which they were advanced was
distributing its bounty all around, and was itself nobly sustaining the
brunt of almost every persecution. In the course of time, the Church of
Rome proceeded to challenge a substantial supremacy; and then the facts
of its early history were mis-stated and exaggerated in accommodation to
the demands of its growing ambition. It was said at first that "its
faith was spoken of throughout the whole world;" it was at length
alleged that its creed should be universally adopted. It was admitted at
an early period that, as it had enjoyed the ministrations of Peter and
Paul, it should be considered an apostolic church; it was at length
asserted that, as an apostle was entitled to deference from ordinary
pastors, a church instructed by two of the most eminent apostles had a
claim to the obedience of other churches. In process of time it was
discovered that Paul was rather an inconvenient companion for the
apostle of the circumcision; and Peter alone then began to be spoken of
as the founder and first bishop of the Church of Rome. Strange to say, a
system founded on a fiction has since sustained the shocks of so many
centuries. One of the greatest marvels of this "mystery of iniquity" is
its tenacity of life; and did not the sure word of prophecy announce
that the time would come when it would be able to boast of its
antiquity, and did we not know that paganism can plead a more remote
original, we might be perplexed by its longevity. But "the vision is yet
for an appointed time--at the end it shall speak and not lie. Though it
tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry."
[162:1]





CHAPTER XI.

THE PERSECUTIONS OF THE APOSTOLIC CHURCH, AND ITS CONDITION AT THE
TERMINATION OF THE FIRST CENTURY.


Jesus Christ was a Jew, and it might have been expected that the advent
of the most illustrious of His race, in the character of the Prophet
announced by Moses, would have been hailed with enthusiasm by His
countrymen. But the result was far otherwise. "He came unto his own, and
his own received him not." [163:1] The Jews cried "Away with him, away
with him, crucify him;" [163:2] and He suffered the fate of the vilest
criminal. The enmity of the posterity of Abraham to our Lord did not
terminate with His death; they long maintained the bad pre-eminence of
being the most inveterate of the persecutors of His early followers.
Whilst the awful portents of the Passion, and the marvels of the day of
Pentecost were still fresh in public recollection, their chief priests
and elders threw the apostles into prison; [163:3] and soon afterwards
the pious and intrepid Stephen fell a victim to their malignity. Their
infatuation was extreme; and yet it was not unaccountable. They looked,
not for a crucified, but for a conquering Messiah. They imagined that
the Saviour would release them from the thraldom of the Roman yoke; that
He would make Jerusalem the capital of a prosperous and powerful empire;
and that all the ends of the earth would celebrate the glory of the
chosen people. Their vexation, therefore, was intense when they
discovered that so many of the seed of Jacob acknowledged the son of a
carpenter as the Christ, and made light of the distinction between Jew
and Gentile. In their case the natural aversion of the heart to a pure
and spiritual religion was inflamed by national pride combined with
mortified bigotry; and the fiendish spirit which they so frequently
exhibited in their attempts to exterminate the infant Church may thus
admit of the most satisfactory explanation.

Many instances of their antipathy to the new sect have already been
noticed. In almost every town where the missionaries of the cross
appeared, the Jews "opposed themselves and blasphemed;" and magistrates
speedily discovered that in no way could they more easily gain the
favour of the populace than by inflicting sufferings on the Christians.
Hence, as we have seen, about the time of Paul's second visit to
Jerusalem after his conversion, Herod, the grandson of Herod the Great,
"killed James, the brother of John, with the sword; and because he saw
_it pleased the Jews,_ he proceeded further to take Peter also." [164:1]
The apostle of the circumcision was delivered by a miracle from his
grasp; but it is probable that other individuals of less note felt the
effects of his severity. Even in countries far remote from their native
land, the posterity of Abraham were the most bitter opponents of
Christianity. [164:2] As there was much intercourse between Palestine
and Italy, the gospel soon found its way to the seat of government; and
it has been conjectured that some civic disturbance created in the great
metropolis by the adherents of the synagogue, and intended to annoy and
intimidate the new sect, prompted the Emperor Claudius, about A.D. 53,
to interfere in the manner described by Luke, and to command "all Jews
to depart from Rome." [165:1] But the hostility of the Israelites was
most formidable in their own country; and for this, as well as other
reasons, "the brethren which dwelt in Judea" specially required the
sympathy of their fellow-believers throughout the Empire. When Paul
appeared in the temple at the feast of Pentecost in A.D. 58, the Jews,
as already related, made an attempt upon his life; and when the apostle
was rescued by the Roman soldiers, a conspiracy was formed for his
assassination. Four years afterwards, or about A.D. 62, [165:2] another
apostle, James surnamed the Just, who seems to have resided chiefly in
Jerusalem, finished his career by martyrdom. Having proclaimed Jesus to
be the true Messiah on a great public occasion, his fellow-citizens were
so indignant that they threw him from a pinnacle of the temple. As he
was still alive when he reached the ground, he was forthwith assailed
with a shower of stones, and beaten to pieces with the club of a fuller.
[165:3]

As the Christians were at first confounded with the Jews, the
administrators of the Roman law, for upwards of thirty years after our
Lord's death, conceded to them the religious toleration enjoyed by the
seed of Abraham. But, from the beginning, "the sect of the Nazarenes"
enjoyed very little of the favour of the heathen multitude. Paganism had
set its mark upon all the relations of life, and had erected an idol
wherever the eye could turn. It had a god of War, and a god of Peace; a
god of the Sea, and a god of the Wind; a god of the River, and a god of
the Fountain; a god of the Field, and a god of the Barn Floor; a god of
the Hearth, a god of the Threshold, a god of the Door, and a god of the
Hinges. [166:1] When we consider its power and prevalence in the
apostolic age, we need not wonder at the declaration of Paul--"All that
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution." [166:2]
Whether the believer entered into any social circle, or made his
appearance in any place of public concourse, he was constrained in some
way to protest against dominant errors; and almost exactly in proportion
to his consistency and conscientiousness, he was sure to incur the
dislike of the more zealous votaries of idolatry. Hence it was that the
members of the Church were so soon regarded by the pagans as a morose
generation instinct with hatred to the human race. In A.D. 64, when
Nero, in a fit of recklessness, set fire to his capital, he soon
discovered that he had, to a dangerous extent, provoked the wrath of the
Roman citizens; and he attempted, in consequence, to divert the torrent
of public indignation from himself, by imputing the mischief to the
Christians. They were already odious as the propagators of what was
considered "a pernicious superstition," and the tyrant, no doubt,
reckoned that the mob of the metropolis were prepared to believe any
report to the discredit of these sectaries. But even the pagan historian
who records the commencement of this first imperial persecution, and who
was deeply prejudiced against the disciples of our Lord, bears testimony
to the falsehood of the accusation. Nero, says Tacitus, "found wretches
who were induced to confess themselves guilty; and, on their evidence, a
great multitude of Christians were convicted, not indeed on clear proof
of their having set the city on fire, but rather on account of their
hatred of the human race. [167:1] They were put to death amidst insults
and derision. Some were covered with the skins of wild beasts, and left
to be torn to pieces by dogs; others were nailed to the cross; and some,
covered over with inflammable matter, were lighted up, when the day
declined, to serve as torches during the night. The Emperor lent his own
gardens for the exhibition. He added the sports of the circus, and
assisted in person, sometimes driving a curricle, and occasionally
mixing with the rubble in his coachman's dress. At length these
proceedings excited a feeling of compassion, as it was evident that the
Christians were destroyed, not for the public good, but as a sacrifice
to the cruelty of a single individual." [167:2] Some writers have
maintained that the persecution under Nero was confined to Rome; but
various testimonies concur to prove that it extended to the provinces.
Paul seems to contemplate its spread throughout the Empire when he tells
the Hebrews that they had "_not yet_ resisted _unto blood_ striving
against sin," [167:3] and when he exhorts them not to forsake the
assembling of themselves together as they "see _the day approaching_."
[167:4] Peter also, as has been stated in a preceding chapter,
apparently refers to the same circumstance in his letter to the brethren
"scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,"
when he announces "the fiery trial" which was "to try" them, [168:1] and
when he tells them of "judgment" beginning "at the house of God."
[168:2] If Nero enacted that the profession of Christianity was a
capital offence, his law must have been in force throughout the Roman
world; and an early ecclesiastical writer positively affirms that he was
the author of such sanguinary legislation. [168:3] The horror with which
his name was so long regarded by members of the Church in all parts of
the Empire [168:4] strongly corroborates the statement that the attack
on the disciples in the capital was only the signal for the commencement
of a general persecution.

Nero died A.D. 68, and the war which involved the destruction of
Jerusalem and of upwards of a million of the Jews, was already in
progress. The holy city fell A.D. 70; and the Mosaic economy, which had
been virtually abolished by the death of Christ, now reached its
practical termination. At the same period the prophecy of Daniel was
literally fulfilled; for "the sacrifice and the oblation" were made to
cease, [168:5] as the demolition of the temple and the dispersion of the
priests put an end to the celebration of the Levitical worship. The
overthrow of the metropolis of Palestine contributed in various ways to
the advancement of the Christian cause. Judaism, no longer able to
provide for the maintenance of its ritual, was exhibited to the world as
a defunct system; its institutions, now more narrowly examined by the
spiritual eye, were discovered to be but types of the blessings of a
more glorious dispensation; and many believers, who had hitherto adhered
to the ceremonial law, discontinued its observances. Christ, forty years
before, had predicted the siege and desolation of Jerusalem; [169:1] and
the remarkable verification of a prophecy, delivered at a time when the
catastrophe was exceedingly improbable, appears to have induced not a
few to think more favourably of the credentials of the gospel. In
another point of view the ruin of the ancient capital of Judea proved
advantageous to the Church. In the subversion of their chief city the
power of the Jews sustained a shock from which it has never since
recovered; and the disciples were partially delivered from the attacks
of their most restless and implacable persecutors.

Much obscurity rests upon the history of the period which immediately
follows the destruction of Jerusalem. Though Philip and John, [169:2]
and perhaps one or two more of the apostles, still survived, we know
almost nothing of their proceedings. After the death of Nero the Church
enjoyed a season of repose, but when Domitian, in A.D. 81, succeeded to
the government, the work of persecution recommenced. The new sovereign,
who was of a gloomy and suspicious temper, encouraged a system of
espionage; and as he seems to have imagined that the Christians fostered
dangerous political designs, he treated them with the greater harshness.
The Jewish calumny, that they aimed at temporal dominion, and that they
sought to set up "another king one Jesus," [169:3] had obviously
produced an impression upon his mind; and he accordingly sought out the
nearest kinsmen of the Messiah, that he might remove these heirs of the
rival dynasty. But when the two grandchildren of Jude, [169:4] called
the brother of our Lord, [169:5] were conducted to Rome, and brought to
his tribunal, he discovered the groundlessness of his apprehensions. The
individuals who had inspired the Emperor with such anxiety, were the
joint-proprietors of a small farm in Palestine which they cultivated
with their own hands; and the jealous monarch at once saw that, when his
fears had been excited by reports of the treasonable designs of such
simple and illiterate husbandmen, he had been miserably befooled. After
a single interview, these poor peasants met with no farther molestation
from Domitian.

Had all the disciples been in such circumstances as the grandchildren of
Jude, the gospel might have been identified with poverty and ignorance;
and it might have been said that it was fitted to make way only among
the dregs of the population. But it was never fairly open to this
objection. From the very first it reckoned amongst its adherents at
least a sprinkling of the wealthy, the influential, and the educated.
Joseph of Arimathea, one of the primitive followers of our Lord, was "a
rich man" and an "honourable counsellor;" [170:1] Paul himself, as a
scholar, stood high among his countrymen, for he had been brought up at
the feet of Gamaliel; and Sergius Paulus, one of the first fruits of the
mission to the Gentiles, was a Roman Proconsul. [170:2] In the reign of
Nero the Church could boast of some illustrious converts; and the saints
of "Caesar's household" are found addressing their Christian salutations
to their brethren at Philippi. [170:3] In the reign of Domitian the
gospel still continued to have friends among the Roman nobility. Flavius
Clemens, a person of consular dignity, and the cousin of the Emperor,
was now put to death for his attachment to the cause of Christ; [170:4]
and his near relative Flavia Domitilla, for the same reason, was
banished with many others to Pontia, [170:5] a small island off the
coast of Italy used for the confinement of state prisoners.

Domitian governed the Empire fifteen years, but his persecution of the
Christians appears to have been limited to the latter part of his reign.
About this time the Apostle John, "for the word of God and for the
testimony of Jesus Christ," [171:1] was sent as an exile into Patmos, a
small rocky island in the Aegaean Sea not far from the coast of Asia
Minor. It is said that he had previously issued unhurt from a cauldron
of boiling oil into which he had been plunged in Rome by order of the
Emperor; but this story, for which a writer who flourished about a
century afterwards is the earliest voucher, [171:2] has been challenged
as of doubtful authority. [171:3] We have no means of ascertaining the
length of time during which he remained in banishment; [171:4] and all
we know of this portion of his life is, that he had now those sublime
and mysterious visions to be found in the Apocalypse. After the fall of
Jerusalem, as well as after he was permitted to leave Patmos, he appears
to have resided chiefly in the metropolis of the Proconsular Asia; and
hence some ancient writers, who flourished after the establishment of
the episcopal system, have designated him the "Bishop of Ephesus."
[172:1] But the apostle, when advanced in life, chose to be known simply
by the title of "the elder;" [172:2] and though he was certainly by far
the most influential minister of the district where he sojourned, there
is every reason to believe that he admitted his brethren to a share in
the government of the Christian community. Like Peter and Paul before
him, he acknowledged the other elders as his "fellow-presbyters,"
[172:3] and, as became his age and apostolic character, he doubtless
exhorted them to take heed unto themselves and to all the flock over the
which the Holy Ghost had made them overseers. [172:4]

John seems to have been the last survivor of the apostles. He is said to
have reached the advanced age of one hundred years, and to have died
about the close of the first century. He was a "Son of Thunder," [172:5]
and he appears to have long maintained the reputation of a powerful and
impressive preacher; but when his strength began to give way beneath the
pressure of increasing infirmities, he ceased to deliver lengthened
addresses. When he appeared before the congregation in extreme old age,
he is reported to have simply repeated the exhortation "Children, love
one another;" and when asked, why he always confined himself to the same
brief admonition, he replied that "no more was necessary." [172:6] Such
a narrative is certainly quite in harmony with the character of the
beloved disciple, for he knew that love is the "bond of perfectness" and
"the fulfilling of the law."

It has been thought that, towards the close of the first century, the
Christian interest was in a somewhat languishing condition; [172:7] and
the tone of the letters addressed to the Seven Churches in Asia is
calculated to confirm this impression. The Church of Laodicea is said to
be "neither cold nor hot;" [173:1] the Church of Sardis is admonished to
"strengthen the things which remain that are ready to die;" [173:2] and
the Church of Ephesus is exhorted to "remember from whence she has
fallen, and repent, and do the first works." [173:3] When it was known
that Christianity was under the ban of a legal proscription, it was not
strange that "the love of many" waxed cold; and the persecutions of Nero
and Domitian must have had a most discouraging influence. But though the
Church had to encounter the withering blasts of popular odium and
imperial intolerance, it struggled through an ungenial spring; and, in
almost every part of the Roman Empire, it had taken root and was
beginning to exhibit tokens of a steady and vigorous growth as early as
the close of the first century. The Acts and the apostolical epistles
speak of the preaching of the gospel in Palestine, Syria, Cyprus, Asia
Minor, Greece, Illyricum, and Italy; and, according to traditions which
we have no reason to discredit, the way of salvation was proclaimed,
before the death of John, in various other countries. It is highly
probable that Paul himself assisted in laying the foundations of the
Church in Spain; at an early date there were disciples in Gaul; and
there is good evidence that, before the close of the first century, the
new faith had been planted even on the distant shores of Britain.
[173:4] It is generally admitted that Mark laboured successfully as an
evangelist in Alexandria, the metropolis of Egypt; [173:5] and it has
been conjectured that Christians were soon to be found in "the parts of
Libya about Cyrene," [173:6] for if Jews from that district were
converted at Jerusalem by Peter's famous sermon on the day of Pentecost,
they would not fail, on their return home, to disseminate the precious
truths by which they had been quickened and comforted. On the same
grounds it may be inferred that the gospel soon found its way into
Parthia, Media, Persia, Arabia, and Mesopotamia. [174:1] Various
traditions [174:2] attest that several of the apostles travelled
eastwards, after their departure from the capital of Palestine.

Whilst Christianity, in the face of much obloquy, was gradually
attracting more and more attention, it was at the same time nobly
demonstrating its power as the great regenerator of society. The
religion of pagan Rome could not satisfy the wants of the soul; it could
neither improve the heart nor invigorate the intellect; and it was now
rapidly losing its hold on the consciences of the multitude. The high
places of idolatrous worship often exercised a most demoralising
influence, as their rites were not unfrequently a wretched mixture of
brutality, levity, imposture, and prostitution. Philosophy had
completely failed to ameliorate the condition of man. The vices of some
of its most distinguished professors were notorious; its votaries were
pretty generally regarded as a class of scheming speculators; and they
enjoyed neither the confidence nor the respect of the mass of the
people. But, even under the most unpromising circumstances, it soon
appeared that Christianity could accomplish social and spiritual changes
of a very extraordinary character. The Church of Corinth was perhaps one
of the least exemplary of the early Christian communities, and yet it
stood upon a moral eminence far above the surrounding population; and,
from the roll of its own membership, it could produce cases of
conversion to which nothing parallel could, be found in the whole
history of heathendom. Paul could say to it--"Neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves
with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers,
nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God, _and such were some
of you_ but ye are washed, but ye _are sanctified_, but ye are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." [175:1]
Nor was this all. The gospel proved itself sufficient to meet the
highest aspirations of man. It revealed to him a Friend in heaven who
"sticketh closer than a brother;" [175:2] and, as it assured him of
eternal happiness in the enjoyment of fellowship with God, it imparted
to him a "peace that passeth all understanding." The Roman people
witnessed a new spectacle when they saw the primitive followers of
Christ expiring in the fires of martyrdom. The pagans did not so value
their superstitions; but here was a religion which was accounted "better
than life." Well then might the flames which illuminated the gardens of
Nero supply some spiritual light to the crowds who were present at the
sad scene; and, in the indomitable spirit of the first sufferers, well
might the thoughtful citizen have recognised a system which was destined
yet to subdue the world.





     SECTION II.

     THE LITERATURE AND THEOLOGY OF THE APOSTOLIC CHURCH.




CHAPTER I

THE NEW TESTAMENT, ITS HISTORY, AND THE AUTHORITY OF ITS VARIOUS PARTS.
THE EPISTLE OF CLEMENT OF ROME.


The conduct of our Lord, as a religious teacher, betokened that He was
something more than man. Mohammed dictated the Koran, and left it behind
him as a sacred book for the guidance of his followers; many others, who
have established sects, have also founded a literature for their
disciples; but Jesus Christ wrote nothing. The Son of God was not
obliged to condescend to become His own biographer, and thus to testify
of Himself. He had at His disposal the hearts and the pens of others;
and He knew that His words and actions would be accurately reported to
the latest generations. During His personal ministry, even His apostles
were only imperfectly acquainted with His theology; but, shortly before
His death, He gave them an assurance that, in due time, He would
disclose to them more fully the nature and extent of the great
salvation. He said to them--"The Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost,
whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you.
[177:1].... He will guide you into all truth." [177:2]

The resurrection poured a flood of light into the minds of the apostles,
and they forthwith commenced with unwonted boldness to proclaim the
truth in all its purity and power; but, perhaps, no part of the
evangelical history was written until upwards of twenty years after the
death of our Saviour. [177:3] According to tradition, the Gospels of
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, then appeared in the order in which they are
now presented in our authorised version. [177:4] It is certain that all
these narratives were published several years before the tall of
Jerusalem in A.D. 70; and as each contains our Lord's announcement of
its speedy catastrophe, there is much probability in the report, that
the exact fulfilment of so remarkable a prophecy, led many to
acknowledge the divine origin of the Christian religion. The Gospel of
John is of a much later date, and seems to have been written towards the
conclusion of the century.

Two of the evangelists, Matthew and John, were apostles; and the other
two, Mark and Luke, appear to have been of the number of the Seventy.
[177:5] All were, therefore, fully competent to bear testimony to the
facts which they record, for the Seventy had "companied" with the Twelve
"all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among" them, [178:1]
and all "were from the beginning eye-witnesses and ministers of the
word." [178:2] These writers mention many miracles performed by Christ,
and at least three of the Gospels were in general circulation whilst
multitudes were still alive who are described in them as either the
spectators or the subjects of His works of wonder; and yet, though the
evangelists often enter most minutely into details, so that their
statements, if capable of contradiction, might have been at once
challenged and exposed, we do not find that any attempt was meanwhile
made to impeach their accuracy. Their manner of recording the acts of
the Great Teacher is characterised by remarkable simplicity, and the
most acute reader in vain seeks to detect in it the slightest trace of
concealment or exaggeration. Matthew artlessly confesses that he
belonged to the odious class of publicans; [178:3] Mark tells how Peter,
his friend and companion, "began to curse and to swear," and to declare
that he knew not the Man; [178:4] Luke, who was probably one of the two
brethren who journeyed to Emmaus, informs us how Jesus drew near to them
on the way and upbraided them as "fools and slow of heart to believe all
that the prophets had spoken;" [178:5] and John honestly repudiates the
pretended prediction setting forth that he himself was not to die.
[178:6] Each evangelist mentions incidents unnoticed by the others, and
thus supplies proof that he is entitled to the credit of an original and
independent witness. Matthew alone gives the formula of baptism "in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost;" [178:7] Mark
alone speaks of the great amazement of the people as they beheld the
face of Christ on His descent from the Mount of Transfiguration; [179:1]
Luke alone announces the appointment of the Seventy; [179:2] and John
alone records some of those sublime discourses in which our Lord treats
of the doctrine of His Sonship, of the mission of the Comforter, and of
the mysterious union between Himself and His people. [179:3] All the
evangelists direct our special attention to the scene of the
crucifixion. As they proceed to describe it, they obviously feel that
they are dealing with a transaction of awful import; and they
accordingly become more impressive and circumstantial. Their statements,
when combined, furnish a complete and consistent narrative of the sore
travail, the deep humiliation, and the dying utterances of the
illustrious sufferer.

If the appointment of the Seventy indicated our Lord's intention of
sending the glad tidings of salvation to the ends of the earth, there
was a peculiar propriety in the selection of an individual of their
number as the historian of the earliest missionary triumphs. Whilst Luke
records the wonderful success of Christianity amongst the Gentiles, he
takes care to point out the peculiar features of the new economy; and
thus it is that his narrative abounds with passages in which the
doctrine, polity, and worship of the primitive disciples are illustrated
or explained. It is well known that the titles of the several parts of
the New Testament were prefixed to them, not by their authors, but at a
subsequent period by parties who had no claim to inspiration; [179:4]
and it is obvious that the book called--"The Acts of the Apostles" has
not been very correctly designated. It is confined almost exclusively to
the acts of Peter and Paul, and it sketches only a portion of their
proceedings. As its narrative terminates at the end of Paul's second
year's imprisonment at Rome, it was probably written about that period.
Superficial readers may object to its information as curt and
fragmentary; but the careful investigator will discover that it marks
with great distinctness the most important stages in the early
development of the Church. [180:1] It shews how Christianity spread
rapidly among the Jews from the day of Pentecost to the martyrdom of
Stephen; it points out how it then took root among the Gentiles; and it
continues to trace its dissemination from Judea westwards, until it was
firmly planted by the apostle of the uncircumcision in the metropolis of
the Empire.

It is highly probable that some of the fourteen epistles of Paul were
written before any other portion of the New Testament, for we have
already seen [180:2] that the greater number of them were transmitted to
the parties to whom they are addressed during the time over which the
Acts of the Apostles extend; but though Luke makes no mention of these
letters, his account of the travels of their author throws considerable
light on the question of their chronology. Guided by statements which he
supplies, and by evidence contained in the documents themselves, we have
endeavoured to point out the order of their composition. It thus appears
that they are not placed chronologically in the New Testament. The
present arrangement is, however, of great antiquity, as it can be traced
up to the beginning of the fourth century; [180:3] and it is made upon
the principle that the Churches addressed should be classed according to
