The voice of humanity, and the experience of centuries, the practice of
holy men, and the example and the words of Christ Himself, have all
testified to the need there is for the spiritual observance of such
times, if men are to keep their soul alive in them--and who are we that
we should venture to set ourselves against such overpowering testimony?

Let us rather address ourselves seriously to making these weeks a time of
some special exercise or discipline such as our life may need.

 There is hardly one of us but will confess, if he thinks of the matter
at all, that the world is too much with us; that its influence is too
strong upon us; that we are too ready to conform to its ways and follow
its indulgences.  And such a confession is equivalent to an
acknowledgment that we need these Lenten seasons.  And if with this
feeling in our hearts we use the coming weeks with any definite purpose,
praying to be rid of some temptation or weakness, or to be endowed with
some strength, or to be supported in some good purpose, we are sure to
recognise with thankfulness, when the time is over, that it has indeed
proved a time of some dislodgment, that some temptation or habit has
fallen away from us and left us free, so that some new spirit or purpose
has begun to grow in us.

We shall, in fact, be conscious, as the weeks go on, that a new life of
new tastes and new satisfactions has sprung up, as the first fruits of
our prayer.  If we doubt the need of such exhortations as these, let us
reflect for a moment--Does it not sometimes happen to us that our souls
are only too like the soul of that sick child in the Gospel?

Good instincts, and intentions, and tendencies, are clearly felt and
recognised, but they are fitful, weak, and intermittent.  Another spirit
seems to lay hold of us and carry us whither it will.

If in any sense this can be said to be your case, then remember, that
just what the Saviour's healing word was to that child, sick and
possessed, as He met it on His way from the Hill of Transfiguration, and
breathed over it the spirit of the higher life, reducing the chaos of the
soul to harmony, and bringing reason out of madness, and freedom out of
demoniac possession, these holy seasons of time-honoured observance may
be to your soul, if you use them reverently, and as God's appointed means
for your growth in the Spirit.




 XIV.  GOD'S CURSE ON SIN.


   "Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to
   his ways, saith the Lord God.  Repent and turn yourselves from all
   your transgressions; so iniquity shall not be your ruin."--EZEKIEL
   xviii. 30.

These words of Ezekiel may be understood as expressing in the prophet's
language what the Book of Deuteronomy expresses in such denunciations as
those which were read to us the other day in the Commination Service.

They correspond also to the warning of St. Paul when he says--"Be not
deceived; God is not mocked; whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also
reap.  He that soweth to the flesh shall reap corruption; and he that
soweth to the spirit shall reap everlasting life."  Or again they
correspond to that question which is put to us in the Epistle to the
Hebrews--"If every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense and reward, how shall we escape?"

Thus we find in the Pentateuch, in Ezekiel, and in the apostolic writings
the representatives of three very different stages of religious
enlightenment, all teaching us in effect the same lesson, to remember the
recompense that sin never fails to bring upon him who commits it.  As we
listen to the curses of Deuteronomy on one sin and on another, and then
read the language of Ezekiel or St. Paul, we are conscious of a
difference in the modes of thought and expression.  The thought of the
apostle is separated from that of the lawgiver or the prophet of the Old
Testament by the new revelation and the sacrifice of Jesus; but yet
underneath all differences their judgment on every sinful act or habit
remains spiritually the same.  They all alike bid us, when we think of
our sins, to think also of the inevitable punishment which rises behind
them like their shadow; and to bear in mind that the root of the whole
matter is the one incontrovertible and never-changing fact of human life
that as you sow you must expect to reap--he that soweth to the flesh
shall of the flesh reap corruption.

Now, inasmuch as your early years are the seed-time of your life, these
stern reminders that if you sow any sin in your soul you will some day
reap its curse, that God will judge you every one according to his ways,
all this is very appropriate for your consideration.  And you are likely
to be all the more serious about your present life and its habits,
tastes, and purposes if this thought really takes possession of you, that
there is in fact a very close analogy between the life of the soul and
life around us in the outer world, and that every seed we sow in it grows
after its own kind.

In the region of animal or vegetable life you see and recognise this law
on every side.  You trace it sometimes as the law of improvement by
culture, sometimes as the law of degeneration.

You cultivate and tend a garden or a field, sowing, planting,
eradicating, and the growths of flower or fruit improve in proportion to
your care; but leave it to itself and the weeds choke it, and the very
fruit degenerates; your rose becomes a dog-rose--it reverts, as men say,
to a lower type.

So exactly is it with your own life; so long as it is grafted into a life
higher than your own, so long as good purposes are being sown in it and
good habits cultivated, and the bad weeded out and the Spirit of God
breathes through it, it is growing nearer to the Divine type; but neglect
it, or follow sinful impulse or low taste, and it becomes like the garden
of weeds; degeneracy begins at once, it is changing to something worse,
it is reverting to a lower type.

This is a way of expressing it which is sufficiently familiar to you.  But
this is only our modern way of looking at those facts of life which were
eloquent to men of earlier times as the curse of God.

As, then, it is undoubtedly true that--

   "Our acts our angels are, for good or ill,
   Our fatal shadows that walk with us still,"

these stern warnings which our Lenten services hold up before us are of
the greatest value.

Keeping before us this law that in every region of life it is the
tendency of everything to bear fruit after its kind, we shall feel that
we can hardly impress it too deeply upon our minds that there is no sin
which we commit but will assuredly return upon our own heads.  The
Israelites in the Old Testament saw the hand of God thus visiting their
sins upon them in many ways.  They thought of Him as smiting them for
their sins with consumption or with fever, with plague or mildew, or the
sword of the oppressor.  These are not our expectations.  We have learnt
that it is not with such visitations that God punishes us for our sinful
indulgence or neglect, but that He does it with a punishment which may be
less obvious but is often more ruinous than these.

Neglect the opportunities of good with which He strews your path in early
life, let some sin strike its roots in your heart and take possession of
it, and the curse of God for that neglect or that sin will overtake you,
no doubt of it; coming not perhaps as the Israelite on Mount Ebal
expected it to come for any sin of his, but coming, you hardly know how,
as the change for the worse, the sinking to lower levels of thought, and
taste, and aim, and practice, the reversion to lower types, which is the
end of neglect, coming as the creeping and insidious growth of the power
of sin working ever stronger in us as the natural fruit of indulgence.  So
the curse of that ancient Jewish law turns out to be a terrible and
unchanging truth, written in a law which is never obsolete and grows not
old, a law which calls on us for our Amen! as it cries to us equally in
the language of Divine revelation and of the latest scientific discovery:
"Sow neglect," it says, "and you will reap deterioration; sow sin, and
you will reap corruption."

This vision of the ultimate results of evil is a very ugly one, put it in
whatever shape you will, and we are naturally somewhat loth to look it in
the face.  We would rather not think of any sin of ours as entailing such
consequences.  This conception of Divine justice or retribution embodied
in the action of unbending laws and declaring that death is the fruit of
sin, and that death must come of it, this is no doubt a conception which
inspires awe.  We shrink from it; we hardly dare to say Amen! to its
dread utterances.  We should like, it may be, to shut our eyes to the
fact and dwell rather on the thought that our God is long-suffering and
of great kindness and of tender mercy.  It is more soothing to think of
love than of retribution, or of the arm that shelters or upholds us than
of the hand that smites; but the real question should be--"Is it true,
this declaration that as we sow we reap, that the wages of sin is death,
death of faculty, death of hope?"  It is foolish to blink the sterner
aspects of life.  The fruit of such blinking and turning aside is very
often the very thing we do not like to think of--indulgence and its
retribution.  Divine love and goodness and long-suffering cannot occupy
too much of our thoughts and prayers; for it is through these that the
heart is touched, and the spirit is fostered in us, and we awake to the
new life in Christ.

But if we shrink from contemplating that law of Divine retribution, which
works in men's lives side by side with the law of mercy and love, it is
time for us to ask ourselves--"How is it that I thus shrink from the
thought of these penalties?"

There is indeed one sense in which we naturally shrink from the thought
that the wages of sin is death, even while we acknowledge that it is so.
It is inexpressibly sad to dwell on the infinite mass of sin which is
daily bearing its bitter and deadly fruit in the world, and propagating
itself after its kind; to think of the untold number of darkened or
misguided souls that have sown to the flesh, and are going in consequence
down to failure and death, blighted, corrupted, ruined.  From this
thought we naturally turn to the thought of God's mercy, and pray that He
may yet sow the seeds of new hope in the dismal waste of such lives.

 But it happens to us, I fear sometimes, that this thought of God's curse
on sin sends a chill through the heart, and we shrink away from it,
because of our own unregenerate life, because of the fascination which
sinful impulse or habit exercises over us.

If the warning voice of our Lenten Commination Service has convicted any
one of us of this motive for shrinking from its stern sentence, it has
come to us as a true messenger of the God who has no pleasure in the
death of him that dieth.  We need the voice of these threatenings,
because the heart has such a great power of self-deception in it.  Men
find it so easy to thrust away into the dim background of their thoughts
all the dark but sure consequences of present sins, treating them as a
debt which will come up no doubt for payment some day, but may be put
aside just now.

And one virtue of our stern plain-speaking Lenten services is this, that
they will not allow us to forget that fated reckoning day--they put us,
whether we like it or not, face to face with the sure consequences of
sin; and they compel us to listen to the question--"What is the choice of
thy life?"

For you will bear in mind that we read all these decrees of Divine law
with our eye fixed on our own life and not on our neighbour.  They are
meant to help us to judge ourselves, and not some other person; they lead
us to penitence and not to criticism, so that our readiness or our
unwillingness to meet and to weigh them, and to respond to them with
definite prayer and penitence, may be taken as an index of our religious
sincerity, and of our readiness to consecrate our lives to the service of
our Saviour Christ.

And it is well for us that we should ask ourselves these questions; for
if indeed it is true that every transgression and disobedience shall
receive its just recompense and reward, how else shall we escape?




 XV.  THE CONFLICT WITH EVIL.


   "And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil."--ST.
   MATTHEW vi. 13.

It is good for us sometimes to stand still for a moment and consider our
use of very familiar words.  And this petition may appropriately
illustrate our need of such an exercise.

It is on your lips every day.  Every Sunday you offer it you hardly know
how many times, in private and in public prayer: "Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil."  And the moment you stop to think
about it you feel--who does not?--that it is a very solemn and moving
petition if you offer it before God in sincerity, and with an honest
desire to be kept out of the way of sin; but it becomes a fearful mockery
if it is offered with unclean lips, or by one who is living in any sort
of sinful practice, either secret or open.

And yet, as we all know, it is possible to do this, making the prayer
mere lip service, under the influence of daily custom.  This, then, is
the question it suggests to us whenever we stop to think about it: How
far are we endeavouring to keep our lives in accordance with the spirit
of such a petition?  "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from
evil."  Most of you, I can well believe, would not voluntarily or
deliberately step out of your way to meet a temptation, or to seek any
evil course of life.  You would not do it of your own free choice, or in
cold blood, as we say.  This, at any rate, is your own feeling about sin,
whether the feeling is consistent with your life or not.  As you
contemplate any low form of life in another, you recognise its ugliness
and its degrading character, and you call it very likely by the name it
deserves.  If, then, you find yourself involved in any sin, in spite of
these feelings, and although you take this daily prayer upon your lips,
how comes it to be so?  How comes it that you remain in this pitiable
condition?

Your answer is, perhaps, that temptation comes upon you unawares, and
that it takes you by surprise; or it seems to watch for some moment of
forgetfulness or weakness; or you fight against a temptation, but still
it clings to you as if it had a life of its own and were independent of
you; or you are drawn into sin you scarcely know how; or you are driven
into it by some one whom you fear although you despise him; or it seems
to you to be in the very air you breathe.  And although such answers
explanatory of a life of sin or waste are no real excuse for it, they are
very often quite true.  If it were not so, the devil would not be the
dangerous enemy that he assuredly is to our spiritual life; our risk of
failure in our battle with sin would not be so great as experience shows
it to be.  We must therefore expect that temptations to sin will
sometimes come upon us quite by surprise and at unlocked for moments, and
that some temptations will linger and cling to us with a hateful
persistence; you must be prepared also to find that some companion may
draw you towards a sin, or a bully may endeavour to drive you into it.
Your life is a happy one if it is free from all such risks, but you
cannot count upon such freedom.  So that, if any one begins his life
thinking that his conflict with evil and its manifold temptations is
going to be an easy one, he begins under a dangerous delusion, and he is
likely to end in some disastrous failure.

You desire, let us hope, to keep your soul unstained by evil ways.  If,
then, you remember that to secure such a stainless and unpolluted life
you have not only to fight with some external enemy now and then, but
against dark and insidious powers of evil which seem to start up around
you and in the very citadel of your heart unawares, and that except
through a constant sense of God's presence in your life you cannot hope
to keep free from their influence, this feeling should give reality and
earnestness to our daily prayer to be delivered from the evil.

And, indeed, this feeling that our life is set in the midst of many and
great dangers is one of the first requisites for its moral safety.  It
stands beside us with its warning, whenever a temptation to some sin
besets us, reminding us that, no matter how pleasant or attractive the
temptation may seem to be, or how trifling the sin that it suggests, it
is in fact an outpost of a great army, whose name is legion, and that we
should hold no parleyings and have no dealings with it, for it breathes
corruption, and it brings degradation and death behind it.

"_Obsta principiis_" may indeed be said to be a warning specially needed
by us in regard to every kind of temptation.  But we may go further than
this.  Our safety from particular sins depends very often and very
largely, at a critical moment, upon our general attitude and feeling
towards sin in every shape.

It must be acknowledged, I think, that most sins which lay their hold
upon us and master us, or struggle long and hard for the mastery, make
their first entrance into the soul so easily, because they find it swept
and garnished for their reception, and its doors wide open.  With
reference to this you have only to reflect on some chapter of your own
experience.  Has it never happened that, when some wrong or sinful act or
thought or speech was first presented to you, it stirred a feeling of
shrinking, or strong dislike, or fear, or uneasiness, or, it may be,
disgust; but instead of listening to that warning voice, and spurning the
temptation utterly, as your feeling bade you do, you were attracted
somehow to turn and gaze upon it.  You knew it to be sin, but you felt no
repulsion.  Your soul was not garrisoned and defended by any strong sense
of the hatefulness and deadly influence of all sin as such; so if you
fled from it it was with a backward look; and then you allowed yourself
to think of it in others, or you lived on friendly and familiar terms
with those who were stained by it; possibly you even jested about it; you
let your thoughts feed upon it; you expressed no stern disapproval of it;
you allowed the atmosphere of your life to be tainted by it; and at last
your adversary the devil, having rejoiced to see his wiles thus gathering
round you, saw you slip or plunge into the sin, and go one great step
nearer to becoming his bondslave--just as some foolish bird, fluttering
this way and that instead of spreading its wings for a heavenward flight
into the pure and safe upper air, might plunge into the snares of the
fowler.  And yet all the while, although you were living this weak and
vacillating life, which is the seed-field of sin, you were praying to God
every day--"Lead us not into temptation."

If we remember any such experience we may at least gather from it some
lessons of safety and strength for the time to come.  It reminds us first
of all how vitally important is our general attitude towards every form
of sin and its allurements.  On this attitude it very often depends
whether your life is to be comparatively free from pitfalls, or whether
it is to be beset with dangers at every turning.  If by your attitude and
behaviour you cause it to be felt that sin is hateful to you, and that
you are sincere when you pray that God may keep you from all evil, a
great many of the temptations that would otherwise make your life
difficult and dangerous will shrink away abashed; or if the tempter
ventures to assail you, he will do it half-heartedly when he sees that
you repel him with a whole-hearted repugnance.  It is this attitude even
more than individual acts which fixes the tone of a society.

 When there is no prevalent sense that there are those present who
maintain this attitude of hatred and contempt for sin and everything that
breeds or fosters it, the tone, as men say, becomes low, or lax, the air
becomes corrupt, and life in such surroundings becomes full of peril.  If
the good are timid, shrinking, showing no positive fervour, no zeal for
virtue, and no moral indignation against evil influence, then the bad in
their society will lift up their heads and walk boldly.  But when, on the
other hand, they who are in their hearts convinced of the sinfulness of
sin, and of the infinite mischief that may arise out of any form of it,
are not ashamed to show it by their attitude, they cause the base to hide
itself in its proper darkness, and they create an atmosphere around them
in which temptations lose a great deal of their force and strength.

Let this, then, be your feeling about your life--that when it is assailed
by any sin, that sin is not something isolated or insignificant; it is
not something which may be indulged or accepted, as if it had no relation
with other sins; it is a part of an infinite brood of evil; and that if
you admit it within the circle of your life, or tolerate it in the air
you breathe, you never know where its pestilent germs may fall, and
breed, and multiply, and what mischief may come of it.

It is this feeling of the mysterious vitality of sin, and the subtle
kinship of one form of sin with other forms, and its destructiveness when
it seizes on a life or poisons an atmosphere, that helps us more than
anything else to feel the force and the intensity of the Saviour's prayer
for us: "Holy Father, keep through Thine own name those whom Thou hast
given Me.  I pray not that Thou shouldest take them out of the world, but
that Thou shouldest keep them from evil."  It is this same feeling of the
spreading, insidious, infectious and destructive nature of sin that makes
us echo this as our first and most earnest prayer for all we love, that
God may keep them from evil; and it is this that makes us value so highly
and recognise with thankful hearts every example of a pure and strong
life, which gives inspiration and strength to those around it.




 XVI.  SPIRITUAL BLINDNESS.


   "As it is written, God hath given them the spirit of slumber, eyes
   that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear."--ROMANS
   xi. 8.

   "Blindness in part is happened to Israel."--ROMANS xi. 25.

It is a sad and painful reflection, and one which is continually forced
upon us as we read the New Testament, that the long training and
preparation of the Jews brought them at the last not to the acceptance
but to the rejection of Jesus.

They had been taught, generation after generation, that they were the
