  Ni/-n[-i]n-d[-e]/, [)e]/, [-o]/, ya/.
  My heart, I am there (in the fullness of my heart).
    [My heart; knows all Mid[-e]/ secrets, sensible one.]

  [Illustration]
  A/-ni-na/-n[)e]sh-mi/-[)i]-an ni/-na/-w[)i]-t[-o]/.
  I follow with my arms.
    [Arms extended to take up "medicine" or Mid[-e]/ secrets.]

  [Illustration]
  Man/-i-d[-o]/-wi-an/ n[)i]-me/-shine/-mi/-an.
  Knowledge comes from the heart, the heart reaches to sources of
    "medicine" in the earth.
    [A Mid[-e]/ whose heart's desires and knowledge extend to the
    secrets of the earth. The lines diverging toward the earth
    denote direction.]

  [Illustration]
  We/-gi-kw[-o]/ K[)e]-m[-i]/-n[)i]-nan/? From whence comes the rain?
    [The power of making a clear sky, i.e., weather.]

  [Illustration]
  Mi-sh[)o]k/ kw[-o]t/, dzhe-man/-i-d[-o]/-yan.
  The sky, nevertheless, may be clear, Good Spirit.
    [Giving life to the sick; Dzhe Man/id[-o] handing it to the
    Mid[-e]/.]

  [Illustration]
  Wi/-ka-ka-n[)u]n/-[)e]-nan.
  Very seldom I make this request of you.
    [The Good Spirit filling the body of the supplicant with knowledge
    of secrets of the earth.]

In the following song (Pl. IX, B), the singer relates to the candidate
the gratitude which he experiences for the favors derived from the Good
Spirit; he has been blessed with knowledge of plants and other sacred
objects taken from the ground, which knowledge has been derived by his
having himself become a member of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, and hence urges
upon the candidate the great need of his also continuing in the course
which he has thus far pursued.

  [Illustration]
  Na-witsh/-tshi na-k[)u]m/-i-en a-na/-pi-a[n]/?
  When I am out of hearing, where am I?
    [The lines extending from the ears denote hearing; the arms directed
    toward the right and left, being the gesture of negation, usually
    made by throwing the hands outward and away from the front of the
    body.]

  [Illustration]
  We/-nen-ne/ en/-da-yan.
  In my house, I see.
    [Sight is indicated by the lines extending from the eyes; the horns
    denote superiority of the singer.]

  [Illustration]
  Mo-k[-i]/-yan-na/-a-witsh/-i-g[-u]m/-mi.
  When I rise it gives me life, and I take it.
    [The arm reaches into the sky to receive the gifts which are handed
    down by the Good Spirit. The short transverse line across the
    forearm indicates the arch of the sky, this line being an
    abbreviation of the curve usually employed to designate the same
    idea.]

  [Illustration]
  Wen/-dzhi-ba/-pi-a[n]/.
  The reason why I am happy.
    [Asking the Spirit for life, which is granted. The singer's body is
    filled with the heart enlarged, i.e., fullness of heart, the lines
    from the mouth denoting abundance of voice or grateful utterances--
    singing.]

  [Illustration (two vertical lines) missing]
  Rest.

  [Illustration]
  Zha/-zha-bui/-ki-bi-nan/ wig/-[)e]-w[^a]m/.
  The Spirit says there is plenty of "medicine" in the Mid[-e]/
  wig/iwam.
    [Two superior spirits, Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] and Dzhe Man/id[-o], whose
    bodies are surrounded by "lines of sacredness," tell the Mid[-e]/
    where the mysterious remedies are to be found. The vertical waving
    lines are the lines indicating these communications; the horizontal
    line, at the bottom, is the earth's surface.].

  [Illustration]
  Ya-h[-o]/-hon-ni/-y[)o].
  The Spirit placed medicine in the ground, let us take it.
    [The arm of Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] put into the ground sacred plants,
    etc., indicated by the spots at different horizons in the earth. The
    short vertical and waving lines denote sacredness of the objects.]

  [Illustration]
  N['i]-wo/-we-n[-i]/-nan ki/-bi-do-na[n]/.
  I am holding this that I bring to you.
    [The singer sits in the Mid[-e]/wiwin, and offers the privilege of
    entrance, by initiation, to the hearer.]

  [Illustration]
  Mid[-e]/ n[)i]-ka/-n[)a]k kish/-o-w[)e]/-ni-m[)i]-ko/.
  I have found favor in the eyes of my mid[-e]/ friends.
    [The Good Spirit has put life into the body of the singer, as
    indicated by the two mysterious arms reaching towards his body,
    i.e., the heart, the seat of life.]

In the following song (Pl. IX, C), the preceptor appears to feel
satisfied that the candidate is prepared to receive the initiation,
and therefore tells him that the Mid[-e]/ Man/id[-o] announces to him
the assurance. The preceptor therefore encourages his pupil with
promises of the fulfillment of his highest desires.

  [Illustration]
  Ba/-dzh[)i]-ke/-o gi/-mand ma-bis/-in-d[^a]/-[)a].
  I hear the spirit speaking to us.
    [The Mid[-e]/ singer is of superior power, as designated by the
    horns and apex upon his head. The lines from the ears indicate
    hearing.]

  [Illustration]
  Kwa-y[)a]k/-in d[-i]/-sha in-d[^a]/-ya[n].
  I am going into the medicine lodge.
    [The Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n is shown with a line through it to signify
    that he is going through it, as in the initiation.]

  [Illustration]
  Kwe/-tsh[)i]-ko-wa/-ya ti/-na-man.
  I am taking (gathering) medicine to make me live.
    [The discs indicate sacred objects within reach of the speaker.]

  [Illustration]
  O/-wi-yo/-in en/-do-ma m[^a]k/-kwin-[)e]n/-do-ma/.
  I give you medicine, and a lodge, also.
    [The Mid[-e]/, as the personator of Makwa/ Man/id[-o], is empowered
    to offer this privilege to the candidate.]

  [Illustration]
  O-w[-e]/-n[)e]n b[)e]-m[-i]/-s[)e]t.
  I am flying into my lodge.
    [Represents the Thunder-Bird, a deity flying into the arch of the
    sky. The short lines denote the (so-called spirit lines) abode of
    spirits or Man/id[-o]s.]

  [Illustration]
  Na-n[-i]-ne kwe-w[-e]/-an.
  The Spirit has dropped medicine from the sky where we can get it.
    [The line from the sky, diverging to various points, indicates that
    the sacred objects occur in scattered places.]

  [Illustration]
  H[-e]/-w[-o]g, [-e]/, [-e]/.
  I have the medicine in my heart.
    [The singer's body--i.e., heart--is filled with knowledge relating
    to sacred medicines from the earth.]

MID[-E]/ THERAPEUTICS.

During the period of time in which the candidate is instructed in the
foregoing traditions, myths, and songs the subject of Mid[-e]/ plants is
also discussed. The information pertaining to the identification and
preparation of the various vegetable substances is not imparted in
regular order, only one plant or preparation, or perhaps two, being
enlarged upon at a specified consultation. It may be that the candidate
is taken into the woods where it is known that a specified plant or tree
may be found, when a smoke offering is made before the object is pulled
out of the soil, and a small pinch of tobacco put into the hole in the
ground from which it was taken. This is an offering to Noko/mis--the
earth, the grandmother of mankind--for the benefits which are derived
from her body where they were placed by Ki/tshi Man/id[-o].

In the following list are presented, as far as practicable, the
botanical and common names of these, there being a few instances in
which the plants were not to be had, as they were foreign to that
portion of Minnesota in which the investigations were made; a few of
them, also, were not identified by the preceptors, as they were out of
season.

It is interesting to note in this list the number of infusions and
decoctions which are, from a medical and scientific standpoint, specific
remedies for the complaints for which they are recommended. It is
probable that the long continued intercourse between the Ojibwa and the
Catholic Fathers, who were tolerably well versed in the ruder forms of
medication, had much to do with improving an older and purely aboriginal
form of practicing medical magic. In some of the remedies mentioned
below there may appear to be philosophic reasons for their
administration, but upon closer investigation it has been learned that
the cure is not attributed to a regulation or restoration of functional
derangement, but to the removal or even expulsion of malevolent
beings--commonly designated as bad Man/id[-o]s--supposed to have taken
possession of that part of the body in which such derangement appears
most conspicuous. Further reference to the mythic properties of some of
the plants employed will be made at the proper time.

Although the word Mashki kiwa/bu[n]--medicine broth--signifies liquid
medical preparations, the term is usually employed in a general sense to
pertain to the entire materia medica; and in addition to the alleged
medicinal virtues extolled by the preceptors, certain parts of the trees
and plants enumerated are eaten on account of some mythic reason, or
employed in the construction or manufacture of habitations, utensils,
and weapons, because of some supposed supernatural origin or property,
an explanation of which they have forgotten.

  _Pinus strobus_, L.  White Pine.  Zhingw[^a]k/.

    1. The leaves are crushed and applied to relieve headache; also
      boiled; after which they are put into a small hole in the ground
      and hot stones placed therein to cause a vapor to ascend, which
      is inhaled to cure backache.

    The fumes of the leaves heated upon a stone or a hot iron pan are
      inhaled to cure headache.

    2. Gum; chiefly used to cover seams of birch-bark canoes. The gum is
      obtained by cutting a circular band of bark from the trunk, upon
      which it is then scraped and boiled down to proper consistence.
      The boiling was formerly done in clay vessels.

  _Pinus resinosa_, Ait.  Red Pine; usually, though erroneously, termed
    Norway Pine.  P[)o]kgw[)e]/nag[-e]/m[)o]k.

    Used as the preceding.

  _Abies balsamea_, Marshall.  Balsam Fir.  Ini/nand[)o]k.

    1. The bark is scraped from the trunk and a decoction thereof is
      used to induce diaphoresis.

    2. The gum, which is obtained from the vesicles upon the bark, and
      also by skimming it from the surface of the water in which the
      crushed bark is boiled, is carried in small vessels and taken
      internally as a remedy for gonorrhoea and for soreness of the
      chest resulting from colds.

    3. Applied externally to sores and cuts.

  _Abies alba_, Michx.  White Spruce.  S[)e]/ss[-e]g[^a]n/d[)o]k. The
    split roots-- wad[)o]b/-are used for sewing; the wood for the inside
    timbers of canoes.

  _Abies nigra_, Poir.  Black Spruce.  A/mikwan/d[)o]k.

    1. The leaves and crushed bark are used to make a decoction, and
      sometimes taken as a substitute in the absence of pines.

    2. Wood used in manufacture of spear handles.

  _Abies Canadensis_, Michx.  Hemlock.  Saga/[-i][n]wu[n]sh-- "Raven
    Tree."

    Outer bark powdered and crushed and taken internally for the cure of
      diarrhea. Usually mixed with other plants not named.

  _Larix Americana_, Michx.  Tamarack.  M[)o]sh/k[-i]kiwa/dik.

    1. Crushed leaves and bark used as Pinus strobus.

    2. Gum used in mending boats.

    3. Bark used for covering wig/iwams.

  _Cupressus thyoides_, L.  White Cedar.  Gi/zh[)i]k-- "Day."

    1. Leaves crushed and used as Pinus strobus. The greater the variety
      of leaves of coniferae the better. The spines of the leaves exert
      their prickly influence through the vapor upon the demons
      possessing the patient's body.

    2. The timber in various forms is used in the construction of canoe
      and lodge frames, the bark being frequently employed in roofing
      habitations.

  _Juniperus Virginiana_, L.  Red Cedar.  Muskwa/w[^a]/ak.

    Bruised leaves and berries are used internally to remove headache.

  _Quercus alba_, L.  White Oak.  M[-i]tig/[-o]mish/.

    1. The bark of the root and the inner bark scraped from the trunk is
      boiled and the decoction used internally for diarrhea.

    2. Acorns eaten raw by children, and boiled or dried by adults.

  _Quercus rubra_, L.  Red Oak.  Wisug/em[-i]tig/omish/-- "Bitter Acorn
    Tree."

    Has been used as a substitute for Q. alba.

  _Acer saccharinum_, Wang.  Sugar Maple.  Inn[-i]n[^a]/tik.

    1. Decoction of the inner bark is used for diarrhea.

    2. The sap boiled in making sirup and sugar.

    3. The wood valued for making arrow shafts.

  _Acer nigrum_, Michx.  Black Sugar Maple.  Ishig/omeaush/--
    "Sap-flows-fast."

    Arbor liquore abundans, ex quo liquor tanquam urina vehementer
      projicitur.

    Sometimes used as the preceding.

  _Betula excelsa_, Ait.  Yellow Birch.  Wi/umis/sik.

    The inner bark is scraped off, mixed with that of the Acer
      saccharinum, and the decoction taken as a diuretic.

  _Betula papyracea_, Ait.  White Birch.  M[-i]gwas/.

    Highly esteemed, and employed for making records, canoes,
      syrup-pans, m[-o]koks/-- or sugar boxes-- etc. The record of the
      Mid[-e]/wiwin, given by Minab[-o]/zho, was drawn upon this kind of
      bark.

  _Populus monilifera_, Ait.  Cottonwood.  M[^a]/n[^a]s[^a]/ti.

    The cotton down is applied to open sores as an absorbent.

  _Populus balsamifera_, L.  Balsam Poplar.  Asa/d[)i].

    1. The bark is peeled from the branches and the gum collected and
      eaten.

    2. Poles are used in building ordinary shelter lodges, and
      particularly for the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.

  _Juglans nigra_, L.  Black Walnut.  Paga/n[)o]k-- "Nut wood."

    Walnuts are highly prized; the green rind of the unripe fruit is
      sometimes employed in staining or dyeing.

  _Smilacina racemosa_, Desf.  False Spikenard.  Kin[-e]/wigw[)o]shk--
    "Snake weed or Snake Vine."

    1. Warm decoction of leaves used by lying-in women.

    2. The roots are placed upon a red-hot stone, the patient, with a
      blanket thrown over his head, inhaling the fumes, to relieve
      headache.

    3. Fresh leaves are crushed and applied to cuts to stop bleeding.

  _Helianthus occidentalis_, Riddell.  Sunflower.
    P[)u]kite/w[)u]kb[)o]ku[n]s/.

    The crushed root is applied to bruises and contusions.

  _Polygala senega_, L.  Seneca Snakeroot.  Winis/sik[-e][n]s/.

    1. A decoction of the roots is used for colds and cough.

    2. An infusion of the leaves is given for sore throat; also to
      destroy water-bugs that have been swallowed.

  _Rubus occidentalis_, L.  Black Raspberry.
      Makad[-e]/w[)i]skwi/min[)o]k-- "Black Blood Berry."

    A decoction made of the crushed roots is taken to relieve pains in
      the stomach.

  _Rubus strigosus_, Michx.  Wild Red Raspberry.  Miskwi/min[)o]k/--
    "Blood Berry."

    The roots are sometimes used as a substitute for the preceding.

  _Gaylussacia resinosa_, Torr. and Gr.  Huckleberry.  M[-i]/n[)u]n.

    Forms one of the chief articles of trade during the summer. The
      berry occupies a conspicuous place in the myth of the "Road of
      the Dead," referred to in connection with the "Ghost Society."

  _Prunus Virginiana_, L.  Choke Cherry.  Sisa[n]/wewi/nak[^a][n]sh/.

    1. The branchlets are used for making an ordinary drink; used also
      during gestation.

    2. The fruit is eaten.

  _Prunus serotina_, Ehrhart.  Wild Black Cherry.  Okw[-e]/w[)i]sh--
    "Scabby Bark."

    1. The inner bark is applied to external sores, either by first
      boiling, bruising, or chewing it.

    2. An infusion of the inner bark is sometimes given to relieve pains
      and soreness of the chest.

  _Prunus Pennsylvanica_, L.  Wild Red Cherry.  Kusigwa/kumi/n[)o]k.

    1. A decoction of the crushed root is given for pains and other
      stomach disorders.

    2. Fruit is eaten and highly prized.

    3. This, believed to be synonymous with the June Cherry of
      Minnesota, is referred to in the myths and ceremonies of the
      "Ghost Society."

  _Prunus Americana_, Marsh.  Wild Plum.  Bog[-e]/san[)o]k.

    The small rootlets, and the bark of the larger ones, are crushed and
      boiled together with the roots of the following named plants, as a
      remedy for diarrhea. The remaining plants were not in bloom at the
      time during which the investigations were made, and therefore were
      not identified by the preceptors, they being enabled to furnish
      only the names and an imperfect description. They are as follows,
      viz: Min[-e][n]/s[)o]k, two species, one with red berries, the
      other with yellow ones; Wab[-o]/samin[-i]/s[)o]k-- "Rabbit
      berries"; Shi/gwanau/is[)o]k, having small red berries; and
      Crataegus coccinea, L. Scarlet-fruited Thorn. O/gin[-i]k.

  _Typha latifolia_, L.  Common Cat-tail.  Nap[)o]g[)u]shk-- "Flat
    grass."

    The roots are crushed by pounding or chewing, and applied as a
      poultice to sores.

  _Sporobolus heterolepis_ Gr.  Nap[)o]/g[)u]shk[-u][n]s/-- "Little Flat
    Grass."

    1. Used sometimes as a substitute for the preceding.

    2. Roots are boiled and the decoction taken to induce emesis, "to
      remove bile."

  _Fragaria vesca_, L.  Wild Strawberry.  Od[-e] [-i]m[)i]n/n[)e]--
