Polytheism." (_Mohammed--R. F. Dibble._)

In the first place, it was rather confusing to attempt to obey the
behests of conflicting deities; in the second place, the different
prophets of Jehovah in Judaism and Christendom had, so far as Mohammed
knew, been uniformly successful, for he was familiar with the glorious
history of Abraham, Moses, and David, and he always held to the perverse
conception that Jesus was not crucified. However deep in the dumps
prophets may have been on occasion, they have invariably believed one
thing: victory for their particular cause would inevitably come. Neither
an unbroken series of worldly failures nor the chastisement of his god
have ever shaken the faith of a first-class prophet in himself or, as he
would doubtless prefer to say, in his Divinity. Arabia, broken,
unorganized, inglorious, idolistic Arabia, obviously lacked one Supreme
Being whose prerogative was greater than all other Supreme Beings, and
that Being, in turn, needed a messenger to exploit His supremacy. The
messengers who had served Jehovah had certainly prospered well; but
Jehovah Himself appeared to be on the decline. His Unity was steadily
disintegrating into a paradoxical Trinity. Why, therefore, not give
Allah, the leading icon in Arabia, an opportunity? Such considerations
quite probably never entered the head of Mohammed with any definiteness;
yet his behavior for the rest of his days seems to indicate that these,
or similar conceptions, were subconsciously egging him on.

Of certain facts, moreover, he was definitely aware. He may have had
little or no formal education, but his memory was retentive and
capacious, and his caravan journeys, together with the scores of
conversations he had held at the yearly fairs, as well as at Mecca, with
many cultivated strangers, had packed his mind with a mass of highly
valuable matter. In these ways he had learned both the strength and the
weakness of the Jews and Christians; their fanatical enthusiasm and
despairs; their spasmodic attempts to proselytize as well as the
widespread defection from their faiths. "Since his conception of
religion was largely personal, for he looked upon Moses, Jesus, and the
rest of the prophets as merely capable men who had founded and
promulgated religions; and since Arabia had no pre-eminent ruler, why
should he not seize the reins of power and carry on the great tradition
of prophethood? What a magnificent opportunity beckoned, and how
fortunate that he had been the first to recognize the call! By keeping
only what was best of the Arabic faith, the Kaaba and the Black Stone,
and by a judicious selection of the most feasible ideas which lay
imbedded in Jewish and Christian precepts, he might establish a code
that would supersede all others, and then might dictate to all Arabs
alike. What prophets had done, he would also do and do better."
(_Mohammed--R. F. Dibble._)

Such are the thoughts of a charlatan and _a_ demagogue. If Mohammed
actually had such ideas, we can never know; but a study of his further
actions and conquests surely shows that he must have had something of
the same trend of thought in mind.

His "fits" before the oncoming of a new Sura have been mentioned.
Eventually, he so perfected his technique that he could throw a
cataleptic fit and produce a message without any previous preparation.
He would drum up a crowd with his ludicrous snortings and puffings until
the resounding cry, "Inspiration hath descended on the Prophet!" assured
him that he had a sufficiently large audience to warrant the
out-spurting of a new Sura. While in a room that was obviously empty, he
declared that all seats were occupied by angels; he cultivated suave and
benign expression; he flattered and astounded his followers by telling
them facts which he had presumably acquired through private information;
he took the most painstaking care of his person, painting his eyes and
perfuming his entire body daily, and wearing his hair long. Ayesha, one
of the Prophet's wives, remarked that the Prophet loved three things:
women, scent and food, and that he had his heart's content of the first
two, but not of the last. In fact, Mohammed, himself, argued that these
two innocuous diversions intensified the ecstasy of his prayers. In the
Koran's description of heaven so much emphasis was put on food that a
jolly Jew objected on the grounds that such continual feasting must of
necessity be followed by a purgation. The Prophet, however, swore that
it would not even be necessary to blow the nose in Paradise, since all
bodily impurities would be carried off by a perspiration "as odoriferous
as musk."

When his wife Khadija was dying he comforted her with the assurance that
she, together with three other well-known women, the Virgin Mary,
Potiphar's wife, and "Kulthum," Moses' sister, would occupy his chamber
in Paradise.

On Mohammed's escape to Medina, a long series of holy wars began which,
like all holy wars, were characterized by extreme brutality. The Koran
of the period contains such pacific doctrines as these: "The sword is
the key of Heaven and Hell; a drop of blood shed in the cause of God, a
night spent in arms is of more avail than two months of fasting or
prayer; whosoever falls in battle, his sins are forgiven. At the day of
Judgment his wounds shall be resplendent as vermilion, and odoriferous
as musk; and the loss of limbs shall be supplied by the wings of angels
and cherubim ... God loveth not the Transgressors; kill them wheresoever
ye find them."

Mohammed, no less than many other religiously-minded emperors and tsars,
appears to have conducted himself in battle according to the wise
principle that a head without a halo is infinitely more desirable than a
halo without a head. Yet he was profoundly convinced that the ultimate
victory of Islam depended upon the sword. The Koran of this period
breathes defiance against the enemies of Islam on almost every page. Its
profuse maledictions, once confined to the evildoers of Mecca, now
include all unbelievers everywhere. When Mohammed once had captured a
fortress inhabited by a tribe of Jews, his judgment was, "The men shall
be put to death, the women and children sold into slavery, and the spoil
divided amongst the army." Then, trenches were dug, some seven hundred
men were marched out, forced to seat themselves in rows along the top of
the trenches, beheaded, and then tumbled into a long gaping grave.
Meanwhile, the Prophet looked on until, tiring of the monotonous
spectacle, he departed to amuse himself with a Jewess whose husband had
just perished.

He continued these conquests until, at his death, in 632, he was the
master of nearly all Arabia and revered almost as a god. Yet, when Omar,
his first lieutenant, captured Jerusalem in 636, he ensured the
conquered Jews and Christians free exercise of their religion, and the
security of their persons and their goods. But when the Crusaders took
Jerusalem in 1099, they massacred all the Mohammedans, and burnt the
Jews alive. It is estimated that 70,000 persons were put to death in
less than a week to attest the superior morality of the Christian faith.

The successors of Mohammed, the Caliphs, in less than a century
conquered Syria, Egypt, Babylonia, Persia, Turkestan, Spain, Northern
Africa, Sicily, and Southern France. Today, 160,000,000 are followers of
Mohammed,--a man who began as a humble religious leader, and ended as an
adroit politician and powerful general; a man who hid during battles,
who often broke faith with friend and foe alike, a charlatan and
demagogue of general intellectual incompetency, and a victim of mental
disease.


JESUS

When we come to consider the life of Jesus, a far different and more
intricate problem is met with. None but the most illogical and purposely
ignorant of religious apologists will admit that the life of Jesus has
been misrepresented by his followers to suit their particular aims. Had
the followers of the moralist Epictetus or the Rabbi Hillel written
lives of these two teachers they would be quite similar to the reputed
life of Jesus. The moral sentiments attributed to Christ in the Gospels
were borrowed from the Jewish rabbis and the numerous cults that
flourished in that age. The birth, death, and resurrection of Christ is
quite similar to the myths of that time concerning the savior gods
Adonis, Isis, Osiris, Attis, Mithra, and a multitude of others. (_For a
full exposition of the subject, the reader is referred to E. Carpenter,
"Pagan and Christian Creeds."_)

The evidence for the point of view that Jesus was actually a historic
character is so slight that such scholars as J. M. Robertson, Prof. W.
B. Smith, Professor Drews, Dr. P. L. Couchoud, and many others deny the
historic reality of Christ on the ground that the Gospels are totally
unreliable as history, that Paul bears no witness to a human Jesus, and
that the pagan and Jewish writers are strangely silent about the Messiah
Jesus.

There are in existence only twenty-four lines from Jewish and Pagan
writers referring to Jesus. These include a reference in Tacitus'
Annals, and brief references by Suetonius and Pliny the Younger. These
three references are considered spurious by many scholars, and even if
they were all to be accepted it would mean that the total pagan
testimony as to the historicity of Jesus is confined to three very vague
and brief references written a century after the reputed time of Jesus.
The longest reference to Jesus is in the writings of the Jewish
historian, Josephus. The passage referring to Jesus in his "Jewish
Antiquities" has been considered as spurious even by conservative
scholars. A group of scholars has always deemed it very probable,
however, that this spurious reference may have replaced an unfavorable
reference to Jesus in the original. Working on this theory, Dr. Eisler
has purged of interpolations this work by a painstaking and scholarly
investigation.

However, it must be pointed out that with regard to Jesus' actual
existence, what divided the Christians and non-Christians was not the
question whether or not Jesus existed; but the vastly more pertinent
and essentially different question whether or not the obscure Galilean
carpenter, executed by a Roman governor as king of the Jews, was really
a superhuman being who had overcome death, the longed-for-savior of
mankind, foretold by the Prophets, the only-begotten Son of God Himself.

To the Jews, Jesus was indeed a heretic and an agitator of the lower
orders; to the pagans, he was a magician who through sham miracles and
with subversive words had incited the people to rebellion, and as a
leader of a gang of desperate men had attempted to seize the royal crown
of Judaea, as others had done before and after him. The non-Christian
writers referred to Jesus as a wizard, a demagogue, and a rebel.

We are fortunate, at this date, to have brought to our attention a
masterful work by Dr. Robert Eisler, a work which will be as
revolutionary to the study of Christianity as was Darwin's "Origin of
the Species" in the realms of science; and, similarly, the former work
will be the basis upon which much progress will be made in a great
field. Dr. Eisler unfolds a great mass of hitherto unknown information
concerning the life, the actual appearance, and the doings of Jesus. He
definitely establishes the proof of Jesus' actual existence, and makes
clear many hitherto obscure utterances and deeds of this Prophet.

The descriptions which follow are based on the material in this work of
Dr. Eisler, "The Messiah Jesus."

In the complete statement of Josephus on Pilate's governorship, we find,
"At that time there appeared a certain man of magical power, if it is
permissible to call him a man, whom certain Greeks call a Son of God,
but his disciples, the True Prophet, said to raise the dead, and heal
all diseases. His nature and his form were human; a man of simple
appearance, mature age, small in stature, three cubits high,
_hunchbacked_, with a long face, long nose, and meeting eyebrows, so
that they who see him might be affrighted, with scanty hair but with a
parting in the middle of his head, after the manner of the Nazarites,
and with an undeveloped beard. Only in semblance was he superhuman for
he gave some astonishing and spectacular exhibitions. But again, if I
look at his commonplace physique, I, for one, cannot call him an angel.
And everything whatsoever he wrought through some invisible power, he
wrought through some word and a command. Some said of him, 'Our first
law giver is risen again, and displays many healings and magic arts.
Others said, 'He is sent from God.' Howbeit in many things he disobeyed
the law and kept not the Sabbath according to our fathers' custom.

"And many of the multitude followed after him and accepted his
teachings, and many souls were excited, thinking that thereby the Jewish
tribes might be freed from Roman hands. But it was his custom most of
the time to abide over against the city on the Mount of Olives, and
there, too, he bestowed his healings upon the people. And there
assembled unto him of helpers one hundred and fifty, and a multitude of
the mob.

"Now, when they saw his power, how he accomplished whatsoever he would
by a magic word, and when they had made known to him their will, that he
should enter into the city, cut down the Roman troops, and Pilate and
rule over us, he disdained us not. And having all flocked into
Jerusalem, they raised an uproar against Pilate, uttering blasphemies
alike against God and against Caesar.

"And when knowledge of it came to the Jewish leaders, they assembled
together, with the high priests and spake, 'We are powerless and too
weak to withstand the Romans. But seeing that the 'bow is bent,' we will
go and impart to Pilate what we have heard, and we shall be safe, lest
he hear of it from others and we be robbed of our substance and
ourselves slaughtered, and the children of Israel dispersed.

"And they went and imparted the matter to Pilate, and he sent and had
many of the multitude slain. And he had that wonder-worker brought up,
and after instituting an inquiry concerning him, he passed this sentence
upon him, 'He is a malefactor, a rebel, a robber thirsting for the
crown.' And they took him and crucified him according to the custom of
their fathers."

Such is the history of Jesus as contrasted with the myth of Jesus in the
New Testament. This description of the actual appearance of Jesus for
the first time gives us a clue to the mental and physical
characteristics of this Prophet.

It must be borne in mind that at the time that Jesus achieved manhood,
his people and his nation were under the complete domination of Rome,
and oppressed by a race whom the Jews looked upon as cursed barbarians
and idolaters. The country was overrun with religious zealots who
stormed over the cities and villages preaching the immediate destruction
of the world and the proximity of the long-awaited coming of the
Messiah.

The fact that Jesus had to bear the hard fate of a deformed body may go
far in helping to explain this remarkable character. It is common
knowledge how frequently weak and deformed children have to suffer from
the cruelty and neglect of environment, a factor which cannot but
produce a peculiar reaction on the childish mind which has a
far-reaching effect in later life. This accounts for Jesus' indifference
towards his mother and brothers; of a delicate constitution, he must
have suffered from insults a great deal more than the others, which
throws some light on the severe punishment demanded by Jesus for
comparatively harmless insults. Under such circumstances it is easy to
explain how every "neighbor," and next-of-kin, although to the weak
naturally an "enemy," came to be included in the sphere of that
all-embracing love which is the nucleus of Jesus' teaching. For the
cripple has to face the dilemma either of warping everything into a
powerful, misanthropic hatred, or else to overcome this feeling of
revenge for the high moral superiority of a Plato, Mendelssohn, or a
Kant. Jesus chose the latter of the two courses, and we may well imagine
that it was not at Golgotha that he had the first occasion to cry out,
"Father, forgive them for they know not what they do!"

In the case of Jesus, the whole paradoxical thought of his being the
vicarious sin-offering and world redeemer can best be understood as the
solution, proposed in the Deutero-Isaiah, of the question which had
occupied Job--to wit: Why must the innocent suffer? If the maimed in
body refuse to consider himself as forsaken by his God, as a sinner
punished for some guilt of which he is unconscious, he cannot but assume
that there is such a thing as a vocation to suffering, and believe in
the inscrutable plan of salvation in which his own life and sufferings
are called upon to play some part. Nothing but this conviction of being
thus elected can afford him the desired compensation for his depressed
and hampered ego.

A repressed nature of this type will, in seeking such a compensation,
escape from the harsh reality into the realm of dreams. This is the
basis of what the physician recognizes in hysteria, and in the mental
disease termed "Dementia Praecox." The glorious daydreams of the
millennium, the time of bliss when all strife and all hate will
disappear from the earth, when all the crooked will be made straight,
find their best explanation in this peculiarity. They console the
suffering and heavy-laden for the bitter reality which, in the light of
the old messianic prophecies, appears only as a nightmare, promptly to
be chased away by the dawn of a new day, a new, a perfect era. The
Davidic Jesus, in spite or rather because of his servile form, feels
that he is himself the secret incognito king of that wonderful realm,
the monarch whom God some time in the future, nay, right here and before
the passing of the present generation, will transform while at the same
time "revealing" his kingdom.

It is but natural that in the mental development of such individuals
they should seek to be great, glorious, and to achieve the supernatural,
since they, themselves, are denied the ordinary satisfactions. If, in
addition, such individuals believe that they have had a divine call, if
the disability of the body so preys on the mind that the sensitive
structure gives way to delusions, then there results an aberration from
the normal and usual processes of thought,--to be sure not the rabid,
violent form of mental disease, but yet a deviation from the normal
manner of thinking. Such was the case with the Prophet Jesus.

Afflicted in body but endowed with a sensitive mind, exposed to an
unusual environment of seething unrest and political ferment, and firmly
convinced in the current fancies regarding the approaching destruction
of the world, the conquest of the Evil Power, and the Reign of God,
Jesus became the subject of a delusion that he was the only true Messiah
who had been presaged by the prophets of old.

The greatest difficulty encountered in every attempt to present the life
and work of Jesus according to the evidence of his own words preserved
in the sources is the sharp, irreconcilable contradiction between the
so-called "fire and sword" sayings on the one side, and the beatitudes
on the peacemakers and the meek, the prohibition to kill, to be angry,
to resist wrong, and the command to love one's enemy, contained in the
Sermon on the Mount, on the other.
