breach between them was complete. It was now time to reconcile the leaders
of the Quraish tribe at Mecca. So the verse quoted above was abrogated by:
"We have seen thee turning thy face towards heaven, but we will have thee
turn to a Qibla, which shall please thee. Turn then thy face toward the
Holy Temple (of Mecca), and wherever ye be, turn your faces toward that
part." (Sura ii. 139.) The Faithful were consoled by the assurance that
though they had not done so hitherto, yet God would not let their {61}
faith be fruitless, "for unto man is God merciful, gracious." (v. 138.) The
doctrine of abrogation is brought in for a more personal matter in the
following case: "It is not permitted to thee to take other wives hereafter,
nor to change thy present wives for other women, though their beauty charm
thee, except slaves, whom thy right hand shall possess." (Sura xxxiii. 52.)
This is said by Beidawi, and other eminent Muslim divines, to have been
abrogated by a verse which though placed before it in the arrangement of
verses, was really delivered after it. The verse is: "O Prophet, we allow
thee thy wives whom thou hast dowered, and the slaves which thy right hand
possesseth out of the booty which God hath granted thee; and the daughters
of thy uncle, and the daughters of thy aunts, both on thy father's side,
and on thy mother's side, who have fled with thee (to Madina), and any
other believing woman, who hath given herself up to the Prophet; if the
Prophet desireth to wed her, it is a peculiar privilege for thee, above the
rest of the Faithful." (Sura xxxiii. 49.)

The Moghul Emperor Akbar, wishing to discredit the 'Ulama, in one of the
meetings so frequently held for discussion during his long reign,
propounded the question as to how many free born women a man might marry.
The lawyers answered that four was the number fixed by the Prophet. "Of
other women who seem good in your eyes marry two and two, and three and
three, and four and four." (Sura iv. 3.) The Emperor said that he had not
restricted himself to that number, and that Shaikh 'Abd-un-Nabi had told
him that a certain Mujtahid had had nine wives. The Mujtahid in question,
Ibn Abi Lailah reckoned the number allowed thus 2+3+4=9. Other learned men
counted in this way 2+2, 3+3, 4+4=18. The Emperor wished the meeting to
decide the point.

Again, the second verse of Sura lxxiii reads: "Stand up all night, except a
small portion of it, for prayer." According to a Tradition handed down by
'Ayesha the last verse {62} of this Sura was revealed a year later. It
makes the matter much easier. "God measureth the night and the day; he
knoweth that ye cannot count its hours aright, and therefore turneth to you
mercifully. Recite _then so much of the Quran as may be easy to you_." (v.
20.)

The following is an illustration of a verse abrogated, though there is no
verse to prove its abrogation. However, according to the Ijma' it has been
abrogated. "But alms are only to be given to the poor and the needy and to
those who collect them, and to those whose hearts are won to Islam." (Sura
ix. 60.) The clause--"to those whose hearts are won to Islam"--is now
cancelled.[57] Muhammad, to gain the hearts of those, who lately enemies,
had now become friends, and to confirm them in the faith, gave them large
presents from the spoils he took in war; but when Islam spread and became
strong, the 'Ulama agreed that such a procedure was not required and said
that the order was "mansukh."

The other verses abrogated relate to the Ramazan fast, to Jihad, the law of
retaliation, and other matters of social interest.

The doctrine of abrogation is now almost invariably applied by Musalman
controversialists to the Old and New Testaments, which they say are
abrogated by the Quran. "His (Muhammad's) law is the abrogator of every
other law."[58] This is not, however, a legitimate use of the doctrine.
According to the best and most ancient Muslim divines, abrogation refers
entirely to the Quran and the Traditions, and even then is confined to
commands and prohibitions. "Those who imagine it to be part of the
Muhammadan creed that one law has totally repealed another, are utterly
mistaken--we hold no such doctrine."[59] In the Tafsir-i-Itifaq it is
written: "Abrogation affects those {63} matters which God has confined to
the followers of Muhammad, and one of the chief advantages of it is that
the way is made easy." In the Tafsir-i-Mazhiri we find: "Abrogation refers
only to commands and prohibitions, not to facts or historical
statements."[60] Again, no verse of the Quran, or a Tradition can be
abrogated unless the abrogating verse is distinctly opposed to it in
meaning. If it is a verse of the Quran, we must have the authority of
Muhammad himself for the abrogation; if a Tradition, that of a Companion.
Thus "the word of a commentator or a Mujtahid is not sufficient unless
there is a 'genuine Tradition' (Hadis-i-Sahih), to show the matter clearly.
The question of the abrogation of any previous command depends on
historical facts with regard to the abrogation, not on the mere opinion of
a commentator." It cannot be shown that either Muhammad or a Companion ever
said that the Bible was abrogated. This rule, whilst it shows that the
assertion of modern controversialists on this point is void of foundation,
also illustrates another point to which I have often called attention,
_viz._; that in Islam all interpretation must be regulated by
traditionalism.

Additions were occasionally made. Thus when it was revealed that those who
stay at home were not before God as those who go forth to war, Abdullah and
Ibn Um-Maktum said: 'and what if they were blind.' The Prophet asked for
the shoulder-blade on which the verse was written. He then had a spasmodic
convulsion. After his recovery he made Zeid add the words, "free from
trouble." So now the whole verse reads thus: "Those believers who sit at
home _free from trouble_ (_i.e._, bodily infirmity), and those who do
valiantly in the cause of God, with their substance and their persons,
shall not be treated alike." (Sura iv. 97). Years after, Zeid said: "I
fancy I see the words now on the shoulder-blade near a crack."

{64}

The question of the eternal nature of the Quran does not properly come
under the head of 'Ilm-i-usul, but it is a dogma fondly cherished by many
Muslims. In the days of the Khalif Al-Mamun this question was fiercely
debated. The Freethinkers, whilst believing in the Mission of Muhammad,
asserted that the Quran was created, by which statement they meant that the
revelation came to him in a subjective mode, and that the language was his
own. The book was thus brought within the reach of criticism. In the year
212, A.H. the Khalif issued a decree to the effect that all who held the
Quran to be uncreated were to be declared guilty of heresy. But the Khalif
himself was a notorious rationalist, and so the orthodox, though they
remained quiet, remained unconvinced. The arguments used on the orthodox
side are, that both the words and their pronunciation are eternal, that the
attempt to draw a distinction between the word as it exists in the Divine
Mind and as it appears in the Quran is highly dangerous. In vain do their
opponents argue that, if the Quran is uncreated, two Eternal Beings are in
existence. To this it is answered: "This is the honourable Quran, written
in the preserved Tablet." (Sura lvi. 76). A Tradition is also adduced which
states: "God wrote the Thora (Law) with His own hand, and with His own hand
He created Adam; and also in the Quran it is written, 'and We wrote for him
upon the tables a monition concerning every matter,' in reference to the
tables of the Law given to Moses." If God did this for former prophets and
their works, how much more, it is argued, should he not have done it for
the last and greatest of the prophets, and the noble Quran? It is not easy
to get a correct definition of the term "the uncreated Quran," but it has
been put thus: "The Word as it exists in the mind of God is 'Kalam-i-Nafsi'
(spiritual word), something unwritten and eternal. It is acknowledged by
the Ijma'-i-Ummat (consent of the Faithful), the Traditions, and by other
prophets that God {65} speaks. The Kalam-i-Nafsi then is eternal, but the
actual words, style, and eloquence are created by God; so also is the
arrangement and the miraculous nature of the book." This seems to be a
reasonable account of the doctrine, though there are theologians who hold
that the very words are eternal. The doctrine of abrogation clashes with
this idea, but they meet the objection by their theory of absolute
predestination. This accounts for the circumstances which necessitated the
abrogation, for the circumstances, as well as the abrogated verses, were
determined on from all eternity.

This concludes the consideration of the exegesis of the Quran, a book
difficult and uninteresting for a non-Muslim to read, but one which has
engaged and is still engaging the earnest thoughts of many millions of the
human race. Thousands of devout students in the great theological schools
of Cairo, Stamboul, Central Asia and India are now plodding through this
very subject of which I have here been treating; soon will they go forth as
teachers of the book they so much revere. How utterly unfit that training
is to make them wise men in any true sense of the word, how calculated to
render them proud, conceited, and scornful of other creeds, its rigid and
exclusive character shows. Still, it is a marvellous book; for twelve
hundred years and more it has helped to mould the faith, animate the
courage, cheer the despondency of multitudes, whether dwellers in the wild
uplands of Central Asia, in Hindustan, or on the shores of the
Mediterranean. The Turanian and the Aryan, the Arab and the Negro, alike
learn its sonorous sentences, day by day repeat its opening clauses, and
pray in its words as their fathers prayed before them.

Next to the act of testifying to the unity of God, the Quran is the great
bond of Islam. No matter from what race the convert may have come, no
matter what language he may speak, he must learn in Arabic, and repeat by
rote portions of the Quran in every act of public worship.

The next subject for consideration is that of the {66} Traditions, or the
second branch of the science of 'Ilm-i-usul. The Traditions contain the
record of all that Muhammad did and said. It is the belief of every Muslim,
to whatever sect he belongs, that the Prophet not only spake but also acted
under a divine influence. The mode of the inspiration is different from
that of the Quran. There the revelation was objective. In the Prophet's
sayings recorded in the Traditions the inspiration is subjective, but still
a true inspiration. This belief places the Traditions in a place second
only to the Quran; it makes them a true supplement to that book, and thus
they not only throw light on its meaning, but themselves form the basis on
which doctrines may be established. Without going so far as to say that
every Tradition by itself is to be accepted as an authority in Islam, it
may be distinctly asserted that there can be no true conception formed of
that system if the Traditions are not studied and taken into account. So
important a branch of Muslim theology is it, that the study of the
Traditions is included in the 'Ilm-i-usul, or science of exegesis. Some
account of them, therefore, naturally forms part of this chapter.

The first four Khalifs were called the Khulafa-i-Rashidin that is, those
who could guide others aright. They had been friends and Companions of the
Prophet, and the Faithful could always appeal to them in cases of doubt.
The Prophet had declared that Islam must be written in the hearts of men.
There was therefore an unwillingness to commit his sayings to writing. They
were handed down by word of mouth. As no argument was so effectual in a
dispute as "a saying" of the Prophet, the door was opened by which spurious
Traditions could be palmed off on the Faithful. To prevent this, a number
of strict rules were framed, at the head of which stands the Prophet's
saying, itself a Tradition: "Convey to other persons none of my words
except those which ye know of a surety. Verily, he who purposely represents
my {67} words wrongly will find a place for himself nowhere but in fire."
To enforce this rule, it was laid down that the relator of a Tradition must
also repeat its "Isnad," or chain of authorities, as: "I heard from such an
one, who heard from such an one," and so on, until the chain reaches the
Prophet himself. Each person, too, in this "Isnad," must have been well
known for his good character and retentive memory. This failed, however, to
prevent a vast number of manifestly false Traditions becoming current; so
men set themselves to the work of collecting and sifting the great mass of
Tradition that in the second century of Islam had begun to work untold
evil. These men are called "Muhadisin," or "collectors of Tradition." The
Sunnis and the Wahhabis recognise six such men, and their collections are
known as the "Sihah-Sittah," or six correct books. They are the
following:--

(1). The _Sahih-i-Bukhari_, called after Abu Abdullah Muhammad
Ibn-i-Isma'il, a native of Bukhara. He was born A.H. 194. He was a man of
middle height, spare in frame, and as a boy totally blind. The grief of his
father was on this account intense; but one day in a dream he saw the
Patriarch Abraham, who said to him: "God on account of thy grief and sorrow
has granted sight to thy son." The sight being thus restored, at the age of
ten he went to school, and began to learn the Traditions by heart. After
his education was finished, a famous Muhadis named Dakhli came to Bukhara.
One day the youthful Bukhari ventured to correct the famous man. It was an
astounding piece of audacity, but the youth was proved to be in the right.
This set him on the work of collecting and sifting the Traditions. At the
early age of sixteen he was able to remember fifteen thousand. In course of
time he collected 600,000 Traditions. The result of his examination and
selection was that he approved of seven thousand two hundred and
seventy-five. These are now recorded in his great work, the
Sahih-i-Bukhari. It {68} is said that he never sat down to examine a
Tradition without first performing a legal ablution, and repeating two
rak'at prayers. He then said: "O Lord, let me not make a mistake." For
sixteen years he lived in a mosque and died much respected at the age of
sixty-four.

(2). _Sahih-i-Muslim._ Muslim Ibn-i-Hajjaj was born at Nishapur, a city of
Khorasan. He collected about 300,000 Traditions, from which he made his
collection. He is said to have been a very just man, and willing to oblige
all who sought his advice. In fact, this willingness to oblige was the
indirect cause of his death. One day he was sitting as usual in the mosque
when some people came to ask him about a Tradition. As he could not
discover it in the books he had with him, he went to his house to search
there. The people brought him a basket of dates. He went on eating and
searching, but unfortunately he ate so many dates that he died. (A.H. 261.)

(3). _Sunan-i-Abu Daud._ Abu Daud Sajistani, a native of Seistan, was born
A.H. 202. He was a great traveller, and went to all the chief places of
Musalman learning. In knowledge of the Traditions, in devotion, in piety,
he was unrivalled. He collected about 500,000 Traditions, of which he
selected four thousand eight hundred for his book.

(4). _Jami'-i-Tirmizi._ Abu Isa' Muhammad Tirmizi was born at Tirmiz in the
year A.H. 209. He was a disciple of Bukhari. Ibn Khallikan says this work
is "the production of a well-informed man: its exactness is
proverbial."[61]

(5). _Sunan-i-Nasai._ Abu Abd-ur-Rahman Nasai was born at Nasa, in
Khorasan, in the year A.H. 214, and died A.H. 303. It is recorded of him,
with great approbation, that he fasted every other day, and had four wives
and many slaves. This book is considered of great value. He met with his
death in rather a sad way. He had compiled a book on the virtues of 'Ali,
and as the people of {69} Damascus were at that time inclined to the heresy
of the Kharigites, he wished to read his book in the mosque of that place.
After he had read a little way, a man arose and asked him whether he knew
aught of the praises of Muavia, 'Ali's deadly enemy. He replied that he did
not. This answer enraged the people, who beat him so severely that he died
soon after.

(6). _Sunan-i-Ibn Majah._ Ibn Majah[62] was born at 'Irak A.H. 209. This
work contains 4,000 Traditions.

The Shia'hs reject these books and substitute five books[63] of their own
instead. They are of a much later date, the last one, indeed, having been
compiled more than four hundred years after the Hijra.

The belief which underlies the question of the authority of the Traditions
is that before the Throne of God there stands a 'preserved Table,' on which
all that can happen, and all that has ever entered, or will enter, the mind
of man is 'noted in a distinct writing.' Through the medium of Gabriel, the
Prophet had access to this. It follows then that the words of the Prophet
are the words of God.

Of the four great "Canonical Legists" of Islam, Ahmad Ibn Hanbal was the
greatest collector of Traditions. It is said that he knew by heart no less
than one million. Of these he incorporated thirty thousand into his system
of jurisprudence. That system is now almost obsolete. Abu Hanifa, who is
said to have accepted only eighteen Traditions as authentic, founded a
system which is to this day the most powerful in Islam. The Hanifites,
however, as well as other Muslims, acknowledge the six standard collections
of Traditions as direct revelations of the will of {70} God. They range
over a vast number of subjects, and furnish a commentary on the Quran. The
Prophet's personal appearance, his mental and moral qualities, his actions,
his opinions, are all recorded over and over again. Many questions of
religious belief are largely founded on the Traditions, and it is to them
we must go for an explanation of much of the ritual of Islam. It is very
difficult for any one, who has not lived in long and friendly intercourse
with Muslims, to realize how much their religious life and opinions, their
thought and actions, are based on the Traditions.

Having thus shown the importance of the Traditions, I now proceed to enter
a little into detail on the question of the rules framed concerning them.
The classification adopted by different authors may vary in some
subordinate points; but the following account is adopted from a standard
Muhammadan work. A Tradition may be Hadis-i-Quali, that is, an account of
something the Prophet said; or Hadis-i-Fa'li, a record of something which
he did; or Hadis-i-Taqriri, a statement of some act performed by other
persons in his presence, and which action he did not forbid.

The Traditions may be classed under two general heads:--

First.--_Hadis-i-Mutawatir_, that is, "an undoubted Tradition," the Isnad,
or chain of narrators of which is perfect, and in which chain each narrator
possessed all the necessary qualifications for his office.[64] Some
authorities say there are only a few of these Traditions extant, but most
allow that the following is one: "There are no good works except with
intention," for example, a man may fast, but, unless he has the intention
of fasting firmly in his mind, he gains no spiritual reward by so doing.

Second.--_Hadis-i-Ahad._ The authority of this class is {71} theoretically
somewhat less than that of the first, but practically it is the same.

This class is again sub-divided into two:--

(1). _Hadis-i-Sahih_, or a genuine Tradition. It is not necessary to go
into the sub-divisions of this sub-division. A Tradition is Sahih if the
narrators have been men of pious lives, abstemious in their habits, endowed
with a good memory, free from blemish, and persons who lived at peace with
their neighbours. The following also are Sahih, though their importance as
authorities varies. I arrange them in the order of their value. Sahih
Traditions are those which are found in the collections made by Bukhari and
Muslim, or in the collection of either of the above, though not in both;
or, if not mentioned by either of these famous collectors, if it has been
retained in accordance with their canons for the rejection or retention of
Traditions; or lastly, if retained in accordance with the rules of any
other approved collector. For each of these classes there is a distinct
name.

(2). _Hadis-i-Hasan._ The narrators of this class are not of such good
authority as those of the former with regard to one or two qualities; but
these Traditions should be received as of equal authority as regards any
practical use.[65] It is merely as a matter of classification that they
rank second.

In addition to these names, there are a number of other technical terms
which have regard to the personal character of the narrators, the Isnad,
and other points. A few may be mentioned.

(1). _Hadis-i-Z'aif_, or a weak Tradition. The narrators of it have been
persons whose characters were not above reproach, whose memories were bad,
or who, worse still, were addicted to "bid'at," innovation, a habit now, as
then, a crime in the eyes of all true Muslims. All agree that a {72} "weak
Tradition" has little force; but few rival theologians agree as to which
are, and which are not, "weak Traditions."

