[Footnote 94: The King of Oman, together with the people of Oman,
embraced Islam during A.H. 8 and 9. The people of Oman were of the
Azdite stock.]

[Footnote 95: Already described at page 43.]

[Footnote 96: A branch of Saad-al-Ashira from the Kahtanite stock. This
tribe inhabited Yemen. They had some peculiar prejudice against eating
the heart of an animal. Mohammad had caused their chief to break his
superstition, which he did by making him eat the roasted heart of an
animal.

But they returned disgusted when told that his (the chief's) mother who
had committed infanticide was in hell. However they sent another
deputation a second time and finally embraced Islam.]

[Footnote 97: They settled in Dumat-ul-Jundal, now Jal-al-Jowf, north of
Arabia. They were a tribe of the Bani Kozaa descended from Himyar.]

[Footnote 98: A tribe of the Kahtanite stock at Yemen. They lived in a
hilly country of that name in Yemen.]

[Footnote 99: They were a tribe of the Kahtanite stock on the coast of
Yemen.]

[Footnote 100: A clan of the Bani Aamir bin Saasaa of the Hawazin tribe
already described.]

[Footnote 101: Descendants of Khazima of the Moaddite stock.]

[Footnote 102: The Bani Kinda princes, Vail bin Hijar and Al-Ash-as bin
Kays; the former, the chief of the coast, and the latter, the chief of
the Hazaramaut in the south of Arabia. They with their whole clans
embraced Islam. Bani Kinda were a powerful tribe of the Kahalanite
stock.]

[Footnote 103: A clan of Ozra from Kozaa described at page 46.]

[Footnote 104: Descendants of Ghatafan of the Moaddite stock.]

[Footnote 105: They inhabited the sea-coast of Yemen, and were a tribe
of Muzhie of the Kahtanite stock.]

[Footnote 106: A branch of the tribe of Aamir bin Saasaa.]

[Footnote 107: A branch of Zobian.]

[Footnote 108: They were a tribe of the Kahtanite stock, residing in
Yemen. Their deputation consisted of two hundred persons. It is said
this was the last deputation received by Mohammad. Some time before this
Ali was sent to the Bani Nakh-a and other tribes of the Mudhij stock in
Yemen.]

[Footnote 109: A tribe of Kozaa of the Himyarite stock at Yemen.]

[Footnote 110: A sub-tribe of Kozaa inhabiting Syria described at page
46.]

[Footnote 111: A tribe of Muzhij of the Kahtanite stock at Yemen.]

[Footnote 112: They were a clan of the Bani Aamir bin Saasaa already
described.]

[Footnote 113: A tribe of the Kozaa of the Moaddite stock, and according
to some from Yemen.]

[Footnote 114: Descendants of Hazaramaut of the Kahtanite stock at
Yemen.]

[Footnote 115: A clan of the Bani Hanifa, descendants of Bakr bin Wail
already described.]

[Footnote 116: A clan of the Bani Shaiban, the descendants of Bakr bin
Wail already mentioned.]

[Footnote 117: The Bani Sakeef (Thackif) were a branch of the Mazar
tribes of the Moaddite stock. They were a sub-tribe of the Hawazin and
sister tribe to the Bani Adwan, Ghatafan, and Suleim. They (the Bani
Sakeef) lived at Tayif and worshipped the idol _Lat_ or _Taqhia_. Orwa,
a chief of Tayif, had gone to Medina to embrace Islam. His first
generous impulse was to return to Tayif and invite his fellow-citizens
to share in the blessings imparted by the new faith. Upon his making
public his conversion, he was wounded by a mob and suffered martyrdom.
But he left a favourable impression of Islam at Tayif. Their deputation
consisted of six chiefs with fifteen or twenty followers. The Prophet
received them gladly and pitched a tent for their accommodation in the
court of his mosque. Every evening after supper he paid them there a
visit and instructed them in the faith till it was dark. Sir W. Muir
writes:--"The martyrdom of Orwa compromised the inhabitants of Tayif,
and forced to continue the hostile course they had previously been
pursuing. But they began to suffer severely from the marauding attacks
of Bani Hawazin under Malik. That chief, according to his engagement,
maintained the increasing predatory warfare against them."--Life of
Mahomet, Vol. IV, page 204. At page 155 he says regarding Malik,--"being
confirmed in his chiefship he engaged to maintain a constant warfare
with the citizens of Tayif." But there was no such engagement with
Malik. The authority (Hishamee) referred to by Sir W. Muir does not
speak anything of the alleged engagement. _Vide_ Hishamee, page 879.
Hishamee has only so much that Mohammad made Malik chief of those who
were converted from the tribe. These were the clans of Somala, Salma,
and Fahm, and that he used to fight with them against the Sakifites. Sir
W. Muir further writes that the inhabitants of Tayif said among
themselves: "We have not strength to fight against the Arab tribe all
around that have plighted their faith to Mahomet, _and bound themselves
to fight in his cause_" (Vol. IV, p. 205). The italics are mine and
these words are not to be found in the original authorities. Hishamee
(page 914) has _Bayaoo va Aslamoo_, _i.e._, they have plighted and
submitted (or converted to Islam).]

[Footnote 118: Descendants of the Kozaa inhabited the hills of that name
(Salaman).]

[Footnote 119: Descendants and branch of Bakr bin Wail.]

[Footnote 120: A tribe of the Kahtanite stock from Yemen.]

[Footnote 121: The Bani Taghlib bin Wail were a tribe of the Moaddite
stock of Meccan origin and a sister tribe to the Bani Bakr bin Wail.
Their wars are famous in the annals of Arabia. The war of Basus has been
already alluded to under Bani Bakr. These tribes, the Bani Bakr and
Taghlib, were located in Yemama, Bahrein, Najd, and Tihama, but lastly
the Bani Taghlib had emigrated to Mesopotamia and professed the
Christian faith. The members of their deputation to Mohammad wore golden
crosses. When invited to Islam, they did not embrace it, but promised to
allow their children to become Moslems. Mohammad allowed them to
maintain unchanged their profession of Christianity. Their Christianity
was of a notoriously superficial character. "The Taghlib," said Ali, the
fourth Khalif, "are not Christians; they have borrowed from Christianity
only the custom of drinking wine."--Dozy _Historie_, i, 20.]

[Footnote 122: A clan of Kinda from the sub-tribe of Sakun at Yemen.]

[Footnote 123: The Bani Tamim were descendants of Tabikha bin Elyas of
the Moaddite stock. They are famous in the history of Najd, the
northeastern desert of which from the confines of Syria to Yemama they
inhabited. They were at constant warfare with the Bani Bakr bin Abd
Monat, descendants of Kinana of the Moaddite stock, from 615 to 630 A.D.
All the branches of the tribe which had not yet converted to Islam were
now converted in A.H. 9.]

[Footnote 124: The Bani Tay was a great tribe of the Kahtanite stock of
Yemen, had moved northwards, and settled in the mountains of Aja and
Salma to the north of Najd and Hijaz and the town of Tyma. They had
adopted Christianity, but some of them were Jews and Pagans. Their
intertribal war has been alluded to in para. 26. The whole tribe now
embraced Islam. "A deputation from the Bani Tay, headed by their chief,
Zeid-al-Khail, came to Medina to ransom the prisoners, soon after Ali's
expedition. Mahomet was charmed with Zeid, of whose fame both as a
warrior and a poet he had long heard. He changed his name to Zeid _al
Kheir_ (_the beneficent_), granted him a large tract of country, and
sent him away laden with presents."

Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, p. 178.]

[Footnote 125: They were a branch of Sad-al-Ashira of the Mazhij tribe
of the Kahtanite stock. They inhabited the sea-coast of Yemen.]


[Sidenote: All the conversions, individual and tribal, without any
compulsion.]

32. Thus all these tribal conversions and the speedy spread of Islam in
the whole of Arabia was accomplished without any resort to arms,
compulsion, threat, or "the scymitar in one hand and the Koran in the
other." The Pagan Arabs, the Christians and the Jews, those who embraced
Islam, adopted it joyfully and voluntarily. Islam had been much
persecuted for many years from the third year of its Prophet's mission
to the sixth year after the Hegira--a period of about sixteen years, but
it flourished alike during persecutions and oppositions as well as
during periods of peace and security of the Moslems. It was the result
of Mohammad's staunch adherence to the uncompromising severity of his
inflexible principles of preaching the divine Truth and his sincere
belief in his own mission that he bore steadfastly all the hardships of
persecutions at Mecca and the horrors of the aggressive wars of the
Koreish and others at Medina, and persuaded the whole of Arabia, Pagan,
Jewish and Christian, to adopt Islam voluntarily.[126]

[Footnote 126: The rebellion of almost the whole of Arabia--wrongly
called apostasy--after the death of Mohammad was chiefly against the
Government of Abu Bakr, the first Khalifa of the Republic of Islam. No
such paramount power over the whole of Arabia was ever vested in the
chiefs of Mecca, and the Arabs were unaccustomed to this new form of
Government. They had neither rebelled against Islam, nor apostatized
from their religion, except a very few of them who had attached
themselves to Moseilama for a short time.]


[Sidenote: Mohammad was not favoured with circumstances round him.]

33. It was not an easy task for Mohammad to have converted the Arabs
from their national idolatry to a religion of pure and strict
monotheism. The aspect of Arabia was strictly conservative, and there
were no prospects of hopeful changes. The indigenous idolatry and
deep-rooted superstition, the worship of visible and material objects of
devotion,--idols and unshaped stones,--something that the eyes can see
and the hands can handle,--and the dread of invisible genii and other
evil spirits, held the Arab mind in a rigorous and undisputed thraldom.
Arabia was obstinately fixed in the profession of idolatry which the
Peninsula being thickly overspread, widely diffused and thoroughly
organized, was supported by national pride and latterly by the sword.

     "It was," writes Dr. Marcus Dods, "certainly no hopeful task which
     Mohammed undertook when he proposed by the influence of religion to
     combine into one nation tribes so incapable of being deeply
     influenced by any religion, and so irreconcilably opposed to one
     another; to abolish customs which had the sanction of immemorial
     usage; and to root out an idolatry, which, if it had no profound
     hold upon the spiritual nature, was at least bound up with old
     family traditions and well-understood tribal interests."[127]

The sacrifices made to, and the requirements essential to Islam, its
numerous positive prohibitions, the immediate repudiation of old
prejudices, the renunciation of all sorts of idolatry and superstition,
the throwing aside of favourite idols and the abandoning of licentious
rites and customs, the total abstinence from much-relished vices, the
demand for producing practical effect on the will and character, and the
reaping of material fruits from holy and religious life--were barriers
insurmountable for the speedy progress of Islam.

Notwithstanding these impediments Mohammad succeeded, by the influence
of his religion, in combining into one nation the wild and independent
tribes, and putting a stop to their internecine wars; in abolishing the
custom which had the sanction of immemorial usage; and in rooting out
the national idolatry of indigenous growth, without compromising his
inflexible principles of truth and sincerity and honesty; and without
adopting the superstitions and vices of the people.

     Dr. Mosheim thinks that, "the causes of this new religion's rapid
     progress are not difficult to be discovered: Mahomet's law itself
     was admirably fitted to the natural disposition of man, but
     especially to the manners, opinions and vices prevalent among the
     people of the East; for it was extremely simple proposing few
     things to be believed; nor did it enjoin many and difficult duties
     to be performed, or such as laid severe restraints on the
     propensities."[128]

It is manifest from the history of religions that the people generally
try their best to obtain religion's sanction for the vices prevalent
among them. But there is no doubt in this that Mohammad never sanctioned
the idolatries and superstitions of the Arabs, nor he framed his
doctrines according to the opinions and fancies of the people. He
preached vehemently against everything he found blamable in the people;
he spared not their dear idols and beloved gods and the dreaded genii,
nor accommodated his preaching and reform to indulge them in their evil
practices; nor did he adopt any of the vices current among the people
into his system.

Mohammad certainly did lay stress on the propensities of the mind and
made the actions of the heart answerable to God, and preferred inward
holiness to outside form.

     53. "The heart is prone to evils."--Sura XII.

     38. "The hearing and the sight and the heart, each of these shall
     be inquired of."--Sura XVI.

     225. "God will not punish you for a mistake in your oaths; but He
     will punish you for that which your hearts have assented to. God is
     gracious, merciful."

     284. "Whatever is in the Heavens and in the Earth is God's, and
     whether ye disclose what is in your minds or conceal it, God will
     reckon with you for it; and whom He pleaseth will He forgive, and
     whom he pleaseth will He punish; for God is All-powerful."--Sura
     II.

     5. "And unless made with intent of heart, mistakes in this matter
     shall be no crimes in you."--Sura XXXIII.

The teachings of the Koran make our natural inclination subject to
regulation. It lays stress upon the heart of men. Note the following
injunctions regarding internal purity:

     120. "Abandon the outside iniquity and its inside."--Sura VI.

     152. "Come not near the pollutions outside or inward."--_Ibid._

     31. "Say: Truly my Lord hath forbidden filthy actions whether open
     or secret, and iniquity and unjust violence."--Sura VIII.

Referring to Dr. Mosheim's cause of the spread of Islam, I will quote
Henry Hallam's opinion regarding the causes of the success of Islam.

Henry Hallam, after enumerating the three important causes of the
success of Islam, the first of which is "those just and elevated notions
of the divine nature and of moral duties, the gold-ore that pervades the
dross of the Koran, which were calculated to strike a serious and
reflecting people," and explaining the two others which are not against
us, he says:--

     "It may be expected that I should add to this what is commonly
     considered as a distinguishing mark of Mohammedanism,--its
     indulgence to voluptuousness. But this appears to be greatly
     exaggerated. Although the character of its founder may have been
     tainted by sensuality as ferociousness, I do not think that he
     relied upon inducements of the former kind for the diffusion of his
     system. We are not to judge of this by rules of Christian purity,
     or of European practice. If polygamy was a prevailing usage in
     Arabia, as is not questioned, its permission gave no additional
     license to the proselytes of Mohammed, who will be found rather to
     have narrowed the unbounded liberty of oriental manners in this
     respect; while his decided condemnation of adultery and of
     incestuous connections, so frequent among barbarous nations, does
     not argue a very lax and accommodating morality. A devout Mussulman
     exhibits much more of the stoical than the epicurean character. Nor
     can any one read the Koran without being sensible that it breathes
     an austere and scrupulous spirit. And in fact, the founder of a new
     religion or sect is little likely to obtain permanent success by
     indulging the vices or luxuries of mankind. I should rather be
     disposed to reckon the severity of Mohammed's discipline among the
     causes of its influence. Precepts of ritual observance, being
     always definite and unequivocal, are less likely to be neglected,
     after their obligation has been acknowledged than those of moral
     virtue. Thus the long fasting, the pilgrimages, and regular prayers
     and ablutions, the constant almsgiving, the abstinence from
     stimulating liquors, enjoined by the Koran, created a visible
     standard of practice among its followers, and preserved a continual
     recollection of their law.

     "But the prevalence of Islam in the lifetime of its Prophet, and
     during the first ages of its existence, was chiefly owing to the
     spirit of martial energy that he infused into it. The religion of
     Mohammed is as essentially a military system as the institution of
     chivalry in the west of Europe. The people of Arabia, a race of
     strong passions and sanguinary temper, inured to habits of pillage
     and murder, found in the law of their native prophet not a license,
     but a command, to desolate the world, and the promise of all that
     their glowing imaginations could anticipate of Paradise annexed to
     all in which they most delighted upon earth."[129]

This is sufficient to refute the opinion of Dr. Mosheim. But what
Hallam says regarding the prevalence of Islam in the lifetime of the
Prophet, and during the first ages of its existence, that "the people of
Arabia, a race of strong passions and sanguinary temper, inured to
habits of pillage and murder, found in the law of their native prophet
not a license, but a command, to desolate the world," is untenable.
There was neither a command nor a license to desolate the world, nor was
any person or tribe converted to Islam with that object in view. All the
teachings of the Koran and the history of the early spread of Islam
falsify such an idea.

[Footnote 127: Mohammed, Buddha and Christ, by Marcus Dods, D.D., page
83.]

[Footnote 128: Mosheim's Ecclesiastical History, Book II, Chap. III,
page 73.]

[Footnote 129: Hallam's Middle Ages, Vol. II, pp. 118-9.]


[Sidenote: Mohammad's unwavering belief in his own mission and his
success show him to be a true prophet.]

34. I will pause here for a while, and ask the indulgence of the reader
to reflect upon the circumstances of the persecutions, insults and
injuries, expulsion and attack suffered by Mohammad and his early
followers,[130] and his unwavering adherence to preach against the
gross idolatry and immorality of his people, which all show his sincere
belief in his own mission, and his possession of an irresistible inward
impulse to publish the Divine Truth of his Revelations regarding the
unity in the Godhead and other moral reforms. His preachings of
monotheism, and his enjoining righteousness, and forbidding evil deeds,
were not attended to for many years with material success. In proportion
as he preached against the gross idolatry and superstition of his
people, he was subjected to ridicule and scorn, and finally to an
inveterate persecution which ruined his and his follower's fortune. But
he unflinchingly kept his path; no threats and no injuries hindered him
from still preaching to the ungodly people a purer and higher theology
and better morality than had ever been set before them. He claimed no
temporal power, no spiritual domination; he asked but for simple
toleration, for free permission to win men by persuasion into the way of
truth. He declared he was sent neither to compel conviction by
miracles, nor to constrain outward profession by the sword.[131] Does
this leave any doubt of the strong conviction in his mind, as well as in
the truth of his claim, to be a man sent by God to preach the Divine
Perfection, and to teach mankind the ways of righteousness? He honestly
and sincerely conveyed the message which he had received or which he
conscientiously or intuitively believed to have received from his God
and which had all the signs and marks of truth in itself. What is meant
by a True Prophet or a Revelation is not more than what we find in the
case of Mohammad.[132]

The general office and main business of a prophet is to proclaim to
mankind the Divine Perfection, to teach publicly purer theology and
higher morality, to enjoin the people to do what is right and just, and
to forbid what is wrong and bad. It is neither a part of the prophet to
predict future events, nor to show supernatural miracles. And further, a
prophet is neither immaculate nor infallible. The Revelation is a
natural product of human faculties. A prophet feels that his mind is
illumined by God, and the thoughts which are expressed by him and spoken
or written under this influence are to be regarded as the words of God.
This illumination of the mind or the effect of the Divine Influence
differ in any prophet according to the capacity of the recipient, or
according to the circumstances--physical, moral, and religious--in which
he is placed.

[Footnote 130: The early followers of Mohammad bore persecutions and
exile with patience and steadfastness; and never recanted. Look to the
increasing number of these early Moslems, their magnanimous forbearance,
and the spontaneous abandonment of their dear homes and relations, and
their defending their Prophet with their blood. The number of Christian
believers during the whole lifetime of Christ was not more than 120 (Act
I, 15). They had a material view of the Messiah's kingdom, and had fled
at the first sound of danger. Two of the disciples when walking to
Emmaus observed, "We trusted that it had been He who should have
redeemed Israel," and the apostle asked Jesus after the so-called
resurrection, "Lord, wilt Thou at this time restore the kingdom of
Israel?"

"During the periods thus indicated as possible for comparison,
persecution and rejection were the fate of both. But the thirteen years'
ministry of Mahomet had brought about a far greater change to the
external eye than the whole lifetime of Christ. The apostles fled at the
first sound of danger, and however deep the inner work may have been in
the 500 by whom our Lord was seen, it had produced as yet but little
outward action. There was among them no spontaneous quitting of their
homes, nor emigration by hundreds, such as distinguished the early
Moslems; nor any rapturous resolution by the converts of a foreign city
to defend the Prophet with their blood."--The Life of Mahomet by Sir W.
Muir, Vol. II, page 274.]

[Footnote 131: "Let us for a moment look back to the period when a ban
was proclaimed at Mecca against all the citizens, whether professed
converts or not, who espoused his cause; when they were shut up in the
_Sheb_ or quarter of Abu Talib, and there for three years without
prospect of relief endured want and hardship. Those must have been
steadfast and mighty motives which enabled him amidst all this
opposition and apparent hopelessness of success, to maintain his
principles unshaken. No sooner was he relieved from confinement, than,
despairing of his native city, he went forth to Tayif and summoned its
rulers and inhabitants to repentance; he was solitary and unaided, but
he had a message, he said, from his Lord. On the third day he was driven
out of the town with ignominy, blood trickling from the wounds inflicted
on him by the populace. He retired to a little distance, and there
poured forth his complaint to God: then he returned to Mecca, there to
carry on the same outwardly hopeless cause with the same high confidence
in its ultimate success. We search in vain through the pages of profane
history for a parallel to the struggle in which for thirteen years the
Prophet of Arabia in the face of discouragement and threats, rejection
and persecution retained his faith unwavering, preached repentance, and
denounced God's wrath against his godless fellow-citizens. Surrounded by
a little band of faithful men and women, he met insults, menaces,
dangers, with a high and patient trust in the future. And when at last
the promise of safety came from a distant quarter, he calmly waited
until his followers had all departed, and then disappeared from amongst
his ungrateful and rebellious people."--Muir, Vol. IV, pages 314-15.]

[Footnote 132: "That he was the impostor pictured by some writers is
refuted alike by his unwavering belief in the truth of his own mission,
by the loyalty and unshaken confidence of his companions, who had ample
opportunity of forming a right estimate of his sincerity, and finally,
by the magnitude of the task which he brought to so successful an issue.
