pleasure. (_M._) Infra sl. 121.]

[Footnote 176: Jagannat'ha, in his Digest, quotes the Dipakalika and
other authorities interpreting this injunction to refer to such wives
only as have not male issue. (Colebrooke, vol. 3, p. 97.)]

[Footnote 177: Something, however valueless; in order that the heirs
of the separated son may have no claim to a share of the family
inheritance, (_M._) Manu, ch. 9, sl. 207.]

[Footnote 178: For instance, if one son have a large family, or be
disqualified to earn a livelihood, the father may give him a portion
larger than the others. But an unequal partition from angry impulse,
or weak-mindedness, has no validity. (_M._)]

[Footnote 179: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 104. Whenever the father wishes, is
one of the ordained periods for partition; the second is, when the
father has renounced worldly enjoyment and the mother is past
child-bearing; and this partition may be enforced (according to
Narada) at the son's desire, though the father object. Partition
should also be made, the son desiring it, if the father lead a vicious
life, or be suffering under incurable disease; even though the
mother's menstruation have not ceased. The third period for partition
is, the father's decease. (_M._) Manu divides,--to the eldest two
aliquot parts, to the second son one and a half, and to each
succeeding son a single part. The Commentator asks, why that division
was not adhered to; and he solves his own question by the remark, that
it was disliked by the people, and therefore rightly abandoned. This
position he supports by several quotations, and by allusion to the
abolition or non-observance of other ancient ordinances, _e.g._ the
raising up of male heirs by the brother of the husband or others.

It is an obvious reflection, that the altered law of distribution is
one of the few instances in the Hindu economy where an innate feeling
of natural equality has overcome or superseded arbitrary rule--and
further, that the change has been brought about by the pressure of the
old law upon the privileged casts, who, in common with others, were
affected by it.]

[Footnote 180: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 206, 208.]

[Footnote 181: When the recovered properly is land, he who obtained it
shall take a fourth part, the remainder to be equally divided. (_M._)
The Commentator supports this view by the authority of Sankha.
Manu, ch. 9, sl. 209.]

[Footnote 182: Supra, Book 1, sl. 3.]

[Footnote 183: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 215.]

[Footnote 184: The Commentator refers, in explanation of this sloka,
to Manu, ch. 9, sl. 216, _viz._ A son born after a division shall
alone inherit the patrimony [_i. e._ the share allotted to the parents
(_M._)], or shall have a share of it with the divided brethren, if
they return and unite themselves with him.--With respect to the
deduction for expenditure, &c., the Commentator explains, that the
accumulations of mere income are not to be included in the estate to
be repartitioned, and that a previous deduction is to be made for
necessary expenditure, _e.g._ the father's debts.]

[Footnote 185: but, if she have _stridhana_, only a half share.
(_M._)]

[Footnote 186: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 118.]

[Footnote 187: These varying proportions ofcourse apply only where
there are several mothers of differing casts. Manu, ch. 9, sl.
148-157.]

[Footnote 188: or escaped notice altogether. (_M._) Manu, ch. 9, sl.
218.]

[Footnote 189: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 59, 145, 167, 190.]

[Footnote 190: But if the actual father have already a son, his son by
another's wife is not his heir. (_M._)]

[Footnote 191: _aurasa_ is from _uras_ 'the best,' being the first in
order of sons.]

[Footnote 192: _dharma_ wife is defined by the Commentator, a wife of
the same cast with her husband, and wedded to him according to the
_brahma_ and other approved forms of marriage; which are described in
the first book, sl. 58-61, _viz._ "In the marriage called _brahma_,
[the bride], adorned in a manner suitable to the means [of her
family], is bestowed upon the invited bridegroom,--In the _daiva_
[marriage, the bride is made over] to the priest whilst offering
sacrifice: _arsha_ [marriage], is where [the bride's father] receives
a pair of kine.--In the _kaya_ [marriage, the bride] is delivered to
the suitor with the injunction, Together practise the rules of duty!
In the _asura_ [marriage], wealth is received [from the bridegroom].
_Gandharva_ is [a union in marriage] by mutual consent [of the
parties]: the _rakshasa_ [marriage], is by capture [of the woman] in
war: the _paisacha_ [marriage, where she is obtained] by
deception." Manu ch. 3, sl. 20 _et. seq._]

[Footnote 193: _scil._ according to Vasishtha, such as, by
agreement between father and son-in-law, at the time of the daughter's
marriage, has been, by anticipation, given up to the father. (_M._)
And the Commentator notes, that the term used, _puttrikasata_, may be
also rendered or understood 'daughter as a son' _i. e._ a daughter
appointed or placed in the same position and with the same rights as a
son.]

[Footnote 194: _sagotra._]

[Footnote 195: it being merely known that the father is a man of the
same cast, not who he is. (_M._)]

[Footnote 196: privately, in the father's house. (_M._) Manu adds the
condition, if she marry her lover; ch. 9, sl. 172.]

[Footnote 197: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 175.]

[Footnote 198: This is permitted to a man of the same cast, in time of
distress; but only where there are several sons: the eldest cannot be
bestowed as a gift-son. (_M._) Manu, ch. 9, sl. 168.]

[Footnote 199: The Commentator explains, that this can only be on the
same conditions as the given or gift son. Manu, ch. 9, sl. 174.]

[Footnote 200: having lost his parents, or being abandoned by them.
(_M._) We have some doubt of the Commentator's meaning: here as the
alternative includes a separate head and description, _viz._ (xii) in
the succeeding sloka. The word rendered 'abandoned' literally
signifies 'liberated,' 'set free;' so the meaning may be,--one who is
left free to choose for himself.]

[Footnote 201: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 173.]

[Footnote 202: ibid. sl. 171.]

[Footnote 203: _pinda_, which literally signifies any round
substance. The cake is a compound, in form of a ball, given as an
offering to the dead.]

[Footnote 204: The Commentator quotes Vasishtha--If a son be
adopted, and afterwards an _aurasa_ be born, the former takes a fourth
part--and deduces from this, that a son of any inferior grade receives
a fourth share when superseded by an afterborn _aurasa._]

[Footnote 205: Manu, ch. 9, sl. 179.]

[Footnote 206: _pitarau._ First the mother, then the father--says the
Commentator. But Manu, ch. 9, sl. 185:--If a man die without male
issue, the father is heir; next to him in order, the brothers--and,
sl. 217--If a man die childless, his mother succeeds.--Such is the
contradictory character of texts and comments on this subject. The law
in use in Bengal is the reverse of the Commentator's gloss.]

[Footnote 207: first, of the whole blood; then, half-brothers. (_M._)]

[Footnote 208: as representing their respective fathers. (_M._)]

[Footnote 209: family; kindred of the same _stirpes_ or stock. These
are thus detailed by the Commentator;

1. paternal grandmother,

2. paternal grandfather,

3. paternal uncles,

4. sons of the uncles,

on failure of paternal grandfather's line, then,

5. paternal great-grandmother,

6. paternal great-grandfather,

7. their sons,

8. their sons' offspring.

All of whom (proceeds the Commentator) are _sapindas_, connected
by food oblations. If they fail, then follow those connected by the
water oblation only, _viz._ seven degrees in the ascending line beyond
_sapindas_, _i. e._ _samanodacas._]

[Footnote 210: divided by the Commentator into three classes, _viz._

1. of one's self, 2. of one's father, 3. of one's mother; as, the sons
of a father's or of a mother's sister, or a maternal uncle (one's own
kin)--the sons of a father's paternal or maternal aunt, or a father's
maternal uncle (a father's kin)--and those in the same relation to a
mother.]

[Footnote 211: _sa-brahmachari_, one instructed together with him in
his religious duties. This head applies only to the first three
classes, those invested with the sacred cord.]

[Footnote 212: as distinguished from the temporary _brahmachari_ or
religious student, which all of the twice born classes should be, in
youth.]

[Footnote 213: who, having been separated, again holds his property in
community with those from whom he had separated. Such reunion is
permitted only with the father, the brothers, and the paternal uncle.
(_M._)]

[Footnote 214: This participle has a masculine termination; and the
ellipsis is supplied from the Commentator.]

[Footnote 215: This is rather the paraphrase of the Commentator: the
text is very obscure. Yajnavalkya in these two verses promulgates,
according to the Commentator, the following law. A wife or a daughter
or a mother shall not be entitled (under a preceding rule) to take the
heritage, when there has been a reunion, after separation, of male
members of the family; and of course where there has been no division.
In the case of united brothers, where there is a full brother in the
union, he takes the property, in preference to a half-brother; but, if
the half-brother be united and the full brother separate, the two will
divide the property between them. When, of many full brothers, some
live united and others separate, those united will have the
preference. If there be half brothers, as well as full brothers, in
the union, the former take nothing; but all full brothers, living
separate, share with one or more united half-brothers. Where the
brothers all live separate the rule will of course not apply.]

[Footnote 216: _i. e._ according to the Ratnakara, a son born after
his degradation from cast.]

[Footnote 217: _scil._ hermits, devotees, one who is his father's
enemy, one guilty of a crime of minor degree, one deaf or dumb, one
deprived of an organ of sense. (_M._)]

[Footnote 218: supra sl. 128 (III).]

[Footnote 219: such as described sl. 140. (_M._)]

[Footnote 220: if there be no sons. (_M._)]

[Footnote 221: These three slokas are analogous to Manu, ch. 9, sl.
201, 2, 3.]

[Footnote 222: _scil._ acquisitions by inheritance, purchase,
partition, gift, finding. (_M._)]

[Footnote 223: supra, note[192]]

[Footnote 224: _asura_, _gandarbha_, _rakshasa_, _paisacha._]

[Footnote 225: _i. e._ if she die without issue. (_M._)]

[Footnote 226: without just cause. (_M._) Yajnavalkya himself suggests
as a sufficient cause, a more eligible bridegroom offering; B. 1, sl.
65.]

[Footnote 227: if he have no other means. (_M._)]

[Footnote 228: The Commentator and other authorities interpret
_arddha_ in this place to signify, such proportionate part as shall
make the entire _stridhana_ of the first wife equal to that of the
second.]

[Footnote 229: and further, by enquiry as to the mode of performing
religious rites in the family. (_M._)]

[Footnote 230: Explained by the Commentator such as are free (as aged
men are presumed to be) from the trammels of worldly occupation and of
passion.]

[Footnote 231: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 258--262.]

[Footnote 232: the remains of burnt fuel. (_M._)]

[Footnote 233: of rice. (_M._)]

[Footnote 234: stones or other landmarks. (_M._)]

[Footnote 235: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 246--252.]

[Footnote 236: _i. e._ if none of the means indicated in the previous
sloka are available. (_M._)]

[Footnote 237: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 254--258.]

[Footnote 238: ibid, sl. 263.]

[Footnote 239: ibid, sl. 265.]

[Footnote 240: and towns. (_M._)]

[Footnote 241: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 262.]

[Footnote 242: The Commentator describes a boundary as a strip or
border (a party-ridge) of land, used in common. The breaking therefore
must mean some material alteration of this border. Overstepping, the
Commentator describes to be cultivating beyond the boundary.]

[Footnote 243: or house or garden, &c. (_M._)]

[Footnote 244: _scil._ reddendo singula singulis, the lowest fine for
breaking, the highest for overstepping, the medium for wrongful
appropriation. Manu, ch. 8, sl. 264; ch. 9, sl. 291.]

[Footnote 245: or similar constructions, as a tank, &c. (_M._)]

[Footnote 246: _semble_, the landowner. The Commentator throws no
light on this ambiguity.]

[Footnote 247: or any other crop. (_M._)]

[Footnote 248: a _masha_ is the twentieth part of a copper _pana_.
(_M._) Supra pa. 7.]

[Footnote 249: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 241.]

[Footnote 250: no penalty therefore or liability. (_M._)]

[Footnote 251: being an open field. (_M._)]

[Footnote 252: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 237, 8, 9.]

[Footnote 253: let loose to propitiate the gods. (_M._)]

[Footnote 254: wanderers from a distant herd. (_M._)]

[Footnote 255: _scil._ other animals, as elephants, horses, &c.
(_M._)]

[Footnote 256: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 242.]

[Footnote 257: _i. e._ counting them. (_M._)]

[Footnote 258: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 232.]

[Footnote 259: for oblations to the gods. (_M._) Manu does not
expressly restrict this privilege to the twice-born; ch. 8, sl. 339.]

[Footnote 260: This term (literally 'a bow') is a land measure,
equivalent to the modern oottah or four hats.]

[Footnote 261: These three are in progressive increase: the first is,
a mere village; the second, the central or sudder station of several
villages; the third, a town of more extended population and
importance. Manu, ch. 8, sl. 237.]

[Footnote 262: or which has been given away, or pledged, by a stranger
without right. (_M._) Manu, ch. 8, sl. 199.]

[Footnote 263: _scil._ one destitute of property. (_M._) The
expression in the text is applicable to any whose position or lack of
means might justify a suspicion that he had not come honestly by the
goods.]

[Footnote 264: the man who sold or assigned it to him. (_M._)]

[Footnote 265: or stolen, or given in pledge. (_M._)]

[Footnote 266: Supra, sl. 27.]

[Footnote 267: Inasmuch as he abets concealment of the thief or
wrongdoer. (_M._)]

[Footnote 268: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 30. The Commentator accounts for the
discrepancy between the two law-givers by supposing Manu to have
alluded to the property of learned brahmans only.]

[Footnote 269: This fine is considered by the Commentator a
consideration or indemnity for safe keeping, and an exception to the
rule laid down by Manu, ch. 8, sec. 33.]

[Footnote 270: Colebrooke's rendering of this sloka (Digest ch. 4,
sec. 1, Sec.16,) differs from ours, which however we consider to be the
correct signification of the text before us.]

[Footnote 271: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 222.]

[Footnote 272: The Commentator explains this to refer to slaves.]

[Footnote 273: Supra, p. 7.]

[Footnote 274: These facts are related, says the Commentator, as an
index to or test of the honesty of metal-workers.]

[Footnote 275: Made into coarse thread. (_M._)]

[Footnote 276: This sloka, as appears from the Commentary, is in
allusion to the loss on working or manufacture of textile fabrics
mentioned in the previous slokas.]

[Footnote 277: or given or pledged. (_M._)]

[Footnote 278: The slavery or servitude being to secure or work out a
debt.]

[Footnote 279: _e.g._ a brahman cannot be slave to a kshattriya.
Manu, ch. 8, sl. 410--15.]

[Footnote 280: _scil._ medicine or handicraft. (_M._)]

[Footnote 281: The Commentator thus explains and analyses the subject
of servitude or working for others:

There are two descriptions of persons who serve. I. Those whose
employment is of a respectable kind. II. Those whose employment is not
so. The first division he subdivides into--1, the disciple; 2, the
apprentice; 3, the workman; 4, the overseer.

The disciple is the student of the vedas; the apprentice is one
learning an art; the workman is one who is paid for his work; the
overseer superintends workmen. There are three sorts of workmen--1,
soldiers; 2, husbandmen; 3, they who bear burdens.

II. The other and meaner description of employment is performed by
slaves, _scil._ cleaning the house, cleaning away filth, &c.

Slaves, the Commentator subdivides, according to their origin and mode
of enslavement, into fifteen classes, _scil._

1. A born slave of the house.

2. A purchased slave.

3. One [otherwise] acquired _e.g._ by donation.

4. One obtained by inheritance.

5. One rescued from starvation during a famine.

6. One received in pledge.

7. One who becomes a slave to discharge a debt.

8. A captive in war.

9. One whose freedom has been lost by wager.

10. A volunteer slave.

11. An apostate from the condition of a _pravajita_ or religious
mendicant.

12. A slave for a prescribed term.

13. A slave for subsistence sake.

14. One enslaved by espousing a woman who is a slave.

15. One who has sold himself.]

[Footnote 282: _scil._ duties prescribed by the Sruti and Smriti,
according to their cast and grade. (_M._)]

[Footnote 283: such as, tending cattle, conservation of water, care of
temples, &c. (_M._)]

[Footnote 284: _scil._ to entertain travellers, or injunction to see
that horses or other provision be not furnished to the enemies of the
State. (_M._)]

[Footnote 285: _i. e._ for a heinous offence: for minor offences,
fines, as declared by Manu, shall be imposed. (_M._) Manu, ch. 8, sl.
220, is probably here referred to.]

