

NOTES.

1. _The Nicolaitanes_. This sect is mentioned specifically in the
divine communication wherein John the Revelator was instructed to
write to the churches of Asia (Rev. 2:6, 15); and the reference proves
the abhorrence with which the Lord regarded the teachings and
practices of the cult. The attempt to corrupt Christianity by the
introduction of Nicolaitan ceremonies was a real danger threatening
the Church. The following extract from Smith's Bible Dictionary is
instructive:

"The sect itself comes before us as presenting the ultimate phase of a
great controversy, which threatened at one time to destroy the unity
of the Church, and afterward to taint its purity. The controversy
itself was inevitable as soon as the Gentiles were admitted in any
large numbers into the Church of Christ. Were the new converts to be
brought into subjugation to the whole Mosaic law? The apostles and
elders at Jerusalem met the question calmly and wisely. The burden of
the Law was not to be imposed on the Gentile disciples. They were to
abstain, among other things, from 'meats offered to idols,' and from
'fornication' (Acts 15:20, 29), and this decree was welcomed as the
great charter of the Church's freedom. Strange as the close union of
the moral and positive commands may seem to us, it did not seem so to
the synod at Jerusalem. The two sins were very closely allied, often
even in the closest proximity of time and place. The messages to the
churches of Asia, and the later Apostolic Epistles (II Peter, and
Jude,) indicate that the two evils appeared at that period also in
close alliance. The teachers of the Church branded them with a name
that expressed their true character. The men who did and taught such
things were followers of Balaam (II Peter 2:15; Jude II.) They, like
the false prophet of Pethor, united brave words with evil deeds. In a
time of persecution, when the eating or not eating of things
sacrificed to idols was more than ever a crucial test of faithfulness,
they persuaded men more than ever that it was a thing indifferent
(Rev. 2:13, 14). This was bad enough, but there was a yet worse evil.
Mingling themselves in the orgies of idolatrous feasts, they brought
the impurities of those feasts into the meetings of the Christian
Church. And all this was done, it must be remembered, not simply as an
indulgence of appetite, but as part of a system supported by a
'doctrine,' accompanied by the boast of a prophetic illumination (II
Peter 2:1)."

2. _Imitation of Heathen Mysteries, and the Result_. The worship of
God by the early Christians was decried and ridiculed because of its
simplicity and the absence of mystic ceremonies. True, the zeal of
persecutors soon made necessary a prudent secrecy in religious service
and worshipping assemblies, but aside from such necessity, there was a
voluntary effort to feign a secrecy that was uncalled for. On this
point Gibbon remarks as follows: "The precautions with which the
disciples of Christ performed the offices of religion were at first
dictated by fear and necessity; but they were continued from choice.
By imitating the awful secrecy of the Eleusinian mysteries, the
Christians had flattered themselves that they should render their
sacred institutions more respectable in the eyes of the pagan world.
But the event, as it often happens to the operations of subtle policy,
deceived their wishes and their expectations. It was concluded that
they only concealed what they would have blushed to disclose. Their
mistaken prudence afforded an opportunity for malice to invent, and
for suspicious credulity to believe, the horrid tales which described
the Christians as the most wicked of human kind, who practiced in
their dark recesses every abomination that a depraved fancy could
suggest, and who solicited the favor of their unknown God by the
sacrifice of every moral virtue. There were many who pretended to
confess or to relate the ceremonies of this abhorred society."--
(Gibbon, "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," chap. XVI.)

3. _Ebionites and Gnostics._ "Beside the general design of fixing on a
perpetual basis the divine honors of Christ, the most ancient and
respectable of the ecclesiastical writers have ascribed to the
evangelic theologian [St. John] a particular intention to confute two
opposing heresies, which disturbed the peace of the primitive Church.
I. The faith of the Ebionites, perhaps of the Nazarenes, was gross and
imperfect. They revered Jesus as the greatest of the prophets, endowed
with supernatural virtue and power. They ascribed to His person and to
His future reign all the predictions of the Hebrew oracles which
relate to the spiritual and everlasting kingdom of the promised
Messiah. Some of them might confess that He was born of a virgin; but
they obstinately rejected the preceding existence and divine
perfections of the Logos, or Son of God, which are so clearly defined
in the Gospel of St. John. * * * II. The Gnostics, who were
distinguished by the epithet of Docetes, deviated into the contrary
extreme, and betrayed the human while they asserted the divine, nature
of Christ. Educated in the school of Plato, accustomed to the sublime
idea of the Logos, they readily conceived that the brightest Aeon or
Emanation of Deity, might assume the outward shape and visible
appearance of a mortal; but they vainly pretended that the
imperfections of matter are incompatible with the purity of a
celestial substance. While the blood of Christ yet smoked on Mount
Calvary, and the Docetes invented the impious and extravagant
hypothesis that, instead of issuing from the womb of the Virgin, he
had descended on the banks of the Jordan in the form of perfect
manhood; that he had imposed on the senses of His enemies and of His
disciples, and that the ministers of Pilate had wasted their impotent
rage on an airy phantom, who seemed to expire on the Cross, and, after
three days, to rise from the dead."--(Gibbon, "Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire," ch. XXI.)

4. _Admixture of Pagan Doctrines With Christianity_. The following
statements by modern writers as to the effect of pagan "philosophy" on
the Church are worthy of attention. Summarizing conditions prevailing
in the latter part of the second century, Milner says: "We have
hitherto found it no hard matter to discover, in the teachers and
writers of Christianity, the vital doctrines of Christ. We shall now
perceive that the most precious truths of the gospel begin to be less
attended to, and less brought to view. Even Justin Martyr, before the
period of eclectic corruption, by his fondness for Plato, adulterated
the gospel in some degree, as we have observed particularly in the
article of free will. Tatian, his scholar, went bolder lengths, and
deserved the name of heretic. He dealt largely in the merits of
continence and chastity; and these virtues, pushed into extravagant
excesses, under the notion of superior purity, became great engines of
self-righteousness and superstition; obscured men's views of the faith
of Christ, and darkened the whole face of Christianity. Under the
fostering hand of Ammonius and his followers, this fictitious holiness
disguised under the appearance of eminent sanctity, was formed into a
system; and it soon began to generate the worst of evils. * * * St.
Paul's caution against philosophy and vain deceit, it appears, was now
fatally neglected by the Christians. False humility, 'Will-worship,'
curious and proud refinements, bodily austerities mixed with high,
self-righteous pretensions, ignorance of Christ and of the true life
of faith in Him, miserably superseded by ceremonies and
superstitions,--all these things are divinely delineated in the second
chapter to the Colossians; and, so far as words can do it, the true
defense against them is powerfully described and enforced."--(Milner,
"Church History," Cent. II, ch. 9.)

"The schisms and commotions that arose in the church, from a mixture
of the oriental and Egyptian philosophy with the Christian religion
were, in the second century, increased by those Grecian philosophers
who embraced the doctrine of Christ. The Christian doctrine,
concerning the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and the two natures united
in our blessed Savior, were by no means reconcilable with the tenets
of the sages and doctors of Greece, who therefore endeavored to
explain them in such a manner as to render them comprehensible.
Praxeas, a man of genius and learning, began to propagate these
explications at Rome, and was severely persecuted for the errors they
contained. He denied any real distinction between the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost; and maintained that the Father, sole Creator of all
things, had united to Himself the human nature of Christ. Hence his
followers were called Monarchians, because of their denying a
plurality of persons in the Deity; and also Patropassians, because,
according to Tertullian's account, they believed that the Father was
so intimately united with the man Christ, His Son, that He suffered
with Him the anguish of an afflicted life and the torments of an
ignominious death. However ready many may have been to embrace this
erroneous doctrine, it does not appear that this sect formed to
themselves a separate place of worship, or removed themselves from the
ordinary assemblies of Christians."--(Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical
History," Cent. II, Part II, ch. 5:20.)

5. _Spurious Writings in the Apostolic Period_. "Not long after
Christ's ascension into heaven, several histories of His life and
doctrines, full of pious frauds and fabulous wonders, were composed by
persons whose intentions, perhaps, were not bad, but whose writings
discovered the greatest superstition and ignorance. Nor was this all:
productions appeared which were imposed upon the world by fraudulent
men, as the writings of the holy apostles. These apocryphal and
spurious writings must have produced a sad confusion, and rendered
both the history and the doctrine of Christ uncertain, had not the
rulers of the church used all possible care and diligence in
separating the books that were truly apostolical and divine from all
that spurious trash."--(Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical History," Cent. I,
Part II, ch. 2:17.)




CHAPTER VIII.

**Internal Causes.--Continued**.


1. As one of the effective causes leading to the apostasy of the
Primitive Church we have specified: _Unauthorized additions to the
ceremonies of the Church, and the introduction of vital changes in
essential ordinances_.

2. The ridicule heaped upon the early Church by the pagans on account
of the simplicity of Christian worship has already received mention.
This cause of reproach was none the less emphasized by Judaistic
critics, to whom rituals and ceremony, formalism and prescribed rites,
figured as essentials of religion. Very early in its history, the
Church manifested a tendency to supplant the pristine simplicity of
its worship by elaborate ceremonies, patterned after Judaistic ritual
and heathen idolatries.

3. As to such innovations, Mosheim writes as follows, with reference
to conditions existing in the second century: "There is no institution
so pure and excellent which the corruption and folly of man will not
in time alter for the worse, and load with additions foreign to its
nature and original design. Such in a particular manner was the fate
of Christianity. In this century many unnecessary rites and ceremonies
were added to the Christian worship, the introduction of which was
extremely offensive to wise and good men. These changes, while they
destroyed the beautiful simplicity of the gospel, were naturally
pleasing to the gross multitude, who are more delighted with the pomp
and splendor of external institutions than with the native charms of
rational and solid piety, and who generally give little attention to
any objects but those which strike their outward senses."--(Mosheim,
"Eccl. Hist.," Cent. II, Part II, ch. 4.) The author just cited
explains that the bishops of that day increased the ceremonies and
sought to give them splendor "by way of accommodation to the
infirmities and prejudices of both Jews and heathen."--(See Note 1,
end of chapter.)

4. To more effectually reconcile the gospel requirements with Jewish
prejudice, which still clung to the letter of the Mosaic law, the
officers of the Church in the first and second centuries took to
themselves the ancient titles; thus, bishops styled themselves chief
priests, and deacons, Levites. "In like manner," says Mosheim, "the
comparison of the Christian _oblation_ with the Jewish _victim_ and
_sacrifice_, produced a multitude of unnecessary rites, and was the
occasion of introducing that erroneous notion of the _eucharist_,
which represents it as a real sacrifice, and not merely as a
commemoration of that great offering that was once made upon the cross
for the sins of mortals."--(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. II, Part II,
ch. 4:4.)

5. In the fourth century we find the Church still more hopelessly
committed to formalism and superstition. The decent respect with which
the remains of the early martyrs had been honored degenerated or grew
into a superstitious reverence amounting to worship. This practice was
allowed in deference to the heathen adoration paid to deified heroes.
Pilgrimages to the tombs of martyrs became common as an outward form
of religious devotion; and the ashes of martyrs as well as dust and
earth brought from places said to have been made holy by some uncommon
occurrence were sold as sovereign remedies against disease and as
means of protection against the assaults of malignant spirits.

6. The form of public worship was so changed during the second and
third centuries as to bear little resemblance to the simplicity and
earnestness of that of the early congregations. Philosophic discourses
took the place of fervent testimony bearing and the arts of the
rhetorician and controversial debater supplanted the true eloquence of
religious conviction. Applause was allowed and expected as evidence of
the preacher's popularity. The burning incense, at first abhorred by
Christian assemblies because of its pagan origin and heathen
significance, had become common in the Church before the end of the
third century.

7. In the fourth century the adoration of images, pictures, and
effigies, had been given a place in the so-called Christian worship;
and the practice became general in the century following. An effort to
check the abuses arising from this idolatrous practice in the eighth
century, actually led to civil war.--(See Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.,"
Cent. VIII, Part II, ch. 3:9, 10.)

8. In considering such evidences of pagan ceremonial and superstitious
rites taking the place of the simple procedure incident to genuine
worship characteristic of the Church in the days of its integrity, who
can question the solemn and awful fact of actual apostasy?--(See Note
2, end of chapter.) But more important yet, more significant still
than mere additions to the ritualistic ceremonial, are the perversions
and changes introduced into the most sacred and essential ordinances
of Christ's Church. As it is common with ecclesiastical authorities to
consider the most essential ordinances of the gospel originally
established by Christ and maintained by His apostles, as comprising
baptism and the sacrament of the Lord's supper, we shall examine into
these alone as examples of the unauthorized alterations now under
consideration. In this restriction of our illustrative examples we do
not admit that baptism and the sacrament named were the only
ordinances characterizing the Church; indeed, there is abundant proof
to the contrary. Thus, the authoritative imposition of hands for the
bestowal of the Holy Ghost in the case of baptized believers was
equally essential with baptism itself,--(See Acts 8:5-8, 12, 14-17;
also 19:1-7; see also 2:38; Matt. 3:11; and Mark 1:8.) and was
assuredly regarded as a vital ordinance from the first.--(See Matt.
3:11.) Furthermore, ordination in the priesthood, whereby men were
commissioned by divine authority was indispensable to the maintenance
of an organized Church. The examples selected, however, will be
sufficient for the purposes of our present inquiry.

**The Ordinance of Baptism Changed**.

9. First, then, as to baptism,--in what did the ordinance originally
consist, as to purpose and mode of administration, and what changes
did it undergo in the course of progressive apostasy through which the
Church passed? That baptism is essential to salvation calls for no
demonstration here; this has been generally held by the Christian
Church in both ancient and modern times.--(For a concise treatment of
this subject, see the author's "Articles of Faith," Lecture 6:8-29.)
The purpose of baptism was and is the obtaining of a remission of
sins; compliance with the requirement has been from the first the sole
means of securing admission to the Church of Christ.--(See Mark 1:4
and Luke 3:3; also Acts 2:38; I Peter 3:21; and Acts 22:16. Compare II
Nephi 31:17.)

10. In the early Church, baptism was administered on profession of
faith and evidence of repentance, and was performed by immersion--(See
Note 3, end of chapter) at the hands of one invested with the
requisite authority of priesthood. There was no delay in administering
the ordinance after the eligibility of the candidate had been shown.
As instances we may cite the promptness with which baptism was
administered to the believers on that eventful day of Pentecost;--
(Acts 2:37-41) the baptism administered by Philip to the Ethiopian
convert immediately following due profession of faith;--(Acts 8:26-39)
the undelayed baptism of devout Cornelius and his family;--(Acts
10:47, 48) and the speedy baptism of the converted jailer by Paul, his
prisoner.--(Acts 16:31-33.)

11. In the second century, however, priestly mandate had restricted
the baptismal ordinance to the times of the two Church festivals,
Easter and Whitsuntide, the first being the anniversary of Christ's
resurrection, and the second the time of Pentecostal celebration. A
long and tedious course of preparation was required of the candidate
before his eligibility was admitted; during this time he was known as
a _catechumen_, or novice in training. According to some authorities a
three years' course of preparation was required in all but exceptional
cases.--(Schlegel, Book VIII, ch. 32.)

12. During the second century the baptismal symbolism of a new birth
was emphasized by many additions to the ordinance; thus the newly
baptized were treated as infants and were fed milk and honey in token
of their immaturity. As baptism was construed to be a ceremony of
liberation from the slavery of Satan, certain formulas used in the
freeing of slaves were added. Anointing with oil was also made a part
of the ceremony. In the third century the simple ordinance of baptism
was further encumbered and perverted by the ministrations of an
exorcist. This official indulged in "menacing and formidable shouts
and declamation" whereby the demons or evil spirits with which the
candidate was supposed to be afflicted were to be driven away. "The
driving out of this demon was now considered as an essential
preparation for baptism, after the administration of which the
candidates returned home, adorned with crowns, and arrayed in white
garments, as sacred emblems,--the former of their victory over sin and
the world; the latter of their inward purity and innocence."--
(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. III, part II, ch. 4:4.) It is not
difficult to see in this superstitious ceremony the evidence of pagan
adulteration of the Christian religion. In the fourth century it
became the practice to place salt in the mouth of the newly baptized
member, as a symbol of purification, and the actual baptism was both
preceded and followed by an anointing with oil.

13. The form or mode of baptism also underwent a radical change during
the first half of the third century,--a change whereby its essential
symbolism was destroyed. Immersion,--(See Note 3, end of chapter)
typifying death followed by resurrection, was no longer deemed an
essential feature, and sprinkling with water was allowed in place
thereof. No less an authority than Cyprian, the learned bishop of
Carthage, advocated the propriety of sprinkling in lieu of immersion
in cases of physical weakness; and the practice thus started, later
became general. The first instance of record is that of Novatus, a
heretic who requested baptism when he thought death was near.--(As to
the scriptural doctrine of baptism, the mode of its administration and
the symbolism thereof, see the author's "Articles of Faith," Lecture
7.)

14. Not only was the form of the baptismal rite radically changed, but
the application of the ordinance was perverted. The practice of
administering baptism to infants was recognized as orthodox in the
third century, and was doubtless of earlier origin. In a prolonged
disputation as to whether it was safe to postpone the baptism of
infants until the eighth day after birth--in deference to the Jewish
custom of performing circumcision on that day--it was gravely decided
that such delay would be dangerous, as jeopardizing the future
well-being of the child should it die before attaining the age of
eight days, and that baptism ought to be administered as soon after
birth as possible.--(See Milner, "Church History," Cent. III; ch. 13.)
A more infamous doctrine than that of the condemnation of unbaptized
infants can scarcely be imagined, and a stronger proof of the heresies
that had invaded and corrupted the early Church need not be sought.
Such a doctrine is foreign to the gospel and to the Church of Christ,
and its adoption as an essential tenet is proof of apostasy.--(For a
discussion of infant baptism, see the author's "Articles of Faith,"
Lecture 6. See Note 4, end of chapter.)

**Changes in the Ordinance of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper**.

15. The sacrament of the Lord's Supper has been regarded as an
essential ordinance from the time of its establishment in the Church
by Jesus Christ. Yet in spite of its sanctity it has undergone radical
alteration both as to its symbolism and its accepted purpose. The
sacrament, as instituted by the Savior and as administered during the
days of the apostolic ministry, was as simple as it was sacred and
solemn. Accompanied by the true spirit of the gospel, its simplicity
was sanctifying; as interpreted by the spirit of apostasy its
simplicity became a reproach. Hence we find that in the third century,
long sacramental prayers were prescribed, and much pomp was
introduced. Vessels of gold and silver were used by such congregations
as could afford them, and this with ostentatious display. Nonmembers
and members "who were in a penitential state" were excluded from the
sacramental service--in imitation of the exclusiveness accompanying
heathen mysteries. Disputation and dissension arose as to the proper
time of administering the sacrament--morning, noon, or evening; and as
to the frequency with which the ordinance should be celebrated.--(See
Note 5, end of chapter.)

16. At a later date the doctrine of _Transubstantiation_ was
established as an essential tenet of the Roman Church. This briefly
summarized, is to the effect that the species--i. e., the bread and
wine used in the sacrament--lose their character as mere bread and
wine, and become in fact the flesh and blood of the crucified Christ.
The transmutation is assumed to take place in such a mystical way as
to delude the senses; and so, though actual flesh and actual blood,
the elements still appear to be bread and wine. This view, so strongly
defended and earnestly reverenced by orthodox members of the Roman
Church, is vehemently denounced by others as "an absurd tenet,"--
(Milner) and a "monstrous and unnatural doctrine."--(Mosheim.)

17. There has been much discussion as to the origin of this
doctrine,--(See Note 6, end of chapter.) the Roman Catholics claiming
for it a great antiquity, while their opponents insist that it was an
innovation of the eighth or ninth century. According to Milner it was
openly taught in the ninth century;--(Milner, "Church History," Cent.
IX, ch. 1.) was formally established as a dogma of the Church by the
Council of Placentia A. D. 1095,--(The same, Cent. XI, ch. 1) and was
made an essential article of creed, belief in which was required of
all by action of the Roman ecclesiastical court about 1160.--(The
same, Cent. XIII, ch. 1.) An official edict of the pope, Innocent III,
confirmed the dogma as a binding tenet and requirement of the Church
in 1215;--(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. XIII, Part II, ch. 3:2.) and
it remains practically in force in the Roman Catholic Church today.
The doctrine was adopted by the Greek Church in the seventeenth
century.--(The same. Cent. XVII, Part II, ch. 2:3.)

18. The consecrated emblems, or "host," being regarded as the actual
flesh and blood of Christ, were adored as of themselves divine. Thus,
"a very pernicious practice of idolatry was connected with the
reception of this doctrine. Men fell down before the consecrated host,
and worshipped it as God; and the novelty, absurdity, and impiety of
this abomination very much struck the minds of all men who were not
dead to a sense of true religion."--(Milner, "Church History," Cent.
XIII, ch. 1.) The "elevation of the host,"--i. e., the presentation of
the consecrated emblems before the congregation for adoration, is a
feature of the present day ritual of worship in the Roman Catholic
Church. The celebration of the mass is taught to be an actual though
mystic sacrifice, in which the Son of God is daily offered up anew as
a constantly recurring atonement for the present sins of the assembled
worshippers. A further perversion of the sacrament occurred in the
administration of bread alone, instead of both bread and wine as
originally required.

19. Thus was the plain purpose and assured efficacy of the sacrament
hidden beneath a cloud of mystery and ceremonial display. Contrast
such with the solemn simplicity of the ordinance as instituted by our
Lord,--He took bread and wine, blessed them and gave to His disciples
and said, "This do in remembrance of me."--(Luke 22:19, 20; compare
Matt. 26:27, 28.) Of the bread He said, "This is my body;" of the
wine, "This is my blood;" yet at that time His body was unpierced, His
blood was unshed. The disciples ate bread, not flesh of a living man,
and drank wine, not blood; and this they were commanded to do in
remembrance of Christ.--(For a general treatment of the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, see the author's "Articles of Faith," Lecture 9.)
The perversion of the sacrament is evidence of departure from the
spirit of the gospel of Christ, and when made an essential dogma of a
church is proof of the apostate condition of that church.

20. Behold, "_they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance,
broken the everlasting covenant_."--(See Isaiah 24:4-6.)


NOTES.

1. _Ceremonies Added as a Compromise_. "Both Jews and heathens were
accustomed to a vast variety of pompous and magnificent ceremonies in
their religious service. And as they considered these rites as an
essential part of religion, it was but natural that they should behold
with indifference, and even with contempt, the simplicity of the
Christian worship, which was destitute of those idle ceremonies that
rendered their service so specious and striking. To remove then, in
some measure, this prejudice against Christianity, the bishops thought
it necessary to increase the number of rites and ceremonies, and thus
to render the public worship more striking to the outward senses. This
addition of external rites was also designed to remove the opprobrious
calumnies which the Jewish and pagan priests cast upon the Christians
on account of the simplicity of their worship, esteeming them little
better than atheists, because they had no temples, altars, victims,
priests, nor anything of that external pomp in which the vulgar are so
prone to place the essence of religion. The rulers of the Church
adopted, therefore, certain external ceremonies, that thus they might
captivate the senses of the vulgar, and be able to refute the
reproaches of their adversaries." (Mosheim, "Ecclesiastical History,"
Cent. II, Part II, ch. 4:2, 3.)

A note appended to the foregoing excerpt by the translator, Dr.
Archibald Maclaine, reads as follows:

"A remarkable passage in the life of Gregory, surnamed Thaumaturgus,
i. e., the wonder worker, will illustrate this point in the clearest
manner. The passage is as follows: 'When Gregory perceived that the
ignorant multitude persisted in their idolatry, on account of the
pleasures and sensual gratifications which they enjoyed at the pagan
festivals, he granted them a permission to indulge themselves in the
like pleasures, in celebrating the memory of the holy martyrs, hoping
that in process of time, they would return of their own accord to a
more virtuous and regular course of life.' There is no sort of doubt,
but that by this permission, Gregory allowed the Christians to dance,
sport, and feast at the tombs of the martyrs upon their respective
festivals, and to do everything which the pagans were accustomed to do
in their temples during the feasts celebrated in honor of their gods."

The Gregory referred to in the note last quoted flourished about the
middle of the third century. He acquired the title Thaumaturgus from
his fame as a worker of miracles, the genuineness of which
achievements is disputed by many authorities. He was bishop of New
Caesarea, and a man of great influence in the Church. His sanction of
ceremonies, patterned after pagan rites, was doubtless of far-reaching
effect.

2. _Church Ceremonial in the Fifth Century_. "The sublime and simple
theology of the primitive Christians was gradually corrupted, and the
Monarchy of heaven, already clouded by metaphysical subtleties, was
degraded by the introduction of a popular mythology, which tended to
restore the reign of polytheism. As the objects of religion were
gradually reduced to the standard of the imagination, the rites and
ceremonies were introduced that seemed most powerfully to affect the
senses of the vulgar. If, in the beginning of the fifth century,
Tertullian or Lactantius had been suddenly raised from the dead, to
assist at the festival of some popular saint or martyr, they would
have gazed with astonishment and indignation on the profane spectacle,
which had succeeded to the pure and spiritual worship of a Christian
congregation. As soon as the doors of the Church were thrown open they
must have been offended by the smoke of incense, the perfume of
flowers, and the glare of lamps and tapers, which diffused, at
noonday, a gaudy, superfluous, and, in their opinion a sacriligious
light. If they approached the balustrade of the altar, they made their
way through the prostrate crowd, consisting for the most part, of
strangers and pilgrims, who resorted to the city on the vigil of the
feast; and who already felt the strong intoxication of fanaticism, and
perhaps of wine. Their devout kisses were imprinted on the walls and
pavements of the sacred edifice; and their fervent prayers were
directed, whatever might be the language of their church, to the
bones, the blood, or the ashes of the saints, which were usually
concealed by a linen or silken veil from the eyes of the vulgar. The
Christians frequented the tombs of the martyrs, in the hope of
obtaining, from their powerful intercession, every sort of spiritual,
but more especially of temporal blessings. * * * The same uniform
original spirit of superstition might suggest, in the most distant
ages and countries, the same methods of deceiving the credulity, and
of affecting the services, of mankind; but it must ingeniously be
confessed that the ministers of the Catholic Church imitated the
profane model which they were impatient to destroy. The most
respectable bishops had persuaded themselves that the ignorant rustics
would more cheerfully renounce the superstitions of Paganism, if they
found some resemblance, some compensation, in the bosom of
Christianity. The religion of Constantine achieved, in less than a
century, the final conquest of the Roman empire; but the victors
themselves were insensibly subdued by the arts of their vanquished
rivals."--(Gibbon, "Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire," ch.
XXVIII.)

3. _Early Form of Christian Baptism_. History furnishes ample proof
that in the first century after the death of Christ, baptism was
administered solely by immersion. Tertullian thus refers to the
immersion ceremony common in his day: "There is no difference whether
one is washed in a sea or in a pool, in a river or in a fountain, in a
lake or in a channel; nor is there any difference between those whom
John dipped in Jordan, and those whom Peter dipped in the Tiber. * * *
We are immersed in the water."

Justin Martyr describes the ceremony as practiced by himself. First
describing the preparatory examination of the candidate, he proceeds:
"After that they are led by us to where there is water, and are born
again in that kind of new birth by which we ourselves were born again.
For in the name of God, the Father and Lord of all, and of Jesus
Christ, our Savior, and of the Holy Spirit, the immersion in water is
performed; because the Christ hath also said, 'Except a man be born
again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.'"

Bishop Bennet says concerning the practices of the early Christians:
"They led them into the water and laid them down in the water as a man
is laid in a grave; and then they said those words, 'I baptize (or
wash) thee in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;' then they
raised them up again, and clean garments were put on them; from whence
came the phrases of being baptized into Christ's death, of being
buried with Him by baptism into death, of our being risen with Christ,
and of our putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, of putting off the old
man, and putting on the new."

"That the apostles immersed whom they baptized there is no doubt. * *
* And that the ancient church followed their example is very clearly
evinced by innumerable testimonies of the fathers."--(Vossius.)

"Burying as it were the person baptized in the water, and raising him
