proverb: "The Zen monk has no money, moneyed Monto[FN#82] knows
nothing."


[FN#82]  The priest belonging to Shin Shu, who are generally rich.



7. The Manliness of the Zen Monk and of the Samurai.

Thirdly, both the Zen monk and the Samurai were distinguished by
their manliness and dignity in manner, sometimes amounting to
rudeness.  This is due partly to the hard discipline that they
underwent, and partly to the mode of instruction.  The following
story,[FN#83] translated by Mr. D. Suzuki, a friend of mine, may well
exemplify our statement:


[FN#83]  The Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1906-1907.


When Rin-zai[FN#84] was assiduously applying himself to Zen
discipline under Obak (Huang Po in Chinese, who died 850), the head
monk recognized his genius.  One day the monk asked him how long he
had been in the monastery, to which Rin-zai replied: 'Three years.'
The elder said: 'Have you ever approached the master and asked his
instruction in Buddhism?'  Rin-zai said: 'I have never done this, for
I did not know what to ask.'  'Why, you might go to the master and
ask him what is the essence of Buddhism?'


[FN#84]  Lin Tsi, the founder of the Lin Tsi school.


"Rin-zai, according to this advice, approached Obak and repeated the
question, but before he finished the master gave him a slap.

"When Rin-zai came back, the elder asked how the interview went.
Said Rin-zai: 'Before I could finish my question the master slapped
me, but I fail to grasp its meaning.'  The elder said: 'You go to him
again and ask the same question.'  When he did so, he received the
same response from the master.  But Rin-zai was urged again to try it
for the third time, but the outcome did not improve.

"At last he went to the elder, and said 'In obedience to your kind
suggestion, I have repeated my question three times, and been slapped
three times.  I deeply regret that, owing to my stupidity, I am
unable to comprehend the hidden meaning of all this.  I shall leave
this place and go somewhere else.'  Said the elder: 'If you wish to
depart, do not fail to go and see the master to say him farewell.'

"Immediately after this the elder saw the master, and said: 'That
young novice, who asked about Buddhism three times, is a remarkable
fellow.  When he comes to take leave of you, be so gracious as to
direct him properly.  After a hard training, he will prove to be a
great master, and, like a huge tree, he will give a refreshing
shelter to the world.'

"When Rin-zai came to see the master, the latter advised him not to
go anywhere else, but to Dai-gu (Tai-yu) of Kaoan, for he would be
able to instruct him in the faith.

"Rin-zai went to Dai-gu, who asked him whence he came.  Being
informed that he was from Obak, Dai-gu further inquired what
instruction he had under the master.  Rin-zai answered: 'I asked him
three times about the essence of Buddhism, and he slapped me three
times.  But I am yet unable to see whether I had any fault or not.'
Dai-gu said: 'Obak was tender-hearted even as a dotard, and you are
not warranted at all to come over here and ask me whether anything
was faulty with you.'

"Being thus reprimanded, the signification of the whole affair
suddenly dawned upon the mind of Rin-zai, and he exclaimed: 'There is
not much, after all, in the Buddhism of Obak.'  Whereupon Dai-gu took
hold of him, and said: 'This ghostly good-for-nothing creature!  A
few minutes ago you came to me and complainingly asked what was wrong
with you, and now boldly declare that there is not much in the
Buddhism of Obak.  What is the reason of all this?  Speak out quick!
speak out quick!'  In response to this, Rin-zai softly struck three
times his fist at the ribs of Dai-gu.  The latter then released him,
saying: 'Your teacher is Obak, and I will have nothing to do with
you.'

"Rin-zai took leave of Dai-gu and came back to Obak, who, on seeing
him come, exclaimed: 'Foolish fellow! what does it avail you to come
and go all the time like this?'  Rin-zai said: 'It is all due to your
doting kindness.'

"When, after the usual salutation, Rin-zai stood by the side of Obak,
the latter asked him whence he had come this time.  Rin-zai answered:
"In obedience to your kind instruction, I was with Dai-gu. Thence am
I come.'

And he related, being asked for further information, all that had
happened there.

"Obak said: 'As soon as that fellow shows himself up here, I shall
have to give him a good thrashing.'  'You need not wait for him to
come; have it right this moment,' was the reply; and with this
Rin-zai gave his master a slap on the back.

"Obak said: 'How dares this lunatic come into my presence and play
with a tiger's whiskers?'  Rin-zai then burst out into a Ho,[FN#85]
and Obak said: 'Attendant, come and carry this lunatic away to his
cell.'"


[FN#85]  A loud outcry, frequently made use of by Zen teachers, after
Rin-zai. Its Chinese pronunciation is 'Hoh,' and pronounced 'Katsu'
in Japanese, but 'tsu' is not audible.



8. The Courage and the Composure of Mind of the Zen Monk and of the
Samurai.

Fourthly, our Samurai encountered death, as is well known, with
unflinching courage.  He would never turn back from, but fight till
his last with his enemy.  To be called a coward was for him the
dishonour worse than death itself.  An incident about Tsu Yuen
(So-gen), who came over to Japan in 1280, being invited by
Toki-mune[FN#86] (Ho-jo), the Regent General, well illustrates how
much Zen monks resembled our Samurais.  The event happened when he
was in China, where the invading army of Yuen spread terror all over
the country.  Some of the barbarians, who crossed the border of the
State of Wan, broke into the monastery of Tsu Yuen, and threatened to
behead him.  Then calmly sitting down, ready to meet his fate, he
composed the following verses

"The heaven and earth afford me no shelter at all;
I'm glad, unreal are body and soul.
Welcome thy weapon, O warrior of Yuen! Thy trusty steel,
That flashes lightning, cuts the wind of Spring, I feel."


[FN#86]  A bold statesman and soldier, who was the real ruler of
Japan 1264-1283.


This reminds us of Sang Chao[FN#87] (So-jo), who, on the verge of
death by the vagabond's sword, expressed his feelings in the follow
lines:

"In body there exists no soul.
The mind is not real at all.
Now try on me thy flashing steel,
As if it cuts the wind of Spring, I feel."


[FN#87]  The man was not a pure Zen master, being a disciple of
Kumarajiva, the founder of the San Ron Sect. This is a most
remarkable evidence that Zen, especially the Rin Zan school, was
influenced by Kumarajiva and his disciples. For the details of the
anecdote, see E-gen.


The barbarians, moved by this calm resolution and dignified air of
Tsu Yuen, rightly supposed him to be no ordinary personage, and left
the monastery, doing no harm to him.



9. Zen and the Regent Generals of the Ho-Jo Period.

No wonder, then, that the representatives of the Samurai class, the
Regent Generals, especially such able rulers as Toki-yori, Toki-mune,
and others noted for their good administration, of the Ho-jo period
(1205-1332) greatly favoured Zen.  They not only patronized the
faith, building great temples[FN#88] and inviting best Chinese Zen
teachers[FN#89] but also lived just as Zen monks, having the head
shaven, wearing a holy robe, and practising cross-legged Meditation.


[FN#88]  To-fuku-ji, the head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai
under the same name, was built in 1243.  Ken-cho-ji, the head temple
of a subsect of the Rin Zai under the same name, was built in 1253.
En-gaku ji, the head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the
same name, was built in 1282.  Nan-zen-ji, the head temple of a
sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name, was erected in 1326.

[FN#89]  Tao Lung (Do-ryu), known as Dai-kaku Zen-ji, invited by
Tokiyori, came over to Japan in 1246.  He became the founder of
Ken-cho-ji-ha, a sub-sect of the Rin Zai, and died in 1278.  Of his
disciples, Yaku-o was most noted, and Yaku-o's disciple, Jaku-shitsu,
became the founder of Yo-genji-ha, another sub-sect of the Rin Zai.
Tsu Yuen (So-gen), known as Buk-ko-koku-shi, invited by Toki-mune,
crossed the sea in 1280, became the founder of En-gaku-ji-ha (a
sub-sect of the Rin Zai), and died in 1286.  Tsing Choh (Sei-setsu),
invited by Taka-toki, came in 1327, and died in 1339.  Chu Tsun
(So-shun) came in 1331, and died in 1336.  Fan Sien (Bon-sen) came
together with Chu Tsun, and died in 1348.  These were the prominent
Chinese teachers of that time.


Toki-yori (1247-1263), for instance, who entered the monastic life
while be was still the real governor of the country, led as simple a
life, as is shown in his verse, which ran as follows:

"Higher than its bank the rivulet flows;
Greener than moss tiny grass grows.
No one call at my humble cottage on the rock,
But the gate by itself opens to the Wind's knock."

Toki-yori attained to Enlightenment by the instruction of Do-gen and
Do-ryu, and breathed his last calmly sitting cross-legged, and
expressing his feelings in the following lines:

"Thirty-seven of years,
Karma mirror stood high;
Now I break it to pieces,
Path of Great is then nigh."

His successor, Toki-mune (1264-1283), a bold statesman and soldier,
was no less of a devoted believer in Zen.  Twice he beheaded the
envoys sent by the great Chinese conqueror, Kublai, who demanded
Japan should either surrender or be trodden under his foot.  And when
the alarming news of the Chinese Armada's approaching the land
reached him, be is said to have called on his tutor, Tsu Yuen, to
receive the last instruction.  "Now, reverend sir," said. he, "an
imminent peril threatens the land."  "How art thou going to encounter
it?" asked the master.  Then Toki-mune burst into a thundering Ka
with all his might to show his undaunted spirit in encountering the
approaching enemy.  "O, the lion's roar!" said Tsu Yuen.

"Thou art a genuine lion. Go, and never turn back."  Thus encouraged
by the teacher, the Regent General sent out the defending army, and
successfully rescued the state from the mouth of destruction, gaining
a splendid victory over the invaders, almost all of whom perished in
the western seas.



10. Zen after the Downfall of the Ho-Jo Regency.

Towards the end of the Ho-Jo period,[FN#90] and after the downfall of
the Regency in 1333, sanguinary battles were fought between the
Imperialists and the rebels.  The former, brave and faithful as they
were, being outnumbered by the latter, perished in the field one
after another for the sake of the ill-starred Emperor Go-dai-go
(1319-1338), whose eventful life ended in anxiety and despair.


[FN#90]  Although Zen was first favoured by the Ho-jo Regency and
chiefly prospered at Kama-kura, yet it rapidly began to exercise its
influence on nobles and Emperors at Kyo-to.  This is mainly due to
the activity of En-ni, known as Sho-Ichi-Koku-Shi (1202-1280), who
first earned Zen under Gyo-yu, a disciple of Ei-sai, and afterwards
went to China, where he was Enlightened under the instruction of Wu
Chun, of the monastery of King Shan.  After his return, Michi-iye
(Fuji-wara), a powerful nobleman, erected for him To-fuku-ji in 1243,
and he became the founder of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai, named after
that monastery.  The Emperor Go-saga (1243-1246), an admirer of his,
received the Moral Precepts from him.  One of his disciples, To-zan,
became the spiritual adviser of the Emperor Fushi-mi (1288-1298), and
another disciple, Mu kwan, was created the abbot of the monastery of
Nan-zen-ji by the Emperor Kame-yama (1260-1274), as the founder of a
sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name.

Another teacher who gained lasting influence on the Court is Nan-po,
known as Dai-O-Koku-Shi (1235-1308), who was appointed the abbot of
the monastery of Man-ju-ji in Kyo to by the Emperor Fushi-mi.  One of
his disciples, Tsu-o, was the spiritual adviser to both the Emperor
Hana-zono (1308-1318) and the Emperor Go-dai-go.  And another
disciple, Myo-cho, known as Dai-To-Koku-Shi (1282-1337), also was
admired by the two Emperors, and created the abbot of Dai-toku-ji, as
the founder of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name.  It was
for Myo-cho's disciple, Kan-zan (1277 1360), that the Emperor
Hana-zono turned his detached palace into a monastery, named
Myo-shin-ji, the head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the
same name.


It was at this time that Japan gave birth to Masa-shige (Kusu-noki),
an able general and tactician of the Imperialists, who for the sake
of the Emperor not only sacrificed himself and his brother, but by
his will his son and his son's successor died for the same cause,
boldly attacking the enemy whose number was overwhelmingly great.
Masa-shige's loyalty, wisdom, bravery, and prudence are not merely
unique in the history of Japan, but perhaps in the history of man.
The tragic tale about his parting with his beloved son, and his
bravery shown at his last battle, never fail to inspire the Japanese
with heroism.  He is the best specimen of the Samurai class.
According to an old document,[FN#91] this Masa-shige was the
practiser of Zen, and just before his last battle he called on Chu
Tsun (So-shun) to receive the final instruction.  "What have I to do
when death takes the place of life?" asked Masa-shige.  The teacher
replied:

"Be bold, at once cut off both ties,
The drawn sword gleams against the skies."

Thus becoming, as it were, an indispensable discipline for the
Samurai, Zen never came to an end with the Ho-jo period, but grew
more prosperous than before during the reign[FN#92] of the Emperor
Go-dai-go, one of the most enthusiastic patrons of the faith.


[FN#91]  The event is detailed at length in a life of So-shun, but
some historians suspect it to be fictitious. This awaits a further
research.

[FN#92]  As we have already mentioned, Do-gen, the founder of the
Japanese So To Sect, shunned the society of the rich and the
powerful, and led a secluded life.  In consequence his sect did not
make any rapid progress until the Fourth Patriarch of his line,
Kei-zan (1268-1325) who, being of energetic spirit, spread his faith
with remarkable activity, building many large monasteries, of which
Yo-ko-ji, in the province of No-to, So-ji-ji (near Yokohama), one of
the head temples of the sect, are well known.  One of his disciples,
Mei ho (1277-1350), propagated the faith in the northern provinces;
while another disciple, Ga-san (1275-1365), being a greater
character, brought up more than thirty distinguished disciples, of
whom Tai-gen, Tsu-gen, Mu-tan, Dai-tetsu, and Jip-po, are best known.
 Tai-gen (died 1370) and big successors propagated the faith over the
middle provinces, while Tsu-gen (1332-1391) and his successors spread
the sect all over the north-eastern and south-western provinces.
Thus it is worthy of our notice that most of the Rin Zai teachers
confined their activities within Kamakura and Kyo-to, while the So To
masters spread the faith all over the country.


The Shoguns of the Ashi-kaga period (1338-1573) were not less devoted
to the faith than the Emperors who succeeded the Emperor Go-dai-go.
And even Taka-uji (1338-1357), the notorious founder of the
Shogunate, built a monastery and invited So-seki,[FN#93] better known
as Mu-So-Koku-Shi, who was respected as the tutor by the three
successive Emperors after Go-dai-go.  Taka-uji's example was followed
by all succeeding Shoguns, and Shogun's example was followed by the
feudal lords and their vassals.  This resulted in the propagation of
Zen throughout the country.  We can easily imagine how Zen was
prosperous in these days from the splendid monasteries[FN#94] built
at this period, such as the Golden Hall Temple and the Silver Hall
Temple that still adorn the fair city of Kyo-to.

[FN#93]  So-seki (1276-1351) was perhaps the greatest Zen master of
the period.  Of numerous monasteries built for him, E-rin-ji, in the
province of Kae, and Ten-ryu-ji, the head temple of a sub-sect of the
Rin Zai under the same name, are of importance.  Out of over seventy
eminent disciples of his, Gi-do (1365-1388), the author of Ku-ge-shu;
Shun-oku (1331-1338), the founder of the monastery of So-koku-ji, the
head temple of a sub-sect of the Rin Zai under the same name; and
Zek-kai (1337-1405), author of Sho-ken-shu, are best known.


[FN#94]  Myo-shin-ji was built in 1337 by the Emperor Hana-zono;
Ten-ryu-ji was erected by Taka-uji, the first Shogun of the period,
in 1344; So-koku-ji by Yosh-imitsu, the third Shogun, in 1385;
