polemoscope--that is to say, an instrument for observations in war."

"Thank you, William," said Lucy, "but what are you going to do with it?"

_William._--"The thing is quite plain. I am going to fasten a small
mirror on a light pitchfork, inclining it downwards. This pitchfork I
shall fasten firmly to pole; then some one will climb, dear papa,
without any danger, as far as the strong branches reach; from thence he
can draw up the pole and its mirror, with a long string, and by raising
the mirror above the nest, he will enable us to see, with the aid of
your telescope, all that the nest contains. This is my plan, and I
think it is not so bad!"

_Father_.--(Smiling.)--"Dear William. It is a great pity, however, that
you are so blind. There are two things you have not considered. One is,
that the branches which cover the nest, are very thick and tufted.
Therefore, your mirror, even if it reached their summit, would only
reflect the leaves, and consequently neither the nest nor the knife;
and the other thing which you do not observe, is this, that the
magpies, by an admirable instinct, which God has given them, build
their nests, not like a basin, as you supposed, but in the form of a
ball; so that the nest is covered with a vaulted roof, formed of sticks
closely interwoven, which shelters the bird and its brood from bad
weather, and above all, from the cruel claw of the kite or hawk."

"I am much obliged to you, dear papa," said William. "What a pity," he
added, with a sigh; "for my plan would otherwise have been infallible."

"Let us seek a better one," said their father. "Mary, go and see if you
have not left your knife in the fruit-room. Perhaps it was yesterday,
that you peeled the apple for Sophy."

"I will do so," said Mary, and she went into the house for the key of
the fruit-room.

She soon returned, exclaiming, "The key is not in its place, and I put
it there this morning."

"Miss Mary is mistaken," said Elizabeth, coming out of the kitchen; "I
see the key in the door."

"Papa," said Mary, "I recollect, when I put the key in the cupboard,
this very morning, Sophy looked at it, and said, 'It is certainly the
prettiest key on the bunch.'"

"Let us go to the fruit-room," said the father, directing his steps
thither. "I fear this will prove a sad affair."

"What is this, too," cried Mary, examining the shelves, "the big key of
the cellar here Where did it come from? And this key covered with
cheese, from one end to the other!"

"Let us go to the cellar!" said the father. "I believe we shall find
out more there than we can here."

They opened the door, and found the brilliant silver knife, not in the
magpie's nest, but sticking in a cheese, from which a large portion
appeared to have been detached.

The children were amazed, and their Father much grieved.

"Here is your knife, Mary," said John, who first saw it. "Certainly,
there is no need of a looking-glass to find it."

"You must not joke, my children," said the Father; "this is a very sad
business. I am thankful it has taken place in the absence of your dear
Mother, and I forbid you writing her anything about it. This must
concern me, and me alone."

_William_.--(Indignantly.)--"It amounts to a theft, a falsehood!"

_Lucy_.--"But who has done it, William? Did not Mary leave her knife
here?"

_William_.--"Who saw the Magpie carrying it off in his beak?"

_Mary_.--(To Lucy.)--"Do you not understand that it was poor Elizabeth,
who came here with my knife, which she took off the table where I left
it, and who, after having cut a piece of cheese with it, went to the
fruit-room, no doubt to steal some apples also."

_John_.--(Angrily.)--"Papa, Elizabeth has acted deceitfully--will you
allow her to remain with you? One of the Psalms, the 101st, I think,
says, 'He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house.'"

_The Father_.--(Gravely.) "It is said also in Holy Scriptures, my son,
that 'mercy rejoiceth against judgment,' and perhaps, John, if any of
us, had been brought up like poor Elizabeth, we might have done even
worse than this."

"I am quite vexed," said Mary, "Oh! why did I not take more care of
that wretched knife!"

_William._--"But, Mary, it was not your knife left upon the table,
which tempted her to take two keys secretly out of the cupboard, and
which made them the instruments of this theft. For Papa," continued he,
"it _is_ a theft, and a shameful one too! These stolen keys are no
small matter!"

_The Father_.--(Calmly.)--"I know it my children, and it grieves my
heart, that one of my servants, who daily hears the word of God read
and explained, should so far have forgotten the fear of the Lord! This
is what saddens me, and wounds me deeply."

_Lucy_.--"Elizabeth has not long been our cook, and probably she never
heard the word of God before she came here. Poor girl I she is perhaps
very unhappy now,--and I am sure, she will repent and turn to God."

_The Father_.-"That is right, my dear child, I rejoice to hear you
plead the cause of the unhappy, and even of the guilty, for as I said
before, 'mercy rejoiceth against judgment.'"

"I was therefore wrong," said John, "and I confess it ... for certainly
I scarcely pitied her.... I did wrong I and now I think as Lucy does."

"And I also," said William, "'Clemency governs courage,' says a Grecian
historian, and ..."

_The Father._--(Very seriously.)--"But, my dear William, what have the
pagans of old and their morals to do here? My son, you know it is the
word of God which rules our conduct, and which commands us to suffer
and to forgive."

_Lucy._--"Papa, will you allow me to repeat a passage, which I learnt
by heart last Sunday?"

_The Father._--"Repeat it, Lucy, and may God bless it to us all!"

_Lucy._--"'Execute true judgment, and show mercy and compassion every
man to his brother.' It is in the seventh chapter of Zechariah."

"I too, was wrong then," said William, "very wrong! for it is the
wisdom of God alone, that enlightens us."

"True, my son," said his Father, "may God always remind you of this. I
am going to speak to Elizabeth," he added, "as for you, my children, do
not say a word about it, and above all, bless the Lord, for having made
known to you his grace and holy law. Pray to him together, that my
words may have their due effect upon the mind of this poor guilty
creature."

The Father went out to look for Elizabeth, and the children repaired to
William's room, who, having knelt down with them, prayed to the Lord to
take pity upon her, and to touch her heart, and he ended the prayer in
the following words:--"In thy great wisdom, O Most Gracious God, and in
thine infinite compassion, through Jesus Christ, grant unto each of us
true repentance, and a sincere change of heart, and may this affliction
be turned to the glory of our Saviour Jesus."

The children then returned to their several occupations, and not one of
them ever thought of judging Elizabeth, or even speaking harshly of her.

We may add, that the exhortation of her charitable master, produced
sincere penitence in Elizabeth, and that the poor girl was not sent out
of the house; for "mercy pleaded against judgment."

It is thus that God deals with us! Oh! which of us can tell how often
he has received pardon from the Lord!




III.


The Modern Dorcas


"The night cometh when no man can work."--JOHN, ix.

Oh! my sister! my sister! What a lesson may we learn from the death of
our dear Amelia! She was but sixteen years old like myself, and only
two years older than you are, but how much had she done for the Lord. I
saw and heard her, when Jesus came to call her to himself; I was in the
churchyard when they placed her body in the grave! Oh! what a solemn
warning! and now I feel humbled before God, and I pray Him to pour into
my heart the same Spirit which He bestowed so abundantly upon our
friend, as well as that lively faith, which although Amelia 'is dead,
yet speaketh,' as it is said of Abel, and which shall speak through her
for many years to come!

I wrote to you less than a fortnight ago, that Amelia was unwell; but
how little I then thought it was her last illness! Oh! how uncertain
our life is, dear Esther, and how much wiser we should be if we would
only believe so!

On the seventh day of her illness, her mother said to me, "Anna, your
friend is going to leave us; the danger of her disorder increases every
hour, and we must give her up to God!"

I wept much and bitterly, and could not at first believe it; but when I
was alone with Amelia, the next day, she said to me, with that calm
peacefulness which never left her, "I am going away from this world,
Anna; yes, dear Anna, I am going to depart; I feel it, and ... I am
preparing myself for it!"

I tried to turn away her thoughts from this subject; I told her that
she was mistaken, and that God would certainly restore her; but she
stopped me with firmness of manner, and said, "Do you envy my
happiness, Anna? Do you wish to prevent me from going to my Heavenly
home, to my Saviour, unto his light and glory?" The entrance of her
father and the Doctor prevented my reply, and I left the room in tears.

"You must not cry," said her mother to me. "We must pray, and above
all, seek profit from the occasion. The time is short! Her end is at
hand! But," added this servant of Christ, "_that_ end is the beginning
of a life which shall have no end!"

Three more days passed away. On the fourth, we had some faint hope, but
the following day, all had vanished, and towards evening, Amelia
declared, that the Lord was about to take her.

"Yes, my dear parents, my excellent father and mother," she said, with
a beam of heavenly joy on her countenance, "I am about to leave you;
but I do not leave my God, for I am going to see Him, 'face to face.'"

"My dear parents," she continued, affectionately, "rejoice at my
departure; I am going to Heaven a little before you, it is true, but it
is _only before you_, and you know it; and the Apostle says, that, 'to
be with Christ is far better.'"

I was present, Esther, and was crying.

"Why do you cry, Anna?" she said, "Are you sorry to see me go to my
Father's house?"

"But, Amelia, _I_ lose you; we all lose you; and ..."

"I do not like to hear you say that, Anna; do not repeat it, and do not
think of it. Our Saviour says that, 'He who believes on Him shall not
see death;' and I am certain, that my soul is about to join those of
His saints who have already departed this life, for His grace has also
justified _me._"

"Ah!" said her aunt, who had not left her bedside for two days, "you
have always done the will of God, dear Amelia; you are therefore sure
of going to Him."

"Dear aunt," she replied, with sorrow on her countenance, "I assure you
that you grieve me. I have been during the whole of my life, but a poor
sinner, and have by no means done what you say; but.... God Himself has
pardoned me, and it is only, my dear aunt, because the blood of Jesus
has washed away my sins, that I shall see God."

It was thus, my sister, that Amelia spoke at intervals almost the whole
night. Her voice at length became weaker; and towards morning, after a
slight drowsiness, she said to her father, "Papa, embrace your child
once more." She then turned to her mother, and said, "My dear mamma,
embrace me also, and ... may Jesus comfort you all!"

A few minutes after, our darling friend fell gradually asleep, and her
last breath died away like the expiring flame of a candle. She
experienced nothing of the agony of death. Truly, dear Esther, Amelia
knew not what death was!

But oh! how I have myself suffered! and how difficult it is to tear
one's self thus forever here below, from such a friend as she was!

Nevertheless, my sister, God knows we have not dared to murmur. I wish
you had heard the prayer that Amelia's father offered up, when his
daughter had ceased to breathe! Oh! it was the spirit of consolation
itself which spoke! And since that solemn hour, what piety, what
strength and peace of mind, Amelia's mother his displayed! I am sure
you would have said, that the Lord was present, and that He was telling
us with His own voice: "Amelia triumphs--she is in _My_ glory!"

I wished to be in the churchyard when our friend, or rather, when her
body of dust, was committed to the grave. There were many persons
present, but especially poor people; some old men, and several
children, came to take their last leave of her.

A grey-headed and feeble old man was standing near the grave, leaning
with his two hands on a staff, and with his head depressed. He wept
aloud, when the clergyman mentioned Amelia's name, as he prayed, and
gave thanks to God. He then stooped down, and taking a little earth in
his hand, said, as he scattered it over the coffin: "Sleep, sweet
messenger of consolation! Sleep, until He whom thy lips first
proclaimed to me, calls thee to arise!" And with this, he burst into
tears, as they filled the grave.

When all was finished, and the funeral procession had departed, the
poor people who were present approached the grave, sobbing, and
repeating, "Sweet messenger of goodness! Our kind friend, our _true_
mother!" And two or three of the children placed upon her grave
nosegays of box and white flowers.

"Alas," said a young girl, "she will never hear me read the Bible
again, nor instruct me how to live!"

Another cried loudly, "Who will now come to visit my sick mother, and
read the Bible to her, and bring her comfort and assistance."

And there was a father, a poor workman, with two little boys, who,
holding his children by the hand, came and placed himself near the spot
where the head of Amelia was laid, saying to them, "Here, my poor
children, under this sod, rests that sweet countenance which used to
smile upon you, as if she had been your mother! Her lips have often
told you, that you were not orphans, and that God was better to you
than a parent.... Well, my dear children, let us remember what she used
to say: 'God has not forgotten us, and He will sustain us!'"

I was with my brother, who himself wept with all his heart, to see the
sincere grief of these poor people. He whispered to me, "I have a great
mind to speak to them, and ask them what Amelia used to do for them." I
had the same wish; so we approached a group which surrounded the grave,
and asked them when they had become acquainted with Amelia.

"For my part," answered the old man, already spoken of, "this messenger
of peace visited me two years ago, for the first time. I lived near a
family to whom she had brought some worsted stockings, for winter was
just setting in, and so my neighbor mentioned me to her, as a poor
infirm old man. She desired to see me, and had she been my own
daughter, she could never have shown me more respect and kindness! She
procured me a warm quilt that same evening, and on the morrow, towards
the middle of the day, she came with her excellent mother to pay me a
long visit.

"You must know, sir," continued the old man, to my brother, "I was then
very ignorant, or rather my heart was hard and proud towards God. I had
no Bible, and did not care about one. Well, this dear young lady not
only brought me one, with her own hands, but came to read and explain
it to me, with great patience, at least three times a week, during the
first twelve months.

"God took pity on me," added the old man, in a low voice, "and last
year I began better to understand the full pardon which is in Christ
Jesus, and was even able to pray with Miss Amelia.

"She used sometimes to call me, 'My old father,' but it was I who ought
to have called _her_ the _mother_, the true mother of my soul.

"Just one month ago, she came to me for the last time; she gave me with
a sweet smile, these worsted gloves, which she had knitted herself, and
then recommended me with much respect and kindness to thank our Lord,
who sent them me! This was the last of that sweet lady's charities to
me!"...

Upon this, the old man turned away weeping, and as he walked slowly on,
he frequently looked back upon the newly-covered grave.

"The same thing happened to me," said the workman. "The mother of these
two little children died ten months ago; we were in want of everything,
then, and I knew not even how to dress these children. Believe me,
Miss," he added, addressing me with feeling, "when the mother is gone,
all is gone!... but our gracious God did not forsake us, for He sent us
his angel; I say His angel, although she is at present much more than
an angel!... Is she not indeed a child of God in heaven? ... but, in
short, she clothed these two little ones, and I am sure she did not
spare herself in working for them; the clothes they now wear were made
chiefly by that dear young lady's hands. Then she used to come and
visit us; she often made my two children go to her house, and always
gave them good advice. She also sent them to school, and although it
was certainly her mother who paid for them, yet it was Miss Amelia who
taught them to read at home, and who, almost every Sunday, made them
repeat their Bible lessons.

"Ah, Miss," he continued, "all that that dear young lady did for us,
