people, we have, for the prosperity of our race, come hither to slay
thee, the slaughterer of our relatives. Thou thinkest that there is no
man among the Kshatriyas (equal to thee). This, O king, is a great
error of judgment on thy part. What Kshatriya is there, O king, who
endued with greatness of soul and recollecting the dignity of his own
parentage, would not ascend to eternal heaven that hath not its like
anywhere, falling in open fight? Know O bull among men, that Kshatriyas
engage themselves in battle, as persons installed in sacrifices, with
heaven in view, and vanquish the whole world! Study of the Vedas, great
fame, ascetic penances, and death in battle, are all acts that lead to
heaven. The attainment of heaven by the three other acts may be
uncertain, but death in battle hath that for its certain consequence.
Death in battle is the sure cause of triumph like Indra's. It is graced
by numerous merits. It is for this reason that he of a hundred
sacrifices (Indra) hath become what he is, and by vanquishing the
Asuras he ruleth the universe. Hostility with whom else than thee is so
sure of leading to heaven, proud as thou art of the excessive strength
of thy vast Magadha host? Don't disregard others, O king. Valour
dwelleth in every man. O king of men, there are many men whose valour
may be equal or superior to thine. As long as these are not known, so
long only art thou noted for thy valour. Thy prowess, O king, can be
borne by us. It is, therefore, that I say so. O king of Magadha, cast
off thy superiority and pride in the presence of those that are thy
equals. Go not, O king, with thy children and ministers and army, into
the regions of Yama. Damvodhava, Kartavirya, Uttara, and Vrihadratha,
were kings that met with destruction, along with all their forces, for
having disregarded their superiors. Desirous of liberating the captive
monarchs from thee, know that we are certainly not Brahmanas. I am
Hrishesha otherwise called Sauri, and these two heroes among men are
the sons of Pandu. O king of Magadha, we challenge thee. Fight standing
before us. Either set free all the monarchs, or go thou to the abode of
Yama.'

"Jarasandha said,--'I never make a captive of a king without first
vanquishing him. Who hath been kept here that hath not been defeated in
war? This, O Krishna, it hath been said, is the duty that should be
followed by the Kshatriyas, viz., to bring others under sway by the
exhibition of prowess and then to treat them as slaves. Having gathered
these monarchs with the intention of offering them as sacrifices unto
the god, how shall I, O Krishna, from fear liberate them to-day, when I
recollect also the duty I have recited of a Kshatriya? With troops
against troops arrayed in order of battle, or alone against one, or
against two, or against three, at the same time or separately, I am
ready to fight.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"Having spoken thus, and desiring to fight with
those heroes of terrible achievements, king Jarasandha ordered (his
son) Sahadeva to be installed on the throne. Then, O bull of the
Bharata race, the king, on the eve of battle, thought of his two
generals Kausika and Chitrasena. These two, O king, were formerly
called by everybody in the world of men by the respectful appellations
of Hansa and Dimvaka. And, O monarch, that tiger among men, the lord
Sauri ever devoted to truth, the slayer of Madhu, the younger brother
of Haladhara, the foremost of all persons having their senses under
complete control, keeping in view the command of Brahma and remembering
that the ruler of Magadha was destined to be slain in battle by Bhima
and not by the descendant of Madhu (Yadavas), desired not to slay
himself king Jarasandha, that foremost of all men endued with strength,
that hero possessed of the prowess of a tiger, that warrior of terrible
valour."


SECTION XXIII

Vaisampayana said,--"then that foremost of all speakers, Krishna of the
Yadava race, addressing king Jarasandha who was resolved upon fighting,
said,--'O king, with whom amongst us three dost thou desire to fight?
Who amongst us shall prepare himself for battle (with thee)?' Thus
addressed, the ruler of Magadha, king Jarasandha of great splendour,
expressed his desire for fighting with Bhima. The priest then, bringing
with him the yellow pigment obtained from the cow and garlands of
flowers and other auspicious articles, as also various excellent
medicines for restoring lost consciousness and alleviating pain,
approached Jarasandha, panting for battle. The king Jarasandha, on
whose behalf propitiatory ceremonies with benedictions were performed
by a renowned Brahmana, remembering the duty of a Kshatriya dressed
himself for battle. Taking off his crown and binding his hair properly,
Jarasandha stood up like an ocean bursting its continents. Then the
monarch possessed of terrible prowess, addressing Bhima, said, 'I will
fight with thee. It is better to be vanquished by a superior person.'
And saying this, Jarasandha, that represser of all foes endued, rushed
with great energy at Bhimasena like the Asura Vala of old who rushed at
the chief of the celestials. And the mighty Bhimasena, on whose behalf
the gods had been invoked by Krishna, that cousin of his, having
consulted with advanced towards Jarasandha, impelled by the desire of
fight. Then those tigers among men, those heroes of great prowess, with
their bare arms as their only weapons, cheerfully engaged themselves in
the encounter, each desirous of vanquishing the other. And seizing each
other's arms and twining each other's legs, (at times) they slapped
their arm-pits, causing the enclosure to tremble at the sound. And
frequently seizing each other's necks with their hands and dragging and
pushing it with violence, and each pressing every limb of his body
against every limb of the other, they continued, O exalted one, to slap
their arm-pits (at time). And sometimes stretching their arms and
sometimes drawing them close, and now raising them up and now dropping
them down, they began to seize each other. And striking neck against
neck and forehead against forehead, they caused fiery sparks to come
out like flashes of lightning. And grasping each other in various ways
by means of their arms, and kicking each other with such violence as to
affect the innermost nerves, they struck at each other's breasts with
clenched fists. With bare arms as their only weapons roaring like
clouds they grasped and struck each other like two mad elephants
encountering each other with their trunks. Incensed at each other's
blow, they fought on dragging and pushing each other and fiercely
looking at each other like two wrathful lions. And each striking every
limb of the other with his own and using his arms also against the
other, and catching hold of each other's waist, they hurled each other
to a distance. Accomplished in wrestling, the two heroes clasping each
other with their arms and each dragging the other unto himself, began
to press each other with great violence. The heroes then performed
those grandest of all feats in wrestling called Prishtabhanga, which
consisted in throwing each other down with face towards the earth and
maintaining the one knocked down in that position as long as possible.
And employing his arms, each also performed the feats called
Sampurna-murchcha and Purna-kumbha. At times they twisted each other's
arms and other limbs as if these were vegetable fibres that were to be
twisted into chords. And with clenched fists they struck each other at
times, pretending to aim at particular limbs while the blows descended
upon other parts of the body. It was thus that those heroes fought with
each other. The citizens consisting of thousands, of Brahmanas,
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras, and even women and the aged, O tiger
among men, came out and gathered there to behold the fight. And the
crowd became so great that it was one solid mass of humanity with no
space between body and body. The sound the wrestlers made by the
slapping of their arms, the seizing of each other's necks for bringing
each other down, and the grasping of each other's legs for dashing each
other to the ground, became so loud that it resembled the roar of
thunder or of falling cliffs. Both of them were foremost of mighty men,
and both took great delight in such encounter. Desirous of vanquishing
the other, each was on the alert for taking advantage of the slightest
lapse of the other. And, O monarch, the mighty Bhima and Jarasandha
fought terribly on in those lists, driving the crowd at times by the
motions of their hands like Vritra and Vasava of old. Thus two heroes,
dragging each other forward and pressing each other backward and with
sudden jerks throwing each other face downward and sideways, mangled
each other dreadfully. And at times they struck each other with their
knee-joints. And addressing each other loudly in stinging speeches,
they struck each other with clenched fists, the blows descending like a
mass of stone upon each other. With broad shoulders and long arms and
both well-skilled in wrestling encounters, they struck each other with
those long arms of theirs that were like maces of iron. That encounter
of the heroes commenced on the first (lunar) day of the month of Kartic
(October) and the illustrious heroes fought on without intermission and
food, day and night, till the thirteenth lunar day. It was on the night
of the fourteenth of the lunar fortnight that the monarch of Magadha
desisted from fatigue. And O king, Janardana beholding the monarch
tired, addressed Bhima of terrible deeds, and as if to stimulate him
said,--'O son of Kunti, a foe that is fatigued cannot be pressed for if
pressed at such a time he may even die. Therefore, O son of Kunti, this
king should not be oppressed by thee. On the other hand, O bull of the
Bharata race, fight with him with thy arms, putting forth as much
strength only as thy antagonist hath now left!' Then that slayer of
hostile heroes, the son of Pandu, thus addressed by Krishna, understood
the plight of Jarasandha and forthwith resolved upon taking his life.
And that foremost of all men endued with strength, that prince of the
Kuru race, desirous of vanquishing the hitherto unvanquished
Jarasandha, mustered all his strength and courage."


SECTION XXIV

Vaisampayana said,--"thus addressed, Bhima firmly resolved upon slaying
Jarasandha, replied unto Krishna of the Yadu race, saying,--'O tiger of
the Yadu race, O Krishna, this wretch that yet stayeth before me with
sufficient strength and bent upon fight, should not be forgiven by me.'
Hearing these words of Vrikodara (Bhima), that tiger among men,
Krishna, desiring to encourage that hero to accomplish the death of
Jarasandha without any delay, answered,--'O Bhima, exhibit today upon
Jarasandha the strength thou hast luckily derived, the might thou hast
obtained from (thy father), the god Maruta.' Thus addressed by Krishna,
Bhima, that slayer of foes, holding up in the air the powerful
Jarasandha, began to whirl him on high. And, O bull of the Bharata
race, having so whirled him in the air full hundred times, Bhima
pressed his knee against Jarasandha's backbone and broke his body in
twain. And having killed him thus, the mighty Vrikodara uttered a
terrible roar. And the roar of the Pandava mingling with that death
knell of Jarasandha, while he was being broken on Bhima's knee, caused
a loud uproar that struck fear into the heart of every creature. And
all the citizens of Magadha became dumb with terror and many women were
even prematurely delivered. And hearing those roars, the people of
Magadha thought that either the Himavat was tumbling down or the earth
itself was being rent asunder. And those oppressors of all foes then,
leaving the lifeless body of the king at the palace gate where he lay
as one asleep, went out of the town. And Krishna, causing Jarasandha's
car furnished with an excellent flagstaff to be made ready and making
the brothers (Bhima and Arjuna) ride in it, went in and released his
(imprisoned) relatives. And those kings rescued from terrible fate,
rich in the possession of jewels, approaching Krishna made presents
unto him of jewels and gems. And having vanquished his foe, Krishna
furnished with weapons and unwounded and accompanied by the kings (he
had released), came out of Girivraja riding in that celestial car (of
Jarasandha). And he also who could wield the bow with both hands
(Arjuna), who was incapable of being vanquished by any of the monarchs
on earth, who was exceedingly handsome in person and well-skilled in
the destruction of the foe, accompanied by the possessor of great
strength (Bhima), came out of that fort with Krishna driving the car
whereon he rode. And that best of cars, incapable of being vanquished
by any king, ridden in by those warriors Bhima and Arjuna, and driven
by Krishna, looked exceedingly handsome. Indeed, it was upon that car
that Indra and Vishnu had fought of old in the battle (with the Asuras)
in which Taraka (the wife of Vrihaspati) had become the immediate cause
of much slaughter. And riding upon that car Krishna now came out of the
hill-fort. Possessed of the splendour of heated gold, and decked with
rows of jingling bells and furnished with wheels whose clatter was like
the roar of clouds, and ever victorious in battle, and always
slaughtering the foe against whom it was driven, it was that very car
riding upon which Indra had slain ninety-nine Asuras of old. And those
bulls among men (the three cousins) having obtained that car became
exceedingly glad. The people of Magadha, behold the long-armed Krishna
along with the two brothers, seated in that car (of Jarasandha)
wondered much. O Bharata, that car, whereunto were yoked celestial
horses and which possessed the speed of the wind, thus ridden upon by
Krishna, looked exceedingly beautiful. And upon that best of cars was a
flag-staff without being visibly attached thereto, and which was the
product of celestial skill. And the handsome flag-staff, possessed of
the splendour of the rainbow, could be seen from the distance of a
yojana. And Krishna while coming out, thought of Garuda. And Garuda,
thought of by his master, came thither in no time, like a tree of vast
proportions standing in a village worshipped by all. Garuda of immense
weight of body and living upon snakes sat upon that excellent car along
with the numberless open-mouthed and frightfully-roaring creatures on
its flag-staff. And thereupon that best of cars became still more
dazzling with its splendour and was as incapable of being looked at by
created being as the midday sun surrounded by a thousand rays. And, O
king, such was that best of flag-staffs of celestial make that it never
struck against any tree nor could any weapon injure it at all even
though visible to men's eyes. And Achyuta, that tiger among men, riding
with the two sons of Pandu upon that celestial car, the clatter of
whose wheels was like the roar of the clouds, came out of Girivraja.
The car upon which Krishna rode had been obtained by king Vasu from
Vasava, and from Vasu by Vrihadratha, and from the latter in due course
by king Jarasandha. And he of long arms and eyes like lotus-petals and
possessed of illustrious reputation, coming out of Girivraja, stopped
(for some time) on a level plain outside the town. And, O king, all the
citizens then, with the Brahmanas at their head, hastened thither to
adore him with due religious rites. And the kings who had been released
from confinement worshipped the slayer of Madhu with reverence, and
addressing him with eulogies said,--'O thou of long arms, thou hast
to-day rescued us, sunk in the deep mire of sorrow in the hand of
Jarasandha. Such an act of virtue by thee, O son of Devaki, assisted by
the might of Bhima and Arjuna, is most extraordinary. O Vishnu,
languishing as we all were in the terrible hill-fort of Jarasandha, it
was verily from sheer good fortune alone that thou hast rescued us, O
son of the Yadu race, and achieved thereby a remarkable reputation. O
tiger among men, we bow down to thee. O, command us what we shall do.
However difficult of accomplishment, thy command being made known to
us, O lord (Krishna), it will at once be accomplished by us.' Thus
addressed by the monarchs, the high-souled Hrishikesa gave them every
assurance and said,--'Yudhishthira is desirous of performing the
sacrifice of Rajasuya. That monarch, ever guided by virtue, is
solicitous of acquiring the imperial dignity. Having known this from me
assist ye him in his endeavours.' Then, O king, all those monarchs with
joyous hearts accepted the words of Krishna, saying,--'So be it!' And
saying this, those lords of earth made presents of jewels unto him of
the Dasarha race. And Govinda, moved by kindness towards them, took a
portion of those presents.

"Then the son of Jarasandha, the high-souled Sahadeva, accompanied by
his relatives and the principal officers of state, and with his priest
in front came thither. And the prince, bending himself low and making
large presents of jewels and precious stones, worshipped Vasudeva, that
god among men. Then that best of men, Krishna, giving every assurance
unto the prince afflicted with fear, accepted those presents of his of
great value. And Krishna joyfully installed the prince there and then
in the sovereignty of Magadha. And the strong-armed and illustrious son
of Jarasandha, thus installed on the throne by those most exalted of
men and having obtained the friendship of Krishna and treated with
respect and kindness by the two sons of Pritha, re-entered the city of
his father. And that bull amongst men, Krishna, accompanied by the sons
of Pritha and graced with great good fortune, left the city of Magadha,
laden with numerous jewels. Accompanied by the two sons of Pandu,
Achyuta (Krishna) arrived at Indraprastha, and approaching Yudhishthira
joyfully addressing that monarch said,--'O best of kings, from good
fortune, the mighty Jarasandha hath been slain by Bhima, and the kings
confined (at Girivraja) have been all set free. From good fortune also,
these two, Bhima and Dhananjaya, are well and arrived, O Bharata, at
their own city unwounded.' Then Yudhishthira worshipped Krishna as he
deserved and embraced Bhima and Arjuna in joy. And the monarch who had
no enemy, having obtained victory through the agency of his brothers in
consequence of the death of Jarasandha, gave himself up to pleasure and
merriment with all his brothers. And the oldest son of Pandu
(Yudhisthira) together with his brothers approached the kings who had
come to Indraprastha and entertaining and worshipping them, each
according to his age, dismissed them all. Commanded by Yudhishthira
those kings with joyful hearts, set out for their respective countries
without loss of time, riding upon excellent vehicles. Thus, O king, did
that tiger among men, Janardana of great intelligence, caused his foe
Jarasandha to be slain through the instrumentality of the Pandavas.
And, O Bharata, that chastiser of all foes having thus caused
Jarasandha to be slain, took leave of Yudhishthira and Pritha, and
Draupadi and Subhadra, and Bhimasena and Arjuna and the twins Nakula
and Sahadeva. After taking leave of Dhananjaya also, he set out for his
own city (of Dwarka), riding upon that best of cars of celestial make,
possessed of the speed of the mind and given unto him by Yudhishthira,
filling the ten points of the horizon with the deep rattle of its
wheels. And, O bull of the Bharata race, just as Krishna was on the
point of setting out, the Pandavas with Yudhishthira at their head
walked round that tiger among men who was never fatigued with exertion.

"And after the illustrious Krishna, the son of Devaki, had departed
(from Indraprastha) having acquired that great victory and having also
dispelled the fears of the kings, that feat, O Bharata, swelled the
fame of the Pandavas. And, O king, the Pandavas passed their days,
continuing to gladden the heart of Draupadi. And at that time, whatever
was proper and consistent with virtue, pleasure, and profit, continued
to be properly executed by king Yudhishthira in the exercise of his
duties of protecting his subjects."


SECTION XXV

(Digvijaya Parva)

Vaisampayana said,--"Arjuna, having obtained that best of bows and that
couple of inexhaustible quivers and that car and flag-staff, as also
that assembly-house, addressing Yudhisthira said,--'Bow, weapons, great
energy, allies, territory, fame, army--those, O king, difficult of
acquisition however desirable, have all been obtained by me. I think,
therefore, that what should now be done is for the swelling up of our
treasury. I desire, O best of monarchs, to make the kings (of the
earth) pay tributes to us. I desire to set out, in an auspicious moment
of a holy day of the moon under a favourable constellation for the
conquest of the direction that is presided over by the Lord of
treasures (viz. the North).'"

Vaisampayana continued,--"King Yudhisthira the just, hearing these
words of Dhananjaya, replied unto him in a grave and collected tone,
saying,--'O bull of the Bharata race, set thou out, having made holy
Brahmanas utter benedictions on thee, to plunge thy enemies in sorrow
and to fill thy friend with joy. Victory, O son of Pritha, will surely
be thine, and thou wilt surely obtain thy desires fulfilled.'

"Thus addressed, Arjuna, surrounded by a large host, set out in that
celestial car of wonderful achievements he had obtained from Agni. And
Bhimasena also, and those bull among men, the twins, dismissed with
affection by Yudhishthira the just set out, each at the head of a large
army. And Arjuna, the son of the chastiser of Paka then brought under
subjugation that direction (the North) which was presided over by the
Lord of treasures. And Bhimasena overcome by force the East and
Sahadeva the South, and Nakula, O king, acquainted with all the
weapons, conquered the West. Thus while his brothers were so employed,
the exalted king Yudishthira the just stayed within Khandavaprastha in
the enjoyment of great affluence in the midst of friends and relatives."

"Bhagadatta, hearing this, said,--'O thou who hast Kunto for thy
mother, as thou art to me, so is Yudhishthira also. I shall do all
this. Tell me, what else I may do for thee.'"


SECTION XXVI

Vaisampayana continued,--"thus addressed, Dhananjaya replied unto
Bhagadatta, saying,--'If thou wilt give thy promise to do this, thou
hast done all I desire.' And having thus subjugated the king of
Pragjyotisha, Dhananjaya of long arms, the son of Kunti, then marched
towards the north--the direction presided over by the lord of
treasures. That bull amongst men, that son of Kunti, then conquered the
mountainous tracts and their outskirts, as also the hilly regions. And
having conquered all the mountains and the kings that reigned there,
and bringing them under his sway, he exacted tributes from all. And
winning the affections of those kings and uniting himself with them, he
next marched, O king, against Vrihanta, the king of Uluka, making this
earth tremble with the sound of his drums, the clatter of his
chariot-wheels, and the roar of the elephants in his train. Vrihanta,
however, quickly coming out of his city followed by his army consisting
of four kinds of troops, gave battle to Falguna (Arjuna). And the fight
that took place between Vrihanta and Dhananjaya was terrible. It so
happened that Vrihanta was unable to bear the prowess of the son of
Pandu. Then that invincible king of the mountainous region regarding
the son of Kunti irresistible, approached him with all his wealth.
Arjuna snatched out the kingdom from Vrihanta, but having made peace
with him marched, accompanied by that king, against Senavindu whom he
soon expelled from his kingdom. After this he subjugated Modapura,
Vamadeva, Sudaman, Susankula, the Northern Ulukas, and the kings of
those countries and peoples. Hereafter at the command of Yudhishthira,
O monarch, Arjuna did not move from the city of Senavindu but sent his
troops only and brought under his sway those five countries and
peoples. For Arjuna, having arrived at Devaprastha, the city of
Senavindu, took up his quarters there with his army consisting of four
