Thou hast sent Me."  No one branch of the Church is absolutely by itself
alone the Catholic Church; all branches need reunion in order to the
completeness of the Church.  There are blessed signs that the Holy
Spirit is quickening Christian hearts to seek for unity.  We all know
that this divided Christianity cannot conquer the world.  At a time when
every form of error and sin is banded together to oppose the kingdom of
Christ, the world needs the witness of a united Church.  Men must hear
again the voice which peals through the lapse of centuries bearing
witness to the "faith once delivered to the saints," or else for many
souls there will be only rationalism and unbelief--while this sad, weary
world, so full of sin and sorrow, is pleading for help, it is a wrong to
Christ and to the souls for whom He died that His children should be
separated in rival folds.  As baptised into Christ we are brothers.
Notwithstanding the hedges of human opinions which men have builded in
the garden of the Lord, all who look for salvation alone through faith
in Jesus Christ do hold the great verities of Divine faith.  The
opinions which separate us are not necessary to be believed in order to
salvation.  The truths in which we agree are parts of the Catholic
faith.  The Holy Spirit has passed over these human barriers, and set
his seal to the labors of separated brethren in Christ, and rewarded
them in the salvation of many precious souls.  The grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ and the renewing and sanctifying influences of the Holy
Ghost are the same in the peasant in the cottage, and in the emperor on
the throne.  They share with us in the long line of confessors and
martyrs for Christ.  We would not rob them of one sheaf which they have
gathered in the garner of the Lord.  We rejoice that Churches with a
like historic lineage with us are seeking reunion.  Churches whose faith
has been dimmed by coldness or clouded by error are being quickened into
new life from the Incarnate Son of God.

Our hearts go out in loving sympathy to the Old Catholics of Europe and
America, whose names always will be linked with Selwyn, Wilberforce, and
Wordsworth, Whittingham, Kerfoot, and Brown, in defence of the faith.
It is with deep sorrow that we remember that the Church of Rome has
separated herself from the teaching of the primitive Church by additions
to the faith once delivered to the saints, and by claiming for its
Bishop prerogatives which belong only to the Divine Head of the Church
While we honor the devotion and zeal of her missionary heroes, and
rejoice at the good works of multitudes of her children, we lament that
lack of charity which anathematizes disciples of Christ who have carried
the Gospel to the ends of the earth.

We bless God's Holy Name for the fraternal work which has been carried
on under the guidance of the see of Canterbury, and which we trust will
lead ancient Churches to a deeper personal faith in Jesus Christ.


We are sad that some of our kinsmen in Christ, children of one mother,
have forsaken her ways.  God can over-rule even this sorrow, so that it
shall fall out to the furtherance of the Gospel.  They must take with
them precious memories of the love and the faith of the mother whom they
have forsaken, and of the liberty wherewith the truth in Christ has made
her children free--under God these may be a link in the chain of His
providence to the restoration of unity.  It is a singular providence
that at this period of the world's history, when marvellous discoveries
have united the people of divers tongues in common interests, He has
placed the Anglo-Saxon race in the forefront of the nations.  They are
carrying civilization to the ends of the earth.  They are bringing
liberty to the oppressed, elevating the down-trodden, and are giving to
all these divers tongues and kindreds their customs, traditions, and
laws.  I reverently believe that the Anglo-Saxon Church has been
preserved by God's Providence (if her children will accept this Mission)
to heal the divisions of Christendom, and lead on in His work to be done
in the eventide of the world.  She holds the truths which underlie the
possibility of reunion, the validity of all Christian baptism in the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.  She ministers the two
sacraments of Christ as of perpetual obligation, and makes faith in
Jesus Christ, as contained in the Catholic Creeds, a condition of
Christian fellowship.  The Anglo-Saxon Church does not perplex men with
theories and shibboleths which many a poor Ephraimite cannot speak--she
believes in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth, and in
Jesus Christ His only Son, and in the Holy Ghost, three Persons and one
God, but she does not weaken faith in the Triune God by human
speculations about the Trinity in Unity.  She believes that the sacred
Scriptures were written by inspiration of God, but she has no theory
about inspiration.  She holds up the Atonement of Christ as the only
hope of a lost world; but she has no philosophy about the Atonement.
She teaches that it is through the Holy Ghost that men are united to
Christ.  She ministers the sacraments appointed by Christ as His
channels of grace; but she has no theory to explain the manner of
Christ's presence to penitent believing souls.  She does not explain
what God has explained, but celebrates these Divine mysteries, as they
were held and celebrated for one thousand years after our Lord ascended
into heaven, before there was any East or West arrayed against each
other in the Church of God.  Surely we may and ought to be first to hold
up the olive branch of peace over strife, and say, "Sirs, ye are
brethren."

In so grave a matter as the restoration of organic unity, we may not
surrender anything which is of Divine authority, or accept terms of
communion which are contrary to God's Word.  We cannot recognize any
usurpation of the rights and prerogatives of national Churches which
have a common ancestry, lest we heal "the hurt of the daughter of my
people slightly," and say "peace, where there is no peace;" but we do
say that all which is temporary and of human choice or preference we
will forego, from our love to our own kinsmen in Christ.

The Church of the Reconciliation will be an historical and Catholic
Church in its ministry, its faith, and its sacraments.  It will inherit
the promises of its Divine Lord.  It will preserve all which is catholic
and Divine.  It will adopt and use all instrumentalities of any existing
organization which will aid it in doing the Lord's work.  It will put
away all which is individual, narrow, and sectarian.  It will concede to
all who hold the faith all the liberty wherewith Christ hath made His
children free.


_Missions_.--In the presence of brethren who bear in their bodies the
marks of the Lord Jesus, I hardly know how to clothe in words my
thoughts as I speak of Missions.  The providence of God has broken down
impenetrable barriers--the doors of hermit nations have been opened;
commerce has bound men in common interests, and so prepared "a highway
for our God"--Japan, India, China, Africa, Polynesia, amid the solitudes
of icy north, and in the lands of tropic suns, world-wide there are
signs of the coming of the kingdom of Jesus Christ.  The veil which has
so long blinded the eyes of the ancient people, our Lord's kinsmen
according to the flesh, is being taken away.  We bless God for the good
example of martyrs like Patteson, Mackenzie, Parker, Hannington, and
others, who have laid down their lives for the Lord Jesus.  We rejoice
that our branch of the Church has been counted worthy to add to the
names of those who "came out of great tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb."  "A great and
effectual door is opened."  There is no country on the earth where we
may not carry the Gospel.  The wealth of the world is largely in
Christian hands.  The Church only needs faith to grasp the opportunity
to do the work.

In the presence of fields so white for the harvest, we must ask, "Lord,
what wilt Thou have me to do?"

1. There must be unceasing, prevailing intercessory prayer for those
whom we send out to heathen lands.  The hearts of all Christian nations
were turned with anxious solicitude to that brave servant of God and His
country in Khartoum.  Shall we feel less for the servants of Christ who
have given up home and country to suffer and it may be to die for Him?
Some of us remember that when Missions were destroyed, when clouds were
all around us, and the very ground drifting from under our feet, that we
were made brave to work and wait for the salvation of God by the prayers
which went up to God for us.  When "prayers were made without ceasing of
the Church unto God," the fast-closed doors of the prison were opened
for the Apostles.  It will be so again.

2. There must be the entire consecration of all unto Christ.  The wisdom
of Paul and the eloquence of Apollos may plant, but "God alone giveth
the increase."  If success comes, if "the rod of the priesthood bud and
blossom and bear fruit," it must be "laid up in the ark of God."  He
will not give His glory to another.  The work is Christ's.  "We are
ambassadors for Him."  "I have chosen you and ordained you that ye
should go and bring forth fruit."

3. They who would win souls must have a ripe knowledge of the sacred
Scriptures.  "They were written by inspiration of God. . . . that the
man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works."
Our orders may be unquestioned, our doctrine perfect in every line and
feature, but we shall not reach the hearts of men unless we preach
Christ out of an experimental knowledge of the truths of Divine
Revelation.  There is but one Book which can bring light to homes of
sorrow, one light to scatter clouds and darkness, one message to lead
wandering folk unto God.  This blessed Book will be to every soldier and
lonely missionary what it was to Livingstone dying alone in Africa, or
to Captain Gardiner dead on the desolate shores of Patagonia, whose
finger pointed to the words, "The Blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from
all sin."

4. We must love all whom Christ loves.  We may have the gift of
teaching, we may understand all mysteries, we may have all knowledge, we
may bestow all our goods to the poor, we may even give our bodies to be
burned, but without that love which comes alone from Christ, we shall be
"as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal."  With St. Paul we must say,
"Whereinsoever Christ is preached I do rejoice, and will rejoice."

5. Above all gifts we need the baptism of the Holy Ghost.  When this
consecration comes there will be no cry of an empty treasury.  We shall
no longer be weary with the bleating of lost sheep, to whom we have to
say, I have no means and no shepherd to send you.



_Christian Work_--We rejoice at every sign that Christians realize that
wealth is a sacred trust, for which they shall give an account.  We
rejoice more that they are giving that personal service which is a law
of His kingdom.  Men and women of culture and gentle birth are going
into the abodes of sickness and sorrow to comfort stricken homes and
lead sinful folk to the Saviour.  Brotherhoods, Sisterhoods, and
deaconesses are multiplying.  Never was there greater need for their
holy work.  Many of our own baptized children have drifted away from all
faith.  To thousands God is a name, the Bible a tradition, faith an
opinion, and heaven and hell fables.  But that which gives us the
deepest sadness and makes all Christian work more difficult is that so
many of those to whom the people look for example have given up the
Bible, the Lord's Day, the house of God, and Christian faith.  Alas!
they are telling these weary toilers whose lives are clouded by anxiety
and sorrow that there is no hereafter.  "They know not what they do."
They are sowing to the wind and will reap the whirlwind.  May God show
them the danger before if is too late!  The loss of faith is the loss of
everything; without it morality becomes prudence or imprudence.  When
the tie which binds man to God is broken all other ties snap asunder.
No nation has survived the loss of its religion.  We are appalled at the
mad cry of anarchy which tramples all which we hold dear for time and
eternity under its feet.  We cannot look into its face without seeing
the lineaments of that man of sin who "opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God and worshipped."  Antichrist is he who
usurps the place of Christ.  "He is antichrist who denieth the Father
and the Son."  Our hearts go out in pity for those whose mechanical
ideas of the universe may be a revolt from a mechanical theology which
has lost sight of the Fatherhood of God.  We stand where two ways meet.
We shall take care of the people or the people will take care of us.
