another world; because no man can judge concerning the truth of such 
accusations, because no man can exempt or defend himself from them:  
so that apparently such practice doth thwart all course of justice 
and equity.

4.  Another kind is, perverting a man's words or actions 
disadvantageously by affected misconstruction.  All words are 
ambiguous, and capable of different senses, some fair, some more 
foul; all actions have two handles, one that candour and charity 
will, another that disingenuity and spite may lay hold on; and in 
such cases to misapprehend is a calumnious procedure, arguing 
malignant disposition and mischievous design.  Thus when two men did 
witness that our Lord affirmed, He "could demolish the temple, and 
rear it again in three days"--although He did indeed speak words to 
that purpose, meaning them in a figurative sense, discernible enough 
to those who would candidly have minded His drift and way of 
speaking--yet they who crudely alleged them against Him are called 
false witnesses.  "At last," saith the Gospel, "came two false 
witnesses, and said, This fellow said, I am able to destroy the 
temple," etc.  Thus also when some certified of St. Stephen, as 
having said that "Jesus of Nazareth should destroy that place, and 
change the customs that Moses delivered;" although probably he did 
speak words near to that purpose, yet are those men called false 
witnesses:  "And," saith St. Luke, "they set up false witnesses, 
which said, This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words," etc.  
Which instances plainly do show, if we would avoid the guilt of 
slander, how careful we should be to interpret fairly and favourably 
the words and the actions of our neighbour.

5.  Another sort of this practice is, partial and lame 
representation of men's discourse, or their practice; suppressing 
some part of the truth in them, or concealing some circumstances 
about them which might serve to explain, to excuse, or to extenuate 
them.  In such a manner easily, without uttering any logical 
untruth, one may yet grievously calumniate.  Thus suppose a man 
speaketh a thing upon supposition, or with exception, or in way of 
objection, or merely for disputation sake, in order to the 
discussion or clearing of truth; he that should report him asserting 
it absolutely, unlimitedly, positively and peremptorily, as his own 
settled judgment, would notoriously calumniate.  If one should be 
inveigled by fraud, or driven by violence, or slip by chance into a 
bad place or bad company, he that should so represent the gross of 
that accident, as to breed an opinion of that person, that out of 
pure disposition and design he did put himself there, doth 
slanderously abuse that innocent person.  The reporter in such cases 
must not think to defend himself by pretending that he spake nothing 
false; for such propositions, however true in logic, may justly be 
deemed lies in morality, being uttered with a malicious and 
deceitful (that is, with a calumnious) mind, being apt to impress 
false conceits and to produce hurtful effects concerning our 
neighbour.  There are slanderous truths as well as slanderous 
falsehoods:  when truth is uttered with a deceitful heart, and to a 
base end, it becomes a lie.  "He that speaketh truth," saith the 
wise man, "showeth forth righteousness:  but a false witness 
deceit."  Deceiving is the proper work of slander:  and truth abused 
to that end putteth on its nature, and will engage into like guilt.

6.  Another kind of calumny is, by instilling sly suggestions; which 
although they do not downrightly assert falsehoods, yet they breed 
sinister opinions in the hearers; especially in those who, from 
weakness or credulity, from jealousy or prejudice, from negligence 
or inadvertency, are prone to entertain them.  This is done many 
ways:  by propounding wily suppositions, shrewd insinuations, crafty 
questions, and specious comparisons, intimating a possibility, or 
inferring some likelihood of, and thence inducing to believe the 
fact.  "Doth not," saith this kind of slanderer, "his temper incline 
him to do thus? may not his interest have swayed him thereto? had he 
not fair opportunity and strong temptation to it? hath he not acted 
so in like cases?  Judge you therefore whether he did it not."  Thus 
the close slanderer argueth; and a weak or prejudiced person is 
thereby so caught, that he presently is ready thence to conclude the 
thing done.  Again:  "He doeth well," saith the sycophant, "it is 
true; but why, and to what end?  Is it not, as most men do, out of 
ill design? may he not dissemble now? may he not recoil hereafter? 
have not others made as fair a show? yet we know what came of it."  
Thus do calumnious tongues pervert the judgments of men to think ill 
of the most innocent, and meanly of the worthiest actions.  Even 
commendation itself is often used calumniously, with intent to breed 
dislike and ill-will towards a person commended in envious or 
jealous ears; or so as to give passage to dispraises, and render the 
accusations following more credible.  'Tis an artifice commonly 
observed to be much in use there, where the finest tricks of 
supplanting are practised, with greatest effect; so that pessimum 
inimicorum genus, laudantes; there is no more pestilent enemy than a 
malevolent praiser.  All these kinds of dealing, as they issue from 
the principles of slander, and perform its work, so they deservedly 
bear the guilt thereof.

7.  A like kind is that of oblique and covert reflections; when a 
man doth not directly or expressly charge his neighbour with faults, 
but yet so speaketh that he is understood, or reasonably presumed to 
do it.  This is a very cunning and very mischievous way of 
slandering; for therein the skulking calumniator keepeth a reserve 
for himself, and cutteth off from the person concerned the means of 
defence.  If he goeth to clear himself from the matter of such 
aspersions:  "What need," saith this insidious speaker, "of that? 
must I needs mean you? did I name you? why do you then assume it to 
yourself? do you not prejudge yourself guilty?  I did not, but your 
own conscience, it seemeth, doth accuse you.  You are so jealous and 
suspicious, as persons overwise or guilty use to be."  So meaneth 
this serpent out of the hedge securely and unavoidably to bite his 
neighbour, and is in that respect more base and more hurtful than 
the most flat and positive slanderer.

8.  Another kind is that of magnifying and aggravating the faults of 
others; raising any small miscarriage into a heinous crime, any 
slender defect into an odious vice, and any common infirmity into a 
strange enormity; turning a small "mote in the eye" of our neighbour 
into a huge "beam," a little dimple in his face into a monstrous 
wen.  This is plainly slander, at least in degree, and according to 
the surplusage whereby the censure doth exceed the fault.  As he 
that, upon the score of a small debt, doth extort a great sum, is no 
less a thief, in regard to what amounts beyond his due, than if 
without any pretence he had violently or fraudulently seized on it:  
so he is a slanderer that, by heightening faults or imperfections, 
doth charge his neighbour with greater blame, or load him with more 
disgrace than he deserves.  'Tis not only slander to pick a hole 
where there is none, but to make that wider which is, so that it 
appeareth more ugly, and cannot so easily be mended.  For charity is 
wont to extenuate faults, justice doth never exaggerate them.  As no 
man is exempt from some defects, or can live free from some 
misdemeanours, so by this practice every man may be rendered very 
odious and infamous.

9.  Another kind of slander is, imputing to our neighbour's 
practice, judgment, or profession, evil consequences (apt to render 
him odious, or despicable) which have no dependence on them, or 
connection with them.  There do in every age occur disorders and 
mishaps, springing from various complications of causes, working 
some of them in a more open and discernible, others in a more secret 
and subtle way (especially from Divine judgment and providence 
checking or chastising sin):  from such occurrences it is common to 
snatch occasion and matter of calumny.  Those who are disposed this 
way, are ready peremptorily to charge them upon whomsoever they 
dislike or dissent from, although without any apparent cause, or 
upon most frivolous and senseless pretences; yea, often when reason 
showeth quite the contrary, and they who are so charged are in just 
esteem of all men the least obnoxious to such accusations.  So 
usually the best friends of mankind, those who most heartily wish 
the peace and prosperity of the world and most earnestly to their 
power strive to promote them, have all the disturbances and 
disasters happening charged on them by those fiery vixens, who (in 
pursuance of their base designs, or gratification of their wild 
passions) really do themselve embroil things, and raise miserable 
combustions in the world.  So it is that they who have the 
conscience to do mischief, will have the confidence also to disavow 
the blame and the iniquity, to lay the burden of it on those who are 
most innocent.  Thus, whereas nothing more disposeth men to live 
orderly and peaceably, nothing more conduceth to the settlement and 
safety of the public, nothing so much draweth blessings down from 
heaven upon the commonwealth, as true religion; yet nothing hath 
been more ordinary than to attribute all the miscarriages and 
mischiefs that happened unto it; even those are laid at his door, 
which plainly do arise from the contempt or neglect of it; being the 
natural fruits or the just punishments of irreligion.  King Ahab by 
forsaking God's commandments, and following wicked superstitions, 
had troubled Israel, drawing sore judgments and calamities thereon; 
yet had he the heart and the face to charge those events on the 
great assertor of piety, Elias:  "Art thou he that troubleth 
Israel?"  The Jews by provocation of Divine justice had set 
themselves in a fair way towards desolation and ruin; this event to 
come they had the presumption to lay upon the faith of our Lord's 
doctrine:  "If," said they, "we let Him alone, all men will believe 
on Him, and the Romans shall come, and take away our place and 
nation:" whereas, in truth, a compliance with His directions and 
admonitions had been the only means to prevent those presaged 
mischiefs.  And, si Tibris ascenderit in maenia, if any public 
calamity did appear, then Christianos ad leones, Christians must be 
charged and persecuted as the causes thereof.  To them it was that 
Julian and other pagans did impute all the concussions, confusions, 
and devastations falling upon the Roman Empire.  The sacking of Rome 
by the Goths they cast upon Christianity; for the vindication of it 
from which reproach St. Austin did write those renowned books de 
Civitate Dei.  So liable are the best and most innocent sort of men 
to be calumniously accused in this manner.

Another practice (worthily bearing the guilt of slander) is, aiding 
and being accessory thereto, by anywise furthering, cherishing, 
abetting it.  He that by crafty significations of ill-will doth 
prompt the slanderer to vent his poison; he that by a willing 
audience and attention doth readily suck it up, or who greedily 
swalloweth it down by credulous approbation and assent; he that 
pleasingly relisheth and smacketh at it, or expresseth a delightful 
complacence therein:  as he is a partner in the fact, so he is a 
sharer in the guilt.  There are not only slanderous throats, but 
slanderous ears also; not only wicked inventions, which engender and 
brood lies, but wicked assents, which hatch and foster them.  Not 
only the spiteful mother that conceiveth such spurious brats, but 
the midwife that helpeth to bring them forth, the nurse that feedeth 
them, the guardian that traineth them up to maturity, and setteth 
them forth to live in the world; as they do really contribute to 
their subsistence, so deservedly they partake in the blame due to 
them, and must be responsible for the mischief they do.  For indeed 
were it not for such free entertainers, such nourishers, such 
encouragers of them, slanderers commonly would die in the womb, or 
prove still-born, or presently entering into the cold air, would 
expire, or for want of nourishment soon would starve.  It is such 
friends and patrons of them who are the causes that they are so 
rife; they it is who set ill-natured, base, and designing people 
upon devising, searching after, and picking up malicious and idle 
stories.  Were it not for such customers, the trade of calumniating 
would fall.  Many pursue it merely out of servility and flattery, to 
tickle the ears, to soothe the humour, to gratify the malignant 
disposition or ill-will of others; who upon the least discouragement 
would give over the practice.  If therefore we would exempt 
ourselves from all guilt of slander, we must not only abstain from 
venting it, but forbear to regard or countenance it:  for "he is," 
saith the wise man, "a wicked doer who giveth heed to false lips, 
and a liar who giveth ear to a naughty tongue."  Yea, if we 
thoroughly would be clear from it, we must show an aversion from 
hearing it, an unwillingness to believe it, an indignation against 
it; so either stifling it in the birth, or condemning it to death, 
being uttered.  This is the sure way to destroy it, and to prevent 
its mischief.  If we would stop our ears, we should stop the 
slanderer's mouth; if we would resist the calumniator, he would fly 
from us; if we would reprove him, we should repel him.  For, "as the 
north wind driveth away rain, so," the wise man telleth us, "doth an 
angry countenance a backbiting tongue."

These are the chief and most common kinds of slander; and there are 
several ways of practising them worthy our observing, that we may 
avoid them, namely these:--

1.  The most notoriously heinous way is, forging and immediately 
venting ill stories.  As it is said of Doeg, "Thy tongue deviseth 
mischief;" and of another like companion, "Thou givest thy mouth to 
evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit;" and as our Lord saith of the 
devil, "When he speaketh a lie, [Greek], he speaketh of his own; for 
he is a liar, and the father of it."  This palpably is the supreme 
pitch of calumny, incapable of any qualifications or excuse:  hell 
cannot go beyond this; the cursed fiend himself cannot worse employ 
his wit than in minting wrongful falsehoods.

2.  Another way is, receiving from others, and venting such stories, 
which they who do it certainly know or may reasonably presume to be 
false; the becoming hucksters of counterfeit wares, or factors in 
this vile trade.  There is no false coiner who hath not some 
accomplices and emissaries ready to take from his hand and put off 
his money; and such slanderers at second hand are scarce less guilty 
than the first authors.  He that breweth lies may have more wit and 
skill, but the broacher showeth the like malice and wickedness.  In 
this there is no great difference between the great devil, that 
frameth scandalous reports, and the little imps that run about and 
disperse them.

3.  Another way is, when one without competent examination, due 
weighing, and just reason, doth admit and spread tales prejudicial 
to his neighbour's welfare; relying for his warrant, as to the truth 
of them, upon any slight or slender authority.  This is a very 
common and current practice:  men presume it lawful enough to say 
over whatever they hear; to report anything, if they can quote an 
author for it.  "It is not," say they, "my invention; I tell it as I 
heard it:  sit fides penes authorem; let him that informed me 
undergo the blame if it prove false."  So do they conceive 
themselves excusable for being the instruments of injurious disgrace 
and damage to their neighbours.  But they greatly mistake therein; 
for as this practice commonly doth arise from the same wicked 
principles, at least in some degree, and produceth altogether the 
like mischievous effects, as the wilful devising and conveying 
slander:  so it no less thwarteth the rules of duty, the laws of 
equity; God hath prohibited it, and reason doth condemn it.  "Thou 
shalt not," saith God in the Law, "go up and down as a tale-bearer 
among thy people:" as a talebearer (as Rachil, that is), as a 
merchant or trader in ill reports and stories concerning our 
neighbour, to his prejudice.  Not only the framing of them, but the 
dealing in them beyond reason or necessity, is interdicted.  And it 
is part of a good man's character in Psalm xv., Non accipit 
opprobrium, "He taketh not up a reproach against his neighbour;" 
that is, he doth not easily entertain it, much less doth he 
effectually propagate it:  and in our text, "He," it is said, "that 
uttereth slander" (not only he that conceiveth it) "is a fool."

And in reason, before exact trial and cognisance, to meddle with the 
fame and interest of another, is evidently a practice full of 
iniquity, such as no man can allow in his own case, or brook being 
used towards himself without judging himself to be extremely abused 
by such reporters.  In all reason and equity, yea, in all 
discretion, before we yield credence to any report concerning our 
neighbour, or venture to relate it, many things are carefully to be 
weighed and scanned.  We should, concerning our author, consider 
whether he be not a particular enemy, or disaffected to him:  
whether he be not ill-humoured, or a delighter in telling bad 
stories; whether he be not dishonest, or unregardful of justice in 
his dealings and discourse; whether he be not vain, or careless of 
what he saith; whether he be not light or credulous, or apt to be 
imposed upon by any small appearance; whether, at least in the 
present case, he be not negligent, or too forward and rash in 
speaking.  We should also, concerning the matter reported, mind 
whether it be possible or probable; whether suitable to the 
disposition of our neighbour, to his principles, to the constant 
tenor of his practice; whether the action imputed to him be not 
liable to misapprehension, or his words to misconstruction.  All 
reason and equity do, I say, exact from us, diligently to consider 
such things, before we do either embrace ourselves or transmit unto 
others any story concerning our neighbour; lest unadvisedly we do 
him irreparable wrong and mischief.  Briefly, we should take his 
case for our own, and consider whether we ourselves should be 
content that upon like grounds or testimonies any man should 
believe, or report, disgraceful things concerning us.  If we fail to 
do thus, we do, vainly, or rashly, or maliciously, conspire with the 
slanderer to the wrong of our innocent neighbour; and that in the 
psalmist, by a parity of reason, may be transferred to us, "Thou 
hast consented unto the liar, and hast partaken with the" author of 
calumny.

4.  Of kin to this way is the assenting to popular rumours, and 
thence affirming matters of obloquy to our neighbour.  Every one by 
experience knows how easily false news do rise, and how nimbly they 
scatter themselves; how often they are raised from nothing, how soon 
they from small sparks grow into a great blaze, how easily from one 
thing they are transformed into another; especially news of this 
kind, which do suit and feed the bad humour of the vulgar.  'Tis 
obvious to any man how true that is of Tacitus, how void of 
consideration, of judgment, of equity, the busy and talking part of 
mankind is.  Whoever therefore gives heed to flying tales, and 
thrusts himself into the herd of those who spread them, is either 
strangely injudicious, or very malignantly disposed.  If he want not 
judgment, he cannot but know that when he complieth with popular 
fame, it is mere chance that he doth not slander, or rather it is 
odds that he shall do so; he consequently showeth himself to be 
indifferent whether he doeth it or no, or rather that he doth 
incline to do it; whence, not caring to be otherwise, or loving to 
be a slanderer, he in effect and just esteem is such; having at 
least a slanderous heart and inclination.  He that puts it to the 
venture whether he lieth or no, doth eo ipso lie morally, as 
declaring no care or love of truth.  "Thou shalt not," saith the 
Law, "follow a multitude to do evil;" and with like reason we should 
not follow the multitude in speaking evil of our neighbour.

5.  Another slanderous course is, to build censures and reproaches 
upon slender conjectures, or uncertain suspicions (those [Greek], 
evil surmises, which St. Paul condemneth).  Of these occasion can 
never be wanting to them who seek them, or are ready to embrace 
them; no innocence, no wisdom can anywise prevent them; and if they 
may be admitted as grounds of defamation, no man's good name can be 
secure.  But he that upon such accounts dareth to asperse his 
neighbour is in moral computation no less a slanderer than if he did 
the like out of pure invention, or without any ground at all:  for 
doubtful and false in this case differ little; to devise, and to 
divine, in matters of this nature, do import near the same.  He that 
will judge or speak ill of others, ought to be well assured of what 
he thinks or says; he that asserteth that which he doth not know to 
be true, doth as well lie as he that affirmeth that which he knoweth 
to be false; for he deceiveth the hearers, begetting in them an 
opinion that he is assured of what he affirms; especially in dealing 
with the concernments of others, whose right and repute justice doth 
oblige us to beware of infringing, charity should dispose us to 
regard and tender as our own.  It is not every possibility, every 
seeming, every faint show or glimmering appearance, which sufficeth 
to ground bad opinion or reproachful discourse concerning our 
brother:  the matter should be clear, notorious and palpable, before 
we admit a disadvantageous conceit into our head, a distasteful 
resentment into our heart, a harsh word into our mouth about him.  
Men may fancy themselves sagacious and shrewd, persons of deep 
judgment and fine wit they may be taken for, when they can dive into 
others' hearts, and sound their intentions; when through thick mists 
or at remote distances they can descry faults in them; when they 
collect ill of them by long trains, and subtle fetches of discourse:  
but in truth they do thereby rather betray in themselves small love 
of truth, care of justice, or sense of charity, together with little 
wisdom and discretion:  for truth is only seen in a clear light; 
justice requireth strict proof.  Charity "thinketh no evil," and 
"believeth all things" for the best; wisdom is not forward to 
pronounce before full evidence.  ("He," saith the wise man, "that 
answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is folly and shame unto 
him.")  In fine, they who proceed thus, as it is usual that they 
speak falsely, as it is casual that they ever speak truly, as they 
affect to speak ill, true or false; so worthily they are to be 
reckoned among slanderers.

6.  Another like way of slandering is, impetuous or negligent 
sputtering out of words, without minding what truth or consequence 
there is in them, how they may touch or hurt our neighbour.  To 
avoid this sin, we must not only be free from intending mischief, 
but wary of effecting it; not only careful of not wronging one 
distinct person, but of harming any promiscuously; not only 
abstinent from aiming directly, but provident not to hit casually 
any person with obloquy.  For as he that dischargeth shot into a 
crowd, or so as not to look about regarding who may stand in the 
way, is no less guilty of doing mischief, and bound to make 
satisfaction to them he woundeth, than if he had aimed at some one 
person:  so if we sling our bad words at random, which may light 
unluckily, and defame somebody, we become slanderers unawares, and 
before we think on it.  This practice hath not ever all the malice 
of the worst slander, but it worketh often the effects thereof; and 
therefore doth incur its guilt, and its punishment; especially it 
being commonly derived from ill-temper, or from bad habit, which we 
are bound to watch over, to curb, and to correct.  The tongue is a 
sharp and perilous weapon, which we are bound to keep up in the 
sheath, or never to draw forth but advisedly, and upon just 
occasion; it must ever be wielded with caution and care:  to 
brandish it wantonly, to lay about with it blindly and furiously, to 
slash and smite therewith any that happeneth to come in our way, 
doth argue malice or madness.

7.  It is an ordinary way of proceeding to calumniate, for men, 
reflecting upon some bad disposition in themselves (although 
resulting from their own particular temper, from their bad 
principles, or from their ill custom), to charge it presently upon 
others; presuming others to be like themselves:  like the wicked 
person in the psalm, "Thou thoughtest that I was altogether such an 
one as thyself."  This is to slander mankind first in the gross; 
then in retail, as occasion serveth, to asperse any man; this is the 
way of half-witted Machiavellians, and of desperate reprobates in 
wickedness, who having prostituted their consciences to vice, for 
their own defence and solace, would shroud themselves from blame 
under the shelter of common pravity and infirmity; accusing all men 
of that whereof they know themselves guilty.  But surely there can 
be no greater iniquity than this, that one man should undergo blame 
for the ill conscience of another.

These seem to be the chief kinds of slander, and most common ways of 
practising it.  In which description, the folly thereof doth, I 
suppose, so clearly shine, that no man can look thereon without 
loathing and despising it, as not only a very ugly, but a most 
foolish practice.  No man surely can be wise who will suffer himself 
to be defiled therewith.  But to render its folly more apparent, we 
shall display it; declaring it to be extremely foolish upon several 
accounts.  But the doing of this, in regard to your patience, we 
shall forbear at present.



THE FOLLY OF SLANDER.



Part 2.

"He that uttereth slander is a fool."--Prov. x. 18.
