side of hands touching each other; (2) bend the body forward from the
hips, stooping forward as far as possible and at the same time swing the
arms forward with a sweeping movement, sending them down, backward and
upward at the back, so that when the body has reached the limit of the
bending forward movement the arms are extended back and over the
body--keep the arms stiff and do not bend the knees; (3) resume standing
position and repeat several times.

Exercise VIII.

(1) Extend the arms straight, sideways, from the shoulder and hold them
there stiff and rigid with hands open; (2) close the hands forcibly
with a quick motion, pressing the fingers well into the palm; (3) open
the hands forcibly and quickly, spreading out the fingers and thumbs
as widely as possible forming a fan shaped hand; (4) close and open
the hands as above stated, several times, as rapidly as possible. Put
life into the exercise. This is a splendid exercise for developing the
muscles of the hand and for acquiring manual dexterity.

Exercise IX.

(1) Lie upon your stomach, extending your arms above your head and then
bowed upward and your legs stretched out full length and raised backward
and upward. The correct position may be carried in the mind by imagining
a watch--crystal or a saucer resting on the table on its middle, with
both ends turning upward; (2) lower and raise the arms and legs, several
times; (3) then turn over on your back and lie extended at full length,
with arms extended straight out upwards over the head, with back of
fingers touching the ground; (4) then raise up both legs from the waist
until they stand straight up in the air, like the mast of a ship, your
upper-body and arms remaining in the last position named. Lower the legs
and raise them several times; (5) resume position 3, lying flat upon the
back at full with arms extended straight out upward, over the head, with
backs of fingers touching the ground; (6) then gradually raise body to
sitting position, with arms projecting straight in front of the
shoulders. Then go back gradually to the lying down position, and
repeat the raising and lowering several times; (7) then turn over on the
face and stomach again and assume the following position:--Keeping
the body rigid from head to foot, raise your body until its weight rests
upon your palms (the arms being stretched out straight in front of you)
at one end, and upon your toes at the other end. Then gradually bend
arms at the elbow, allowing your chest to sink to the floor; then raise
up your chest and upper-body by straightening out your arms, the entire
weight falling upon the arms, with the toes as a pivot--this last is a
difficult motion, and should not be overdone at first.

Exercise X.

This exercise is for those troubled with a too large abdomen, which
trouble is caused by too much fat gathering there. The abdomen may
be materially reduced by a reasonable indulgence in this exercise--but
always remember "moderation in all things" and do not overdo matters,
or be in too much of a hurry. Here is the exercise: (1) exhale the breath
(breathe out all the air in the lungs, without straining yourself too
much) and then draw the abdomen in and up as far as you can, then hold
for a moment and let it resume its natural position. Repeat a number of
times and then take a breath or two and rest a moment. Repeat several
times, moving it in and out. It is surprising how much control one may
gain over these stubborn muscles with a little practice. This exercise
will not only reduce the fatty layers over the abdomen, but will also
greatly strengthen the stomach muscles. (2) Give the abdomen a good but
not rough kneading and rubbing.

Exercise XI.

The exercise is as follows:--Follow it carefully. (1) stand erect, with
heels together, toes slightly pointed outward; (2) raise the arms up by
the sides (with a circular movement) until the hands meet over the head,
thumbs touching each other; (3) keeping the knees stiff; the body rigid;
_the elbows unbent_; (and shoulders bent well back as the movement is
made); bring down the hands, slowly, with a sideway circular motion,
until they reach the sides of the legs the little finger and the
inner-edge (the "chopping-edge") of the hand alone touching the legs, and
palms of the hands facing straight to the front. The shoulder gets the
right position by touching the little finger of each hand to the seam of
the trousers. (4) Repeat several times, _slowly_ remember. With the hands
in the last position, having been placed there by the motion stated, it
is very difficult for the shoulders to warp forward. The chest is
projected a little; the head is erect; neck is straight, the back
straight and hollowed a little (the natural position); and the knees are
straight. In short, you have a fine, erect carriage--_now keep it_.


SEVEN MINOR BREATHING EXERCISES.

Exercise I.

(1) Stand erect with hands at sides. (2) Inhale complete breath.
(3) Raise the arms slowly, keeping them rigid until the hands touch over
head. (4) Retain the breath a few minutes with hands over head. (5)
Lower hands slowly to sides exhaling slowly at the same time. (6)
Practise cleansing breath.

Exercise II.

(1) Stand erect with arms straight in front of you. (2) Inhale
complete breath and retain. (3) Swing arms back as far as they will go;
then back to first position; then repeat several times, retaining the
breath all the while. (4) Exhale vigorously through mouth. (5) Practise
cleansing breath.

Exercise III.

(1) Stand erect with arms straight in front of you. (2) Inhale complete
breath. (3) Swing arms around in a circle, backward, a few times. Then
reverse a few times retaining the breath all the while. You may vary this
by rotating them alternately like the sails of a wind-mill. (4) Exhale
the breath vigorously through the mouth. (5) Practise cleansing breath.

Exercise IV.

(1) Lie on the floor with your face downward, and palms of hands flat
upon the floor by your sides. (2) Inhale complete breath and retain.
(3) Stiffen the body and raise yourself up by the strength of your arms
until you rest on your hands and toes. (4) Then lower yourself to
original position. Repeat several times. (5) Exhale vigorously through
the mouth. (6) Practise cleansing breath.

Exercise V.

(1) Stand erect with your palms against the wall. (2) Inhale complete
breath and retain. (3) Lower the chest to the wall, resting your
weight on your hands. (4) Then raise yourself back with the arm muscles
alone, keeping the body stiff. (5) Exhale vigorously through the mouth.
(6) Practise cleansing breath.

Exercise VI.

(1) Stand erect with arms "akimbo" that is with hands resting around the
waist and elbows standing out. (2) Inhale complete breath and retain. (3)
Keep legs and hips stiff and bend well forward, as if bowing, at the same
time exhaling slowly. (4) Return to first position and then take another
complete breath. (5) Then bend backward exhaling slowly. (6) Return to
first position and take a complete breath. (7) Then bend sideways
exhaling slowly (vary by bending to right and then to left). (8) Practise
cleansing breath.

Exercise VII.

(1) Stand erect or sit erect with straight spinal column. (2) Inhale a
complete breath but instead of inhaling on a continuous steady stream,
take a series of short, quick "sniffs" as if you were smelling aromatic
salts and ammonia and did not wish to get too strong a "whiff." Do not
exhale any of these little breaths, but add one to the other until the
entire lung space is filled. (3) Retain for a few seconds. (4) Exhale
through the nostrils in a long restful breath. (5) Practise cleansing
breath.


WHEN YOU ARE IN TRAINING.

Do not attempt to take all the above exercises at one and the same
time. Take them several times in the day. Never exercise immediately
after a meal or before it. Do not try to force development as you will
be apt to suffer from re-action. Slow and steady wins the race. Gentle
and persistent exercises are advisable. That will lead to permanent
development.


EFFECT OF MIND AND BODY.

It has been proved conclusively even on the physical plane that a
"a Man thinketh in his heart so is he." The great thing to avoid is Fear
and Worry thoughts. These and all other undesirable thoughts are due
to bad health partially but it is even a greater truth that physical
degeneration is due to bad thinking. Fear affects the heart. During
epidemics such as plague, cholera, etc., you generally first project the
deadly germs of Fear-Thoughts upon yourself and thus by weakening your
mind you weaken your body and expose yourself to disease influence.
Again, if you have some hereditary disease and if you accept adverse
suggestions from ignorant people and keep telling yourself that such and
such a disease has taken shelter in you and your body as its "fixed
abode" you simply hasten your own end. The body and mind are
interrelated. Thoughts materialize themselves in your body. You should
get as far away from the idea of disease and old age and weaknesses as
possible and hold the health-thoughts steadily before your mind. The only
way in which to be quite immune from Disease is to Deny the Power of
Disease on yourself. Say "I cannot be ill," "I will not admit disease."
Health and strength are in the unyielding will. De-hypnotise yourself
of that superstition that God sends disease. Your body is yours to
control and keep healthy. God will give you--(He has already given you
rather)--the Power to control your body. Remember always; you alone can
save yourself. All Power and Wisdom are potentially resident in you.
Have confidence and set that thing in motion, exercise it constantly and
persistently and it shall grow and unfold. God is in you and you are in
God. When you pray you are simply, although often unconsciously, helping
that Latent Power to uncoil itself. Remember again: God will grant you
the opportunity, the means, the wisdom, the ability to accomplish a
thing, but You Shall Have to do the work yourself. Hence, you see, the
illumined mind is quite necessary for perfect health. Get rid of all weak
thoughts. Have a strong mind. Remember lastly:


MIND ACTS UPON BODY IN ALL WAYS.

Make your mind positive to your body. I have told you how to do so.
Physical exercise plus Mental Exercise will put you on the road to
Power and Poise. And side by side with this follow health-laws. But
bear in mind that if you assert your power on your mind and body
confidentially, they cannot but obey your commands. The body has an
intelligence of its own. This intelligence knows its work perfectly. It
is what you call Instinct. It digests your meals; assimilates and
eliminates; repairs wastes; works the heart and controls the circulation;
heals wounds and presides over all other natural and involuntary
processes in the body. This Instinctive mind knows its work perfectly.
But, mark you, this intelligence in the cells and nerve-centres of your
body is negative to the Central Intelligence in the brain--the
controlling centre--the "I Am" and is affected by suggestions, beliefs
and thoughts in your brain. All you have got to do is to avoid projecting
negative thoughts from your mind and let it alone. But suppose you have
by violation of the Laws of Nature disturbed the action of the
Instinctive Mind, disease results. Disease is simply the effect of nature
to throw off unnatural conditions and re-assert natural conditions. In
such a case all you have got to do is to re-establish natural states. You
can do so by simply increasing the general vitality of the body and by
changing your Mental Attitude. For instance, if you somehow or other have
accepted the "belief" that your stomach is weak or your heart is weak or
your liver is slow or your circulation is bad or your vitality is low,
etc., your instinctive Mind will take up your Beliefs and work them out
in no time physically. The Instinctive Mind--which is the same as the
sub-conscious Mind working in the body--_never reasons_. It is on the
plane of Automatism. Therefore, if you have done any such negative
thinking your first step is to wipe out these noxious mental weeds by the
Positive Denial. Say "No, No, No, my body is strong; my stomach is
strong, my heart is strong, etc." In this form of suggestion you use
positive Denial as well as Positive Affirmation. The former is
destructive of evil if rightly applied, the latter is constructive of
good. Belief and confident expectation are mighty forces. Be sure you
apply them wisely. The power of mind over matter is supreme and a Proven
Reality.


RESERVE FORCE.

Here I should like to draw your attention to the Reserve Power existing
in your body. Of course there are soul-powers existing potentially
within YOU which leap into brilliant expression as you succeed in
developing and expanding your brain to a state of perfect responsiveness
to the touch of your will. For really and truly your will, forming as it
does the divine part of yourself, is always strong and must unfold "as a
rose" by exercising itself, in the field of matter, force and mind;--all
of which are subordinate to YOU and the real aim of human evolution is
actually to place in your hands the wand of power.

What is within your body is sure to find its correspondent outside in
Nature. Control nature inside and you will move as a master out in this
universe.

Now without going into details let me tell you--if you do not know it
already--that mind is the finest form of matter, and matter the grossest
form of mind, and there is a constant interaction between the two poles.
But since mind represents the positive end and matter the negative, the
former can dominate the latter. You can evoke states of consciousness by
applying stimulus to the periphery and again mental states evoke
corresponding vibrations in the cellular life of body and brain.

Hence you see your mind controls and forms your body. Also your body
reacts upon your brain and affects that part of your mind which has to
operate through the brain, which is matter pure and simple. So to keep
aright the polarities of your brain and body a constant adjustment of
forces is needed and thus you can establish POISE.

In order always to be in a state of perfect health two things are
necessary. Deny the power of disease over yourself. In the unyielding
will is health. In the weak, vacillating, fearful mind is disease and
death. At the same time always be in perfect magnetic trim with the
physical laws of health. A knowledge of the latter and the ascension of a
fearless mental attitude will open up hitherto unrecognised channels of
physical and mental expression. Physiological researches have led sincere
investigators to the inevitable conclusion that there is subtle, refined,
dynamic substance, a reality that binds up the reorganization, causes
growth, vitality and motion; repairs injuries; makes up losses; overcomes
and cures diseases. Von Helment called it "Archeus"; Stahl called it
"Anima;" Whytt called it the "sentiment principle;" Dr. Cullen called it
"Caloric;" Dr. Darwin called it "Sensorial energy"; Rush called it
"Occult cause;" and many other names such as "Vital Principle," "Living
power," "Conservative Power," "Odic Force," etc., etc., have been given
to it. We of India have recognised it and devised Yoga methods for
controlling it; we call it Prana and only in India do you come across men
who possess pranic control or control over universal energy.

There exists in your physical organism reserve stores of vital energy
stored away for your use, particularly in that central ganglion of your
vital battery known as the Solar Plexus and generally in the chain of
ganglia or storage batteries along and up your spine and elsewhere in
other nerve-centres. The solar plexus is also known as the Abdominal
Brain and your brain depends and draws upon this vital centre for its
energies. You will find after the prolonged concentration and brain-work
that this part of your body--at the back of pit of stomach--becomes
warm. Now when you engage in physical exercise, for instance, you must
have noticed how at first you soon get tired and all done up. But if you
wait a little and then start again, you will find how the sense of
fatigue has quite passed away and you can run your body under full
pressure for a very long time, and the more you exert yourself the
greater and more powerful the surging up of your vital energy. With each
new exertion you seem to acquire a fresh start. This has puzzled
physiologists. You will find a parallel phenomenon in mental work. You
may experience a sense of weariness and fatigue in some brain-work which
demands close thinking and attention, but if you attack your work a
little later after the first effort you will do your work a surprising
degree of freshness, vigour, and enthusiasm far surpassing the original
attempt. Again everyone can and does put forth universal energy under
pressure of some urgent necessity, which will startle even himself. No
matter who you are and what your physical condition, there is an enormous
amount of power in your body that has never been drawn upon at all
and impatiently waiting for up-call. We go on in ordinary dog trot pace,
resting, limping, "taking care of our health," and then we think we are
doing our best. Do not permit your mind to be self-hypnotised into a
false sense of being "exhausted" and "old." Neither of them is a fact
except in your thought of yourself. All your powers are lying dormant.
All your latent energies are lying unused. Back of your conscious
mentality are tremendous energies awaiting the pull of your will. When
your brain conceives of being something unusually great, at least so it
may appear from your view-point, do not question your strength but go
ahead unhesitatingly, fearlessly and steadily. Assert your life-force.
Feel that you are young, strong and healthy and fit. Live in mental
consciousness of power and never think of weakness. Keep your grip and
run right along. Nature is sure to honor your draft. Nature is sure to
give you strength, energy and vim, in boundless measure. Just try this
my friends, you, who write me of "there being a serious lack of vitality"
in your system and hence your inability to grapple with the occult. No
such thing. Fact is you lack courage and initiative, pluck and "go" and
you are labouring under the hypnotism of weakening thoughts. Just change
your thoughts, and your reserve forces will rush out into activity
and you will be a changed man in no time.


HOW TO EXERCISE.

In exercising aim at rhythm of motion. Let your movements be easy,
regular, rhythmic and graceful. Take an interest in your work. Do pay
attention. Put Will-Power and Mind into your work. Think of all it means.
Do not fatigue yourself unduly. After exercise towelling or a spray-bath
is advisable. Wet your towel, pass it over your body, rubbing thoroughly.
Raise the towel and repeat. After exercise and towelling, you should be
in a splendid glow. Be sure to keep the windows open when exercising.
Fresh air is an absolute necessity. Never mind about cold and so forth.
Remember the Positive Denial will fill you with Power of Resistance. Say
"Cold cannot affect my body" and believe what you say. You can face
anything in this way and remain untouched.


BATHING AND LINEN.

The student should bathe daily, using plenty of water, rubbing and
cleaning the body from top to toe. I myself bathe very early in the
morning, in all seasons, in cold water. Cold water stimulates circulation
and is a wonderful tonic internally and externally. Warm water is
soothing and relaxing in its effect. If you can bathe in the flowing
water of a river, so much the better. Swimming is a wonderful bracer,
besides being an enjoyment in itself. There is Prana in water and your
body extracts this Prana from air, water and food. I cannot give you
instructions as to different forms of bathing, as this is not a "doctor"
book. As far as possible bathe twice a day, mornings and evenings; if
