representations of the work of Christ and that of the Spirit of
Christ. The former in its character and revelation and attainment was
wrought upon earth, and in its character of intercession and
bestowment of blessings is discharged at the right hand of God in
heaven; the whole of the Spirit's work, on the other hand, is wrought
in human spirits here. The context speaks of intercession expressed
in 'groanings which cannot be uttered,' and which, unexpressed though
they are, are fully understood 'by Him who searches the heart.'
Plainly, therefore, these groanings come from human hearts, and as
plainly are the Divine Spirit's voicing them.

II. The Spirit's intercession in our spirits consists in our own
divinely-inspired longings.

The Apostle has just been speaking of another groaning within
ourselves, which is the expression of 'the earnest expectation' of
'the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body'; and he says that
that longing will be the more patient the more it is full of hope.
This, then, is Paul's conception of the normal attitude of a
Christian soul; but that attitude is hard to keep up in one's own
strength, because of the distractions of time and sense which are
ever tending to disturb the continuity and fixity of that onward
look, and to lead us rather to be satisfied with the gross, dull
present. That redemption of the body, with all which it implies and
includes, ought to be the supreme object to which each Christian
heart should ever be turning, and Christian prayers should be
directed. But our own daily experience makes us only too sure that
such elevation above, and remoteness from earthly thoughts, with all
their pettinesses and limitations, is impossible for us in our own
strength. As Paul puts it here, 'We know not what to pray for'; nor
can we fix and focus our desires, nor present them 'as we ought.' It
is to this weakness and incompleteness of our desires and prayers
that the help of the Spirit is directed. He strengthens our longings
by His own direct operation. The more vivid our anticipations and the
more steadfast our hopes, and the more our spirits reach out to that
future redemption, the more are we bound to discern something more
than human imaginings in them, and to be sure that such visions are
too good not to be true, too solid to be only the play of our own
fancy. The more we are conscious of these experiences as our own, the
more certain we shall be that in them it is not we that speak, but
'the Spirit of the Father that speaketh in us.'

III. These divinely-inspired longings are incapable of full
expression.

They are shallow feelings that can be spoken. Language breaks down in
the attempt to express our deepest emotions and our truest love. For
all the deepest things in man, inarticulate utterance is the most
self-revealing. Grief can say more in a sob and a tear than in many
weak words; love finds its tongue in the light of an eye and the
clasp of a hand. The groanings which rise from the depths of the
Christian soul cannot be forced into the narrow frame-work of human
language; and just because they are unutterable are to be recognised
as the voice of the Holy Spirit.

But where amidst the Christian experience of to-day shall we find
anything in the least like these unutterable longings after the
redemption of the body which Paul here takes it for granted are
the experience of all Christians? There is no more startling
condemnation of the average Christianity of our times than the calm
certainty with which through all this epistle the Apostle takes it
for granted that the experience of the Roman Christians will
universally endorse his statements. Look for a moment at what these
statements are. Listen to the briefest summary of them: 'We cry,
Abba, Father'; 'We are children of God'; 'We suffer with Him that we
may be glorified with Him'; 'Glory shall be revealed to usward'; 'We
have the first-fruits of the Spirit'; 'We ourselves groan within
ourselves'; 'By hope were we saved'; 'We hope for that which we see
not'; 'Then do we with patience wait for it'; 'We know that to them
that love God all things work together for good'; 'In all these
things we are more than conquerors'; 'Neither death nor life... nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God.' He believed that in these rapturous and triumphant words he was
gathering together the experience of every Roman Christian, and would
evoke from their lips a confident 'Amen.' Where are the communities
to-day in whose hearing these words could be reiterated with the like
assurance? How few among us there are who know anything of these
'groanings which cannot be uttered!' How few among us there are whose
spirits are stretching out eager desires towards the land of
perpetual summer, like migratory birds in northern latitudes when the
autumn days are shortening and the temperature is falling!

But, however we must feel that our poor experience falls far short of
the ideal in our text, an ideal which was to some extent realised in
the early Christian Church, we must beware of taking the
imperfections of our experience as any evidence of the unreality of
our Christianity. They are a proof that we have limited and impeded
the operation of the Spirit within us. They teach us that He will not
intercede 'with groanings which cannot be uttered' unless we let Him
speak through our voices. Therefore, if we find that in our own
consciousness there is little to correspond to those unuttered
groanings, we should take the warning: 'Quench not the Spirit.'
'Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God in whom ye were sealed unto the
day of redemption.'

IV. The unuttered longings are sure to be answered.

He that searcheth the heart knows the meaning of the Spirit's
unspoken prayers; and looking into the depths of the human spirit
interprets its longings, discriminating between the mere human and
partial expression and the divinely-inspired desire which may be
unexpressed. If our prayers are weak, they are answered in the
measure in which they embody in them, though perhaps mistaken by us,
a divine longing. Apparent disappointment of our petitions may be
real answers to our real prayer. It was because Jesus loved Mary and
Martha and Lazarus that He abode still in the same place where He
was, to let Lazarus die that He might be raised again. That was the
true answer to the sisters' hope of His immediate coming. God's way
of giving to us is to breathe within us a desire, and then to answer
the desire inbreathed. So, longing is the prophecy of fulfilment when
it is longing according to the will of God. They who 'hunger and
thirst after righteousness' may ever be sure that their bread shall
be given them, and their water will be made sure. The true object of
our desires is often not clear to us, and so we err in translating it
into words. Let us be thankful that we pray to a God who can discern
the prayer within the prayer, and often gives the substance of our
petitions in the very act of refusing their form.




THE GIFT THAT BRINGS ALL GIFTS

   'He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up
   for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give
   us all things?'--ROMANS viii. 32.


We have here an allusion to, if not a distinct quotation from, the
narrative in Genesis, of Abraham's offering up of Isaac. The same
word which is employed in the Septuagint version of the Old
Testament, to translate the Hebrew word rendered in our Bible as
'withheld,' is employed here by the Apostle. And there is evidently
floating before his mind the thought that, in some profound and real
sense, there is an analogy between that wondrous and faithful act of
giving up and the transcendent and stupendous gift to the world, from
God, of His Son.

If we take that point of view, the language of my text rises into
singular force, and suggests many very deep thoughts, about which,
perhaps, silence is best. But led by that analogy, let us deal with
these words.

I. Consider this mysterious act of divine surrender.

The analogy seems to suggest to us, strange as it may be, and remote
from the cold and abstract ideas of the divine nature which it is
thought to be philosophical to cherish, that something corresponding
to the pain and loss that shadowed the patriarch's heart flitted
across the divine mind when the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour
of the world. Not merely to give, but to give up, is the highest
crown and glory of love, as we know it. And who shall venture to say
that we so fully apprehend the divine nature as to be warranted in
declaring that some analogy to that is impossible for Him? Our
language is, 'I will not offer unto God that which doth cost me
nothing.' Let us bow in silence before the dim intimation that seems
to flicker out of the words of my text, that so He says to us, 'I
will not offer unto you that which doth cost Me nothing.' 'He
_spared_ not His own Son'; withheld Him not from us.

But passing from that which, I dare say, many of you may suppose to
be fanciful and unwarranted, let us come upon the surer ground of the
other words of my text. And notice how the reality of the surrender
is emphasised by the closeness of the bond which, in the mysterious
eternity, knits together the Father and the Son. As with Abraham, so
in this lofty example, of which Abraham and Isaac were but as dim,
wavering reflections in water, the Son is His own Son. It seems to me
impossible, upon any fair interpretation of the words before us, to
refrain from giving to that epithet here its very highest and most
mysterious sense. It cannot be any mere equivalent for Messiah, it
cannot merely mean a man who was like God in purity of nature and in
closeness of communion. For the force of the analogy and the emphasis
of that word which is even more emphatic in the Greek than in the
English 'His _own_ Son,' point to a community of nature, to a
uniqueness and singleness of relation, to a closeness of intimacy, to
which no other is a parallel. And so we have to estimate the measure
of the surrender by the tenderness and awfulness of the bond. 'Having
one Son, His well-beloved, He sent Him.'

Notice, again, how the greatness of the surrender is made more
emphatic by the contemplation of it in its double negative and
positive aspect, in the two successive clauses. 'He spared not His
Son, but delivered Him up,' an absolute, positive giving of Him over
to the humiliation of the life and to the mystery of the death.

And notice how the tenderness and the beneficence that were the sole
motive of the surrender are lifted into light in the last words, 'for
us all.' The single, sole reason that bowed, if I may so say, the
divine purpose, and determined the mysterious act, was a pure desire
for our blessing. No definition is given as to the manner in which
that surrender wrought for our good. The Apostle does not need to
dwell upon that. His purpose is to emphasise the entire
unselfishness, the utter simplicity of the motive which moved the
divine will. One great throb of love to the whole of humanity led to
that transcendent surrender, before which we can only bow and say,
'Thanks be unto God for His unspeakable gift.'

And now, notice how this mysterious act is grasped by the Apostle
here as what I may call the illuminating fact as to the whole divine
nature. From it, and from it alone, there falls a blaze of light on
the deepest things in God. We are accustomed to speak of Christ's
perfect life of unselfishness, and His death of pure beneficence, as
being the great manifestation to us all that in His heart there is an
infinite fountain of love to us. We are, further, accustomed to speak
of Christ's mission and death as being the revelation to us of the
love of God as well as of the Man Christ Jesus, because we believe
that 'God was in Christ reconciling the world,' and that He has so
manifested and revealed the very nature of divinity to us, in His
life and in His person, that, as He Himself says, 'He that hath seen
Me hath seen the Father.' And every conclusion that we draw as to the
love of Christ is, _ipso facto_, a conclusion as to the love of God.
But my text looks at the matter from rather a different point of view,
and bids us see, in Christ's mission and sacrifice, the great
demonstration of the love of God, not only because 'God was in
Christ,' but because the Father's will, conceived of as distinct
from, and yet harmonious with, the will of the Son, gives Him up for
us. And we have to say, not only that we see the love of God in the
love of Christ, but 'God so loved the world that He sent His only
begotten Son' that we might have life through Him.

These various phases of the love of Christ as manifesting the divine
love, may not be capable of perfect harmonising in our thoughts, but
they do blend into one, and by reason of them all, 'God commendeth
His love toward us in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for
us.' We have to think not only of Abraham who gave up, but of the
unresisting, innocent Isaac, bearing on his shoulders the wood for
the burnt offering, as the Christ bore the Cross on His, and
suffering himself to be bound upon the pile, not only by the cords
that tied his limbs, but by the cords of obedience and submission,
and in both we have to bow before the Apocalypse of divine love.

II. So, secondly, look at the power of this divine surrender to bring
with it all other gifts.

'How shall He not with Him also freely give us all things?' The
Apostle's triumphant question requires for its affirmative answer
only the belief in the unchangeableness of the Divine heart, and the
uniformity of the Divine purpose. And if these be recognised, their
conclusion inevitably follows. 'With Him He will freely give us all
things.'

It is so, because the greater gift implies the less. We do not expect
that a man who hands over a million of pounds to another, to help
him, will stick at a farthing afterwards. If you give a diamond you
may well give a box to keep it in. In God's gift the lesser will
follow the lead of the greater; and whatsoever a man can want, it is
a smaller thing for Him to bestow, than was the gift of His Son.

There is a beautiful contrast between the manners of giving the two
sets of gifts implied in words of the original, perhaps scarcely
capable of being reproduced in any translation. The expression that
is rendered 'freely give,' implies that there is a grace and a
pleasantness in the act of bestowal. God gave in Christ, what we may
reverently say it was something like pain to give. Will He not give
the lesser, whatever they may be, which it is the joy of His heart to
communicate? The greater implies the less.

Farther, this one great gift draws all other gifts after it, because
the purpose of the greater gift cannot be attained without the
bestowment of the lesser. He does not begin to build being unable to
finish; He does not miscalculate His resources, nor stultify Himself
by commencing upon a large scale, and having to stop short before the
purpose with which He began is accomplished. Men build great palaces,
and are bankrupt before the roof is put on. God lays His plans with
the knowledge of His powers, and having first of all bestowed this
large gift, is not going to have it bestowed in vain for want of some
smaller ones to follow it up. Christ puts the same argument to us,
beginning only at the other end of the process. Paul says, 'God has
laid the foundation in Christ.' Do you think He will stop before the
headstone is put on? Christ said, 'It is your Father's good pleasure
to give you the Kingdom.' Do you think He will not give you bread and
water on the road to it? Will He send out His soldiers half-equipped;
will it be found when they are on their march that they have been
started with a defective commissariat, and with insufficient
trenching tools? Shall the children of the King, on the road to their
thrones, be left to scramble along anyhow, in want of what they need
to get there? That is not God's way of doing. He that hath begun a
good work will also perfect the same, and when He gave to you and me
His Son, He bound Himself to give us every subsidiary and secondary
blessing which was needed to make that Son's work complete in each of
us.

Again, this great blessing draws after it, by necessary consequence,
all other lesser and secondary gifts, inasmuch as, in every real
sense, everything is included and possessed in the Christ when we
receive Him. 'With Him,' says Paul, as if that gift once laid
in a man's heart actually enclosed within it, and had for its
indispensable accompaniment the possession of every smaller thing
that a man can need, Jesus Christ is, as it were, a great Cornucopia,
a horn of abundance, out of which will pour, with magic affluence,
all manner of supplies according as we require. This fountain flows
with milk, wine, and water, as men need. Everything is given us when
Christ is given to us, because Christ is the Heir of all things, and
we possess all things in Him; as some poor village maiden married to
a prince in disguise, who, on the morrow of her wedding finds that
she is lady of broad lands, and mistress of a kingdom. 'He that
spared not His own Son,' not only 'with Him will give,' but in Him
has 'given us all things.'

And so, brethren, just as that great gift is the illuminating fact in
reference to the divine heart, so is it the interpreting fact in
reference to the divine dealings. Only when we keep firm hold of
Christ as the gift of God, and the Explainer of all that God does,
can we face the darkness, the perplexities, the torturing questions
that from the beginning have harassed men's minds as they looked upon
the mysteries of human misery. If we recognise that God has given us
His Son, then all things become, if not plain, at least lighted with
some gleam from that great gift; and we feel that the surrender of
Christ is the constraining fact which shapes after its own likeness,
and for its own purpose, all the rest of God's dealings with men.
That gift makes anything believable, reasonable, possible, rather
than that He should spare not His own Son, and then should
counterwork His own act by sending the world anything but good.

III. And now, lastly, take one or two practical issues
from these thoughts, in reference to our own belief and conduct.

First, I would say, Let us correct our estimates of the relative
importance of the two sets of gifts. On the one side stands the
solitary Christ; on the other side are massed all delights of sense,
all blessings of time, all the things that the vulgar estimation of
men unanimously recognises to be good. These are only makeweights.
They are all lumped together into an 'also.' They are but the golden
dust that may be filed off from the great ingot and solid block. They
are but the outward tokens of His far deeper and true preciousness.
They are secondary; He is the primary. What an inversion of our
notions of good! Do _you_ degrade all the world's wealth,
pleasantness, ease, prosperity, into an 'also?' Are you content to
put it in the secondary place, as a result, if it please Him, of
Christ? Do you live as if you did? Which do you hunger for most?
Which do you labour for hardest? 'Seek ye first the Kingdom and the
King, and all 'these things shall be added unto you.'

Let these thoughts teach us that sorrow too is one of the gifts of
the Christ. The words of my text, at first sight, might seem to be
simply a promise of abundant earthly good. But look what lies close
beside them, and is even part of the same triumphant burst. 'Shall
tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword?' These are some of the 'all things' which Paul
expected that God would give him and his brethren. And looking upon
all, he says, 'They all work together for good'; and in them all we
may be more than conquerors. It would be a poor, shabby issue of such
a great gift as that of which we have been speaking, if it were only
to be followed by the sweetnesses and prosperity and wealth of this
world. But here is the point that we have to keep hold of--inasmuch
as He gives us all things, let us take all the things that come to us
as being as distinctly the gifts of His love, as is the gift of
Christ Himself. A wise physician, to an ignorant onlooker, might seem
to be acting in contradictory fashions when in the one moment he
slashes into a limb, with a sharp, gleaming knife, and in the next
sedulously binds the wounds, and closes the arteries, but the purpose
of both acts is one.

The diurnal revolution of the earth brings the joyful sunrise and the
pathetic sunset. The same annual revolution whirls us through the
balmy summer days and the biting winter ones. God's purpose is one.
His methods vary. The road goes straight to its goal; but it
sometimes runs in tunnels dank and dark and stifling, and sometimes
by sunny glades and through green pastures. God's purpose is always
love, brother. His withdrawals are gifts, and sorrow is not the least
of the benefits which come to us through the Man of Sorrows.

So again, let these thoughts teach us to live by a very quiet and
peaceful faith. We find it a great deal easier to trust God for
Heaven than for earth--for the distant blessings than for the near
ones. Many a man will venture his soul into God's hands, who would
hesitate to venture to-morrow's food there. Why? Is it not because we
do not really trust Him for the greater that we find it so hard to
trust Him for the less? Is it not because we want the less more
really than we want the greater, that we can put ourselves off with
faith for the one, and want something more solid to grasp for the
other? Live in the calm confidence that God gives all things; and
gives us for to-morrow as for eternity; for earth as for heaven.

And, last of all, make you quite sure that you have taken _the_
great gift of God. He gives it to all the world, but they only have
it who accept it by faith. Have you, my brother? I look out upon the
lives of the mass of professing Christians; and this question weighs
on my heart, judging by conduct--have they really got Christ for
their own? 'Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not
bread, and your labour for that which satisfieth not?' Look how you
are all fighting and scrambling, and sweating and fretting, to get
hold of the goods of this present life, and here is a gift gleaming
before you all the while that you will not condescend to take. Like a
man standing in a market-place offering sovereigns for nothing, which
nobody accepts because they think the offer is too good to be true,
so God complains and wails: I have stretched out My hands all the
day, laden with gifts, and no man regarded.

  'It is only heaven may be had for the asking;
  It is only God that is given away.'

He gives His Son. Take Him by humble faith in His sacrifice and
Spirit; take Him, and with Him He freely gives you all things.




MORE THAN CONQUERORS

   'Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors
   through Him that loved us.'--ROMANS viii. 37.


In order to understand and feel the full force of this triumphant
saying of the Apostle, we must observe that it is a negative answer
to the preceding questions, 'Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword?' A heterogeneous mass the Apostle here
brigades together as an antagonistic army. They are alike in nothing
except that they are all evils. There is no attempt at an exhaustive
enumeration, or at classification. He clashes down, as it were, a
miscellaneous mass of evil things, and then triumphs over them, and
all the genus to which they belong, as being utterly impotent to drag
men away from Jesus Christ. To ask the question is to answer it, but
the form of the answer is worth notice. Instead of directly replying,
'No! no such powerless things as these can separate us from the love
of Christ,' he says, 'No! In all these things, whilst weltering
amongst them, whilst ringed round about by them, as by encircling
enemies, "we are more than conquerors."' Thereby, he suggests that
there is something needing to be done by us, in order that the foes
may not exercise their natural effect. And so, taking the words of my
text in connection with that to which they are an answer, we have
three things--the impotent enemies of love; the abundant victory of
love; 'We are more than conquerors'; and the love that makes us
victorious. Let us look then at these three things briefly.

I. First of all, the impotent enemies of love.

There is contempt in the careless massing together of the foes which
the Apostle enumerates. He begins with the widest word that covers
everything--'affliction.' Then he specifies various forms of
it--'distress,' _straitening_, as the word might be rendered,
then he comes to evils inflicted for Christ's sake by hostile
men--'persecution,' then he names purely physical evils, 'hunger' and
'nakedness,' then he harks back again to man's antagonism, 'peril,'
and 'sword.' And thus carelessly, and without an effort at logical
order, he throws together, as specimens of their class, these salient
points, as it were, and crests of the great sea, whose billows
threaten to roll over us; and he laughs at them all, as impotent and
nought, when compared with the love of Christ, which shields us from
them all.

Now it must be noticed that here, in his triumphant question, the
Apostle means not our love to Christ but His to us; and not even our
sense of that love, but the fact itself. And his question is just
this:--Is there any evil in the world that can make Christ stop
loving a man that cleaves to Him? And, as I said, to ask the question
is to answer it. The two things belong to two different regions. They
have nothing in common. The one moves amongst the low levels of
earth; the other dwells up amidst the abysses of eternity, and to
suppose that anything that assails and afflicts us here has any
effect in making that great heart cease to love us is to fancy that
the mists can quench the sunlight, is to suppose that that which lies
down low in the earth can rise to poison and to darken the heavens.

There is no need, in order to rise to the full height of the
Christian contempt for calamity, to deny any of its terrible power.
These things can separate us from much. They can separate us from
joy, from hope, from almost all that makes life desirable. They can
strip us to the very quick, but the quick they cannot touch. The
frost comes and kills the flowers, browns the leaves, cuts off the
stems, binds the sweet music of the flowing rivers in silent chains,
casts mists and darkness over the face of the solitary grey world,
but it does not touch the life that is in the root.

And so all these outward sorrows that have power over the whole of
the outward life, and can slay joy and all but stifle hope, and can
ban men into irrevocable darkness and unalleviated solitude, they do
not touch in the smallest degree the secret bond that binds the heart
to Jesus, nor in any measure affect the flow of His love to us.
Therefore we may front them and smile at them and say:

  'Do as thou wilt, devouring time,
  With this wide world, and all its fading sweets';

'my flesh and my heart faileth, but God is the strength of my heart,
and my portion for ever.'

You need not be very much afraid of anything being taken from you as
long as Christ is left you. You will not be altogether hopeless so
long as Christ, who is our hope, still speaks His faithful promises
to you, nor will the world be lonely and dark to them who feel that
they are lapt in the sweet and all-pervading consciousness of the
changeless love of the heart of Christ. 'Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution?'--in any of these things, 'we are more than
conquerors through Him that loved us.' Brethren, that is the
Christian way of looking at all externals, not only at the dark and
the sorrowful, but at the bright and the gladsome. If the withdrawal
of external blessings does not touch the central sanctities and
sweetness of a life in communion with Jesus, the bestowal of external
blessedness does not much brighten or gladden it. We can face the
withdrawal of them all, we need not covet the possession of them all,
for we have all in Christ; and the world without His love contributes
less to our blessedness and our peace than the absence of all its
joys with His love does. So let us feel that earth, in its givings
and in its withholdings, is equally impotent to touch the one thing
that we need, the conscious possession of the love of Christ.

All these foes, as I have said, have no power over the fact of
Christ's love to us, but they have power, and a very terrible power,
over our consciousness of that love; and we may so kick against the
pricks as to lose, in the pain of our sorrows, the assurance of His
presence, or be so fascinated by the false and vulgar sweetnesses and
promises of the world as, in the eagerness of our chase after them,
to lose our sense of the all-sufficing certitude of His love.
Tribulation does not strip us of His love, but tribulation may so
darken our perceptions that we cannot see the sun. Joys need not rob
us of His heart, but joys may so fill ours, as that there shall be no
longing for His presence within us. Therefore let us not exaggerate
the impotence of these foes, but feel that there are real dangers, as
in the sorrows so in the blessings of our outward life, and that the
evil to be dreaded is that outward things, whether in their bright or
in their dark aspects, may come between us and the home of our
hearts, the love of the loving Christ.

II. So then, note next, the abundant victory of love.

Mark how the Apostle, in his lofty and enthusiastic way, is not
content here with simply saying that he and his fellows conquer. It
would be a poor thing, he seems to think, if the balance barely
inclined to our side, if the victory were but just won by a hair's
breadth and triumph were snatched, as it were, out of the very jaws
of defeat. There must be something more than that to correspond to
the power of the victorious Christ that is in us. And so, he says, we
very abundantly conquer; we not only hinder these things which he has
been enumerating from doing that which it is their aim apparently to
do, but we actually convert them into helpers or allies. The '_more_
than conquerors' seems to mean, if there is any definite idea to be
attached to it, the conversion of the enemy conquered into a friend
and a helper. The American Indians had a superstition that every foe
tomahawked sent fresh strength into the warrior's arm. And so all
afflictions and trials rightly borne, and therefore overcome, make a
man stronger, and bring him nearer to Jesus Christ.

Note then, further, that not only is this victory more than bare
victory, being the conversion of the enemy into allies, but that it
is a victory which is won even whilst we are in the midst of the
strife. It is not that we shall be conquerors in some far-off heaven,
when the noise of battle has ceased and they hang the trumpet in the
hall, but it is here now, in the hand-to-hand and foot-to-foot
death-grapple that we do overcome. No ultimate victory, in some
far-off and blessed heaven, will be ours unless moment by moment,
here, to-day,' we _are_ more than conquerors through Him that
loved us.'

So, then, about this abundant victory there are these things to
say:--You conquer the world only, then, when you make it contribute
to your conscious possession of the love of Christ. That is the real
victory, the only real victory in life. Men talk about overcoming
here on earth, and they mean thereby the accomplishment of their
designs. A man has 'victory,' as it is phrased, in the world's
strife, when he secures for himself the world's goods at which he has
aimed, but that is not the Christian idea of the conquest of
calamity. Everything that makes me feel more thrillingly in my
inmost heart the verity and the sweetness of the love of Jesus Christ
as my very own, is conquered by me and compelled to subserve my
highest good, and everything which slips a film between me and Him,
which obscures the light of His face to me, which makes me less
desirous of, and less sure of, and less happy in, and less satisfied
with, His love, is an enemy that has conquered me. And all these
evils as the world calls them, and as our bleeding hearts have often
felt them to be, are converted into allies and friends when they
drive us to Christ, and keep us close to Him, in the conscious
possession of His sweet and changeless love. That is the victory, and
the only victory. Has the world helped me to lay hold of Christ? Then
I have conquered it. Has the world loosened my grasp upon Him? Then
it has conquered me.

Note then, further, that this abundant victory depends on how we deal
with the changes of our outward lives, our sorrows or our joys. There
is nothing, _per se_, salutary in affliction, there is nothing,
_per se_, antagonistic to Christian faith in it either. No man
is made better by his sorrows, no man need be made worse by them.
That depends upon how we take the things which come storming against
us. The set of your sails, and the firmness of your grasp upon the
tiller, determine whether the wind shall carry you to the haven or
shall blow you out, a wandering waif, upon a shoreless and melancholy
sea. There are some of you that have been blown away from your
moorings by sorrow. There are some professing Christians who have
been hindered in their work, and had their peace and their faith
shattered all but irrevocably, because they have not accepted, in the
spirit in which they were sent, the trials that have come for their
good. The worst of all afflictions is a wasted affliction, and they
are all wasted unless they teach us more of the reality and the
blessedness of the love of Jesus Christ.

III. Lastly, notice the love which makes us conquerors.

The Apostle, with a wonderful instinctive sense of fitness, names
Christ here by a name congruous to the thoughts which occupy his
mind, when he speaks of Him that loved us. His question has been, Can
anything separate us from the love of Christ? And his answer is, So
far from that being the case, that very love, by occasion of sorrows
and afflictions, tightens its grasp upon us, and, by the
communication of itself to us, makes us more than conquerors. This
great love of Jesus Christ, from which nothing can separate us, will
use the very things that seem to threaten our separation as a means
of coming nearer to us in its depth and in its preciousness.

The Apostle says 'Him that loved us,' and the words in the original
distinctly point to some one fact as being the great instance of
love. That is to say they point to His death. And so we may say
Christ's love helps us to conquer because in His death He interprets
for us all possible sorrows. If it be true that love to each of us
nailed Him there, then nothing that can come to us but must be a
love-token, and a fruit of that same love. The Cross is the key to
all tribulation, and shows it to be a token and an instrument of an
unchanging love.

Further, that great love of Christ helps us to conquer, because in
His sufferings and death He becomes the Companion of all the weary.
The rough, dark, lonely road changes its look when we see His
footprints there, not without specks of blood in them,
where the thorns tore His feet. We conquer our afflictions if we
recognise that 'in all our afflictions He was afflicted,' and that
Himself has drunk to its bitterest dregs the cup which He commends to
our lips. He has left a kiss upon its margin, and we need not shrink
when He holds it out to us and says 'Drink ye all of it.' That one
thought of the companionship of the Christ in our sorrows makes us
more than conquerors.

And lastly, this dying Lover of our souls communicates to us all, if
we will, the strength whereby we may coerce all outward things into
being helps to the fuller participation of His perfect love. Our
sorrows and all the other distracting externals do seek to drag us
away from Him. Is all that happens in counteraction to that pull of
the world, that we tighten our grasp upon Him, and will not let Him
go; as some poor wretch might the horns of the altar that did not
respond to his grasp? Nay what we lay hold of is no dead thing, but
a living hand, and it grasps us more tightly than we can ever grasp
it. So because He holds us, and not because we hold Him, we shall
not be dragged away, by anything outside of our own weak and wavering
souls, and all these embattled foes may come against us, they may
shear off everything else, they cannot sever Christ from us unless
we ourselves throw Him away. 'In this thou shalt conquer.' 'They
overcame by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of His testimony.'




LOVE'S TRIUMPH

   'Neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities,
   nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
   height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able
   to separate us from the love of God.'--ROMANS viii. 38, 39.


These rapturous words are the climax of the Apostle's long
demonstration that the Gospel is the revelation of 'the righteousness
of God from faith to faith,' and is thereby 'the power of God unto
salvation.' What a contrast there is between the beginning and the
end of his argument! It started with sombre, sad words about man's
sinfulness and aversion from the knowledge of God. It closes with
this sunny outburst of triumph; like some stream rising among black
and barren cliffs, or melancholy moorlands, and foaming through
narrow rifts in gloomy ravines, it reaches at last fertile lands, and
flows calm, the sunlight dancing on its broad surface, till it loses
itself at last in the unfathomable ocean of the love of God.

We are told that the Biblical view of human nature is too dark. Well,
the important question is not whether it is dark, but whether it is
true. But, apart from that, the doctrine of Scripture about man's
moral condition is not dark, if you will take the whole of it
together. Certainly, a part of it is very dark. The picture, for
instance, of what men are, painted at the beginning of this Epistle,
is shadowed like a canvas of Rembrandt's. The Bible is 'Nature's
sternest painter but her best.' But to get the whole doctrine of
Scripture on the subject, we have to take its confidence as to what
men may become, as well as its portrait of what they are--and then
who will say that the anthropology of Scripture is gloomy? To me it
seems that the unrelieved blackness of the view which, because it
admits no fall, can imagine no rise, which sees in all man's sins and
sorrows no token of the dominion of an alien power, and has,
therefore, no reason to believe that they can be separated from
humanity, is the true 'Gospel of despair,' and that the system which
looks steadily at all the misery and all the wickedness, and calmly
proposes to cast it all out, is really the only doctrine of human
nature which throws any gleam of light on the darkness. Christianity
begins indeed with, 'There is none that doeth good, no, not one,' but
it ends with this victorious paean of our text.

And what a majestic close it is to the great words that have gone
before, fitly crowning even their lofty height! One might well shrink
from presuming to take such words as a text, with any idea of
exhausting or of enhancing them. My object is very much more humble.
I simply wish to bring out the remarkable order, in which Paul here
marshals, in his passionate, rhetorical amplification, all the
enemies that can be supposed to seek to wrench us away from the love
of God; and triumphs over them all. We shall best measure the
fullness of the words by simply taking these clauses as they stand in
the text.

I. The love of God is unaffected by the extremest changes of our
condition.

The Apostle begins his fervid catalogue of vanquished foes by a pair
of opposites which might seem to cover the whole ground--'neither
death nor life.' What more can be said? Surely, these two include
everything. From one point of view they do. But yet, as we shall see,
there is more to be said. And the special reason for beginning with
this pair of possible enemies is probably to be found by remembering
that they are a pair, that between them they do cover the whole
ground and represent the _extremes_ of change which can befall
us. The one stands at the one pole, the other at the other. If these
two stations, so far from each other, are equally near to God's love,
then no intermediate point can be far from it. If the most violent
change which we can experience does not in the least matter to the
grasp which the love of God has on us, or to the grasp which we may
have on it, then no less violent a change can be of any consequence.
It is the same thought in a somewhat modified form, as we find in
another word of Paul's, 'Whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and
whether we die, we die unto the Lord.' Our subordination to Him is
the same, and our consecration should be the same, in all varieties
of condition, even in that greatest of all variations. His love to us
makes no account of that mightiest of changes. How should it be
affected by slighter ones?

The distance of a star is measured by the apparent change in its
position, as seen from different points of the earth's surface or
orbit. But this great Light stands steadfast in our heaven, nor moves
a hair's-breadth, nor pours a feebler ray on us, whether we look up
to it from the midsummer day of busy life, or from the midwinter of
death. These opposites are parted by a distance to which the millions
of miles of the world's path among the stars are but a point, and yet
the love of God streams down on them alike.

Of course, the confidence in immortality is implied in this thought.
Death does not, in the slightest degree, affect the essential
vitality of the soul; so it does not, in the slightest degree, affect
the outflow of God's love to that soul. It is a change of condition
and circumstance, and no more. He does not lose us in the dust of
death. The withered leaves on the pathway are trampled into mud, and
indistinguishable to human eyes; but He sees them even as when they
hung green and sunlit on the mystic tree of life.

How beautifully this thought contrasts with the saddest aspect of the
power of death in our human experience! He is Death the Separator,
who unclasps our hands from the closest, dearest grasp, and divides
asunder joints and marrow, and parts soul and body, and withdraws us
from all our habitude and associations and occupations, and loosens
every bond of society and concord, and hales us away into a lonely
land. But there is one bond which his 'abhorred shears' cannot cut.
Their edge is turned on _it_. One Hand holds us in a grasp which
the fleshless fingers of Death in vain strive to loosen. The
separator becomes the uniter; he rends us apart from the world that
He may 'bring us to God.' The love filtered by drops on us in life is
poured upon us in a flood in death; 'for I am persuaded, that neither
death nor life shall be able to separate us from the love of God.'

II. The love of God is undiverted from us by any other order of
beings.

'Nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers,' says Paul. Here we pass
from conditions affecting ourselves to living beings beyond
ourselves. Now, it is important for understanding the precise thought
of the Apostle to observe that this expression, when used without any
qualifying adjective, seems uniformly to mean good angels, the
hierarchy of blessed spirits before the throne. So that there is no
reference to 'spiritual wickedness in high places' striving to draw
men away from God. The supposition which the Apostle makes is,
indeed, an impossible one, that these ministering spirits, who are
sent forth to minister to them who shall be heirs of salvation,
should so forget their mission and contradict their nature as to seek
to bar us out from the love which it is their chiefest joy to bring
to us. He knows it to be an impossible supposition, and its very
impossibility gives energy to his conclusion, just as when in the
same fashion he makes the other equally impossible supposition about
an angel from heaven preaching another gospel than that which he had
preached to them.

So we may turn the general thought of this second category of
impotent efforts in two different ways, and suggest, first, that it
implies the utter powerlessness of any third party in regard to the
relations between our souls and God.

We alone have to do with Him alone. The awful fact of individuality,
that solemn mystery of our personal being, has its most blessed or
its most dread manifestation in our relation to God. There no other
Being has any power. Counsel and stimulus, suggestion or temptation,
instruction or lies, which may tend to lead us nearer to Him or away
from Him, they may indeed give us; but after they have done their
best or their worst, all depends on the personal act of our own
innermost being. Man or angel can affect that, but from without. The
old mystics called prayer 'the flight of the lonely soul to the only
God.' It is the name for all religion. These two, God and the soul,
have to 'transact,' as our Puritan forefathers used to say, as if
there were no other beings in the universe but only they two. Angels
and principalities and powers may stand beholding with sympathetic
joy; they may minister blessing and guardianship in many ways; but
the decisive act of union between God and the soul they can neither
effect nor prevent.

And as for them, so for men around us; the limits of their power to
harm us are soon set. They may shut us out from human love by
calumnies, and dig deep gulfs of alienation between us and dear ones;
they may hurt and annoy us in a thousand ways with slanderous
tongues, and arrows dipped in poisonous hatred, but one thing they
cannot do. They may build a wall around us, and imprison us from many
a joy and many a fair prospect, but they cannot put a roof on it to
keep out the sweet influences from above, or hinder us from looking
up to the heavens. Nobody can come between us and God but ourselves.

Or, we may turn this general thought in another direction, and say,
These blessed spirits around the throne do not absorb and intercept
His love. They gather about its steps in their 'solemn troops and
sweet societies'; but close as are their ranks, and innumerable as is
their multitude, they do not prevent that love from passing beyond
them to us on the outskirts of the crowd. The planet nearest the sun
