forsaken Him. Let us fear to leave Him. Let us be always with Him. Let
us live and die in His presence. Do you pray for me, as I for you.

I am, Yours, &c.



THIRTEENTH LETTER.


_To the Same_.

I am in pain to see you suffer so long. What gives me some ease and
sweetens the feelings I have for your griefs is, that they are proofs
of GOD'S love towards you. See them in that view and you will bear
them more easily. As your case is, it is my opinion that you should
leave off human remedies, and resign yourself entirely to the
providence of GOD: perhaps He stays only for that resignation and a
perfect trust in Him to cure you. Since, notwithstanding all your
cares, physic has hitherto proved unsuccessful, and your malady still
increases, it will not be tempting GOD to abandon yourself in His
hands, and expect all from Him.

I told you in my last that He sometimes permits bodily diseases to
cure the distempers of the soul. Have courage then: make a virtue of
necessity. Ask of GOD, not deliverance from your pains, but strength
to bear resolutely, for the love of Him, all that He should please,
and as long as He shall please.

Such prayers, indeed, are a little hard to nature, but most acceptable
to GOD, and sweet to those that love Him. Love sweetens pains; and
when one loves GOD, one suffers for His sake with joy and courage. Do
you so, I beseech you: comfort yourself with Him, who is the only
Physician of all our maladies. He is the FATHER of the afflicted,
always ready to help us. He loves us infinitely more than we imagine.
Love Him, then, and seek no consolation elsewhere. I hope you will
soon receive it. Adieu. I will help you with my prayers, poor as they
are, and shall always be, in our LORD Yours, &c.



FOURTEENTH LETTER.


_To the Same_.

I render thanks to our LORD for having relieved you a little,
according to your desire. I have been often near expiring, but I never
was so much satisfied as then. Accordingly, I did not pray for any
relief, but I prayed for strength to suffer with courage, humility and
love. Ah, how sweet it is to suffer with GOD! However great the
sufferings may be, receive them with love. It is paradise to suffer
and be with Him; so that if in this life we would enjoy the peace of
paradise we must accustom ourselves to a familiar, humble,
affectionate conversation with Him. We must hinder our spirits
wandering from Him upon any occasion. We must make our heart a
spiritual temple, wherein to adore Him incessantly. We must watch
continually over ourselves, that we may not do, nor say, nor think
anything that may displease Him. When our minds are thus employed
about GOD, suffering will become full of unction and consolation.

I know that to arrive at this state the beginning is very difficult,
for we must act purely in faith. But though it is difficult, we know
also that we can do all things with the grace of GOD, which He never
refuses to them who ask it earnestly. Knock, persevere in knocking,
and I answer for it that He will open to you in His due time, and
grant you all at once what He has deferred during many years. Adieu!
Pray to Him for me, as I pray to Him for you. I hope to see Him
quickly.

I am, Yours, &c.



FIFTEENTH LETTER.


_To the Same_.

GOD knoweth best what is needful for us, and all that He does is for
our good. If we knew how much He loves us, we should always be ready
to receive equally and with indifference from His Hand the sweet and
the bitter: all would please that came from Him. The sorest
afflictions never appear intolerable, except when we see them in the
wrong light. When we see them as dispensed by the hand of GOD, when we
know that it is our loving FATHER who abases and distresses us, our
sufferings will lose their bitterness, and become even matter of
consolation.

Let all our employment be to _know_ GOD: the more one _knows_ Him, the
more one _desires_ to know Him. And as _knowledge_ is commonly the
measure of _love_, the deeper and more extensive our _knowledge_ shall
be, the greater will be our _love_: and if our love of GOD were great,
we should love Him equally in pains and pleasures.

Let us not content ourselves with loving GOD for the mere sensible
favors, how elevated soever, which he has done, or may do us. Such
favors, though never so great, cannot bring us so near to Him as faith
does in one simple act. Let us seek Him often by faith. He is within
us: seek Him not elsewhere. If we do love Him alone, are we not rude,
and do we not deserve blame, if we busy ourselves about trifles which
do not please and perhaps offend Him. It is to be feared these
_trifles_ will one day cost us dear.

Let us begin to be devoted to Him in good earnest. Let us cast
everything besides out of our hearts. He would possess them alone. Beg
this favor of Him. If we do what we can on our parts, we shall soon
see that change wrought in us which we aspire after. I cannot thank
Him sufficiently for the relaxation He has vouchsafed you. I hope from
His mercy the favor to see Him within a few days.[4] Let us pray for
one another.

I am, in our LORD, Yours, &c.

NOTES:

[1: Gal. i, 10; Eph. vi, 5, 6.]

[2: The particulars which follow are collected from other accounts of
Brother Lawrence.]

[3: _I suppose he means_ that all distinct notions he could form of
GOD, were unsatisfactory, because he perceived them to be unworthy of
GOD; and therefore his mind was not to be satisfied but by the views
of _faith_, which apprehend GOD as infinite and incomprehensible, as
He is in Himself, and not as He can be conceived by human ideas.]

[4: He took to his bed two days after, and died within the week.]







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Practice of the Presence of God
the Best Rule of a Holy Life, by Herman Nicholas

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICE OF THE PRESENCE OF GOD ***

***** This file should be named 13871.txt or 13871.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/3/8/7/13871/

Produced by Robert Shimmin, Project Manager, Keith M. Eckrich, 
Post-Processor, and the Project Gutenberg Online Distributed
Proofreading Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
