and half Napoleons, Fredericks and double Fredericks, and ducats, and
Isabellinos, all of which names mean not so much usefulness as
dominion. The most of our windows open toward the exchange, toward the
salon of fashion, toward the god of this world. In olden times the
length of the English yard was fixed by the length of the arm of King
Henry I., and we are apt to measure things by a variable standard and
by the human arm that in the great crises of life can give us no help.
We need, like Daniel, to open our windows toward God and religion.

But, mark you, that good lion-tamer is not standing at the window, but
kneeling, while he looks out. Most photographs are taken of those in
standing or sitting posture. I now remember but one picture of a man
kneeling, and that was David Livingstone, who in the cause of God and
civilization sacrificed himself; and in the heart of Africa his
servant, Majwara, found him in the tent by the light of a candle,
stuck on the top of a box, his head in his hands upon the pillow, and
dead on his knees. But here is a great lion-tamer, living under the
dash of the light, and his hair disheveled of the breeze, praying. The
fact is, that a man can see further on his knees than standing on
tiptoe. Jerusalem was about five hundred and fifty statute miles from
Babylon, and the vast Arabian Desert shifted its sands between them.
Yet through that open window Daniel saw Jerusalem, saw all between it,
saw beyond, saw time, saw eternity, saw earth, and saw heaven. Would
you like to see the way through your sins to pardon, through your
troubles to comfort, through temptation to rescue, through dire
sickness to immortal health, through night to day, through things
terrestrial to things celestial, you will not see them till you take
Daniel's posture. No cap of bone to the joints of the fingers, no cap
of bone to the joints of the elbow, but cap of bone to the knees, made
so because the God of the body was the God of the soul, and especial
provision for those who want to pray, and physiological structure
joins with spiritual necessity in bidding us pray, and pray, and pray.

In olden time the Earl of Westmoreland said he had no need to pray,
because he had enough pious tenants on his estate to pray for him;
but all the prayers of the church universal amount to nothing unless,
like Daniel, we pray for ourselves. Oh, men and women, bounded on one
side by Shadrach's red-hot furnace, and the other side by devouring
lions, learn the secret of courage and deliverance by looking at that
Babylonish window open toward the south-west! "Oh," you say, "that is
the direction of the Arabian Desert!" Yes; but on the other side of
the desert is God, is Christ, is Jerusalem, is heaven.

The Brussels lace is superior to all other lace, so beautiful, so
multiform, so expensive--four hundred francs a pound. All the world
seeks it. Do you know how it is made? The spinning is done in a dark
room, the only light admitted through a small aperture, and that light
falling directly on the pattern. And the finest specimens of Christian
character I have ever seen or ever expect to see are those to be found
in lives all of whose windows have been darkened by bereavement and
misfortune save one, but under that one window of prayer the
interlacing of divine workmanship went on until it was fit to deck a
throne, a celestial embroidery which angels admired and God approved.

But it is another Jerusalem toward which we now need to open our
windows. The exiled evangelist of Ephesus saw it one day as the surf
of the Icarian sea foamed and splashed over the bowlders at his feet,
and his vision reminded me of a wedding-day when the bride by sister
and maid was having garlands twisted for her hair and jewels strung
for her neck just before she puts her betrothed hand into the hand of
her affianced: "I, John, saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, coming
down from God out of heaven prepared as a bride adorned for her
husband." Toward that bridal Jerusalem are our windows opened?

We would do well to think more of heaven. It is not a mere annex of
earth. It is not a desolate outpost. As Jerusalem was the capital of
Judae, and Babylon the capital of the Babylonian monarchy, and London
is the capital of Great Britain, and Washington is the capital of our
own republic, the New Jerusalem is the capital of the universe. The
king lives there, and the royal family of the redeemed have their
palaces there, and there is a congress of many nations and the
parliament of all the worlds. Yea, as Daniel had kindred in Jerusalem
of whom he often thought, though he had left home when a very young
man, perhaps father and mother and brothers and sisters still living,
and was homesick to see them, and they belonged to the high circles of
royalty, Daniel himself having royal blood in his veins, so we have in
the New Jerusalem a great many kindred, and we are sometimes homesick
to see them, and they are all princes and princesses, in them the
blood imperial, and we do well to keep our windows open toward their
eternal residence.

It is a joy for us to believe that while we are interested in them
they are interested in us. Much thought of heaven makes one heavenly.
The airs that blow through that open window are charged with life, and
sweep up to us aromas from gardens that never wither, under skies that
never cloud, in a spring-tide that never terminates. Compared with it
all other heavens are dead failures.

Homer's heaven was an elysium which he describes as a plain at the
end of the earth or beneath, with no snow nor rainfall, and the sun
never goes down, and Rhadamanthus, the justest of men, rules. Hesiod's
heaven is what he calls the islands of the blessed, in the midst of
the ocean, three times a year blooming with most exquisite flowers,
and the air is tinted with purple, while games and music and
horse-races occupy the time. The Scandinavian's heaven was the hall of
Walhalla, where the god Odin gave unending wine-suppers to earthly
heroes and heroines. The Mohammedan's heaven passes its disciples in
over the bridge Al-Sirat, which is finer than a hair and sharper than
a sword, and then they are let loose into a riot of everlasting
sensuality.

The American aborigines look forward to a heaven of illimitable
hunting-ground, partridge and deer and wild duck more than plentiful,
and the hounds never off the scent, and the guns never missing fire.
But the geographer has followed the earth round, and found no Homer's
elysium. Voyagers have traversed the deep in all directions, and found
no Hesiod's islands of the blessed. The Mohammedan's celestial
debauchery and the Indian's eternal hunting-ground for vast multitudes
have no charm. But here rolls in the Bible heaven. No more sea--that
is, no wide separation. No more night--that is, no insomnia. No more
tears--that is, no heart-break. No more pain--that is, dismissal of
lancet and bitter draught and miasma, and banishment of neuralgias and
catalepsies and consumptions. All colors in the wall except gloomy
black; all the music in the major-key, because celebrative and
jubilant. River crystalline, gate crystalline, and skies crystalline,
because everything is clear and without doubt. White robes, and that
means sinlessness. Vials full of odors, and that means pure regalement
of the senses. Rainbow, and that means the storm is over. Marriage
supper, and that means gladdest festivity. Twelve manner of fruits,
and that means luscious and unending variety. Harp, trumpet, grand
march, anthem, amen, and hallelujah in the same orchestra. Choral
meeting solo, and overture meeting antiphon, and strophe joining
dithyramb, as they roll into the ocean of doxologies. And you and I
may have all that, and have it forever through Christ, if we will let
Him with the blood of one wounded hand rub out our sin, and with the
other wounded hand swing open the shining portals.

Day and night keep your window open toward that Jerusalem. Sing about
it. Pray about it. Think about it. Talk about it. Dream about it. Do
not be inconsolable about your friends who have gone into it. Do not
worry if something in your heart indicates that you are not far off
from its ecstasies. Do not think that when a Christian dies he stops,
for he goes on.

An ingenious man has taken the heavenly furlongs as mentioned in
Revelation, and has calculated that there will be in heaven one
hundred rooms sixteen feet square for each ascending soul, though this
world should lose a hundred millions yearly. But all the rooms of
heaven will be ours, for they are family rooms; and as no room in your
house is too good for your children, so all the rooms of all the
palaces of the heavenly Jerusalem will be free to God's children and
even the throne-room will not be denied, and you may run up the steps
of the throne, and put your hand on the side of the throne, and sit
down beside the king according to the promise: "To him that overcometh
will I grant to sit with me in my throne."

But you can not go in except as conquerors. Many years ago the Turks
and Christians were in battle, and the Christians were defeated, and
with their commander Stephen fled toward a fortress where the mother
of this commander was staying. When she saw her son and his army in
disgraceful retreat, she had the gates of the fortress rolled shut,
and then from the top of the battlement cried out to her son, "You can
not enter here except as conqueror!" Then Stephen rallied his forces
and resumed the battle and gained the day, twenty thousand driving
back two hundred thousand. For those who are defeated in the battle
with sin and death and hell nothing but shame and contempt; but for
those who gain the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ the gates of
the New Jerusalem will hoist, and there shall be an abundant entrance
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord, toward which you do well to
keep your windows open.




STORMED AND TAKEN.

    "And Abimelech gat him up to Mount Zalmon, he and all the
    people that were with him, and Abimelech took an ax in his
    hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it, and
    laid it on his shoulder.... And all the people likewise cut
    down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them
    to the hold, and set the hold on fire upon them; so that all
    the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand
    men and women."--JUDGES ix: 48, 49.


Abimelech is a name malodorous in Bible history, and yet full of
profitable suggestion. Buoys are black and uncomely, but they tell
where the rocks are. The snake's rattle is hideous, but it gives
timely warning. From the piazza of my summer home, night by night I
saw a lighthouse fifteen miles away, not placed there for adornment,
but to tell mariners to stand off from that dangerous point. So all
the iron-bound coast of moral danger is marked with Saul, and Herod,
and Rehoboam, and Jezebel, and Abimelech. These bad people are
mentioned in the Bible, not only as warnings, but because there were
sometimes flashes of good conduct in their lives worthy of imitation.
God sometimes drives a very straight nail with a very poor hammer.

The city of Shechem had to be taken, and Abimelech and his men were to
do it. I see the dust rolling up from their excited march. I hear the
shouting of the captains and the yell of the besiegers. The swords
clack sharply on the parrying shields, and the vociferation of two
armies in death-grapple is horrible to hear. The battle goes on all
day, and as the sun is setting Abimelech and his army cry "Surrender!"
to the beaten foe. And, unable longer to resist, the city of Shechem
falls; and there are pools of blood, and dissevered limbs, and glazed
eyes looking up beggingly for mercy that war never shows, and dying
soldiers with their head on the lap of mother, or wife, or sister, who
have come out for the last offices of kindness and affection: and a
groan rolls across the city, stopping not, because there is no spot
for it to rest, so full is the place of other groans. A city wounded!
A city dying! A city dead! Wail for Shechem, all ye who know the
horrors of a sacked town!

As I look over the city I can find only one building standing, and
that is the temple of the god Berith. Some soldiers outside of the
city, in a tower, finding that they can no longer defend Shechem, now
begin to look out for their own personal safety, and they fly to this
temple of Berith. They get within the door, shut it, and they say,
"Now we are safe. Abimelech has taken the whole city, but he can not
take this temple of Berith. Here we shall be under the protection of
the gods." Oh, Berith, the god! do your best now for these refugees.
If you have eyes, pity them. If you have hands, help them. If you have
thunderbolts, strike for them.

But how shall Abimelech and his army take this temple of Berith and
the men who are there fortified? Will they do it with sword? Nay.
Will they do it with spear? Nay. With battering-ram, rolled up by
hundred-armed strength, crashing against the walls? Nay. Abimelech
marches his men to a wood in Zalmon. With his ax he hews off a limb of
a tree, and puts that limb upon his own shoulder, and then he says to
his men, "You do the same." They are obedient to their commander.

Oh, what a strange army, with what strange equipment! They come to the
foot of the temple of Berith, and Abimelech takes his limb of a tree
and throws it down; and the first platoon of soldiers come up and they
throw down their branches; and the second platoon, and the third,
until all around about the temple of Berith there is a pile of
tree-branches. The Shechemites look out from the windows of the temple
upon what seems to them childish play on the part of their enemies.
But soon the flints are struck, and the spark begins to kindle the
brush, and the flame comes up all through the pile, and the red
elements leap to the casement, and the woodwork begins to blaze, and
one arm of flame is thrown up on the right side of the temple, and
another arm of flame is thrown up on the left side of the temple,
until they clasp their lurid palms under the wild night sky, and the
cry of "Fire!" within, and "Fire!" without announces the terror, and
the strangulation, and the doom of the Shechemites, and the complete
overthrow of the temple of the god Berith. Then there went up a shout,
long and loud, from the stout lungs and swarthy chests of Abimelech
and his men, as they stood amid the ashes and the dust, crying:
"Victory! Victory!"

Now, I learn first from this subject the folly of depending upon any
one form of tactics in anything we have to do for this world or for
God. Look over the weaponry of olden times--javelins, battle-axes,
habergeons--and show me a single weapon with which Abimelech and his
men could have gained such complete victory. It is no easy thing to
take a temple thus armed. I saw a house where, during revolutionary
times, a man and his wife kept back a whole regiment hour after hour,
because they were inside the house, and the assaulting soldiers were
outside the house. Yet here Abimelech and his army come up, they
surround this temple, and they capture it without the loss of a single
man on the part of Abimelech, although I suppose some of the old
Israelitish heroes told Abimelech: "You are only going up there to be
cut to pieces." Yet you are willing to testify to-day that by no other
mode--certainly not by ordinary modes--could that temple so easily, so
thoroughly have been taken. Fathers and mothers, brethren and sisters
in Jesus Christ, what the Church most wants to learn this day is that
any plan is right, is lawful, is best, which helps to overthrow the
temple of sin, and capture this world for God. We are very apt to
stick to the old modes of attack.

We put on the old-style coat of mail. We come up with the sharp, keen,
glittering steel spear of argument, expecting in that way to take the
castle, but they have a thousand spears where we have ten. And so the
castle of sin stands. Oh, my friends, we will never capture this world
for God by any keen saber of sarcasm, by any glittering lances of
rhetoric, by any sapping and mining of profound disquisition, by any
gunpowdery explosions of indignation, by sharp shootings of wit, by
howitzers of mental strength made to swing shell five miles, by
cavalry horses gorgeously caparisoned pawing the air. In vain all the
attempts on the part of these ecclesiastical foot soldiers, light
horsemen, and grenadiers.

My friends, I propose this morning a different style of tactics. Let
each one go to the forest of God's promise and invitation, and hew
down a branch and put it on his shoulder, and let us all come around
these obstinate iniquities, and then, with this pile, kindled by the
fires of a holy zeal and the flames of a consecrated life, we will
burn them out. What steel can not do, fire may. And I, this morning,
announce myself in favor of any plan of religious attack that
succeeds--any plan of religious attack, however radical, however odd,
however unpopular, however hostile to all the conventionalities of
Church and State. We want more heart in our song, more heart in our
alms-giving, more heart in our prayers, more heart in our preaching.
Oh, for less of Abimelech's sword, and more of Abimelech's
conflagration! I have often heard

    "There is a fountain filled with blood"

sung artistically by four birds perched on their Sunday roost in the
gallery, until I thought of Jenny Lind, and Nilsson, and Sontag, and
all the other warblers; but there came not one tear to my eye, nor one
master emotion to my heart. But one night I went down to the African
Methodist meeting-house in Philadelphia, and at the close of the
service a black woman, in the midst of the audience, began to sing
that hymn, and all the audience joined in, and we were floated some
three or four miles nearer heaven than I have ever been since. I saw
with my own eyes that "fountain filled with blood"--red, agonizing,
sacrificial, redemptive--and I heard the crimson plash of the wave as
we all went down under it:

    "For sinners plunged beneath that flood
    Lose all their guilty stains."

Oh, my friends, the Gospel is not a syllogism; It is not casuistry, it
is not polemics, or the science of squabble. It is blood-red fact; it
is warm-hearted invitation; it is leaping, bounding, flying good news;
it is efflorescent with all light; it is rubescent with all glow; it
is arborescent with all sweet shade. I have seen the sun rise on Mount
Washington, and from the Tip-top House; but there was no beauty in
that compared with the day-spring from on high when Christ gives light
to a soul. I have heard Parepa sing; but there was no music in that
compared with the voice of Christ when He said: "Thy sins are forgiven
thee; go in peace." Good news! Let every one cut down a branch of this
tree of life and wave it. Let him throw it down and kindle it. Let all
