their times, as their Canons speake, enjoyning frequent preaching,
calling for more then almost any man is able to performe?

But heere I may turne reprooving into rejoycing, that preaching is
growne in any better fashion and grace with our times, by royall and
reverend, both examples and countenance: only I wish that every
_Archippus_ may fulfill his Ministery, be instant and constant in
preaching. _Salomon_ the older, and wiser hee grew, the more hee taught
the people, sharpened his goads, and fastned his nails; whereas many
amongst us are so wise in their youth, as to affect the foolishnes of
preaching; but in their dotage, Ease slayes the foole; when the doore is
oyled, it leaves creaking; they must then fall to make much of
themselves, till contrary with the Prophet they cry out, My fatnesse, my
fatnesse, my belly, my belly; so favouring their lungs, that they will
bee sure never to die of _Davids_ consumption of zeale; let such preach,
say they, that want livings: and if for shame they preach at all, it
must bee rarely and easily, for breaking of their winde (my meaning is
not to tax such, whom God disinables by weaknesse of body; or such as
recompence their rarity with industry, as _Perkins_, &c.) and yet
forsooth these thinke they may justly challenge, and weare the double
honor of countenance and maintenance; I marvell with what right, or with
what face, so long as there remaineth expresse Canon of Scripture,
bequeathing it to those, that toyle in word and doctrine. Neither will
zeale set us on worke onely to preach, or to preach often to avoyd the
infamy of bare readers; but it will teach us to preach painefully, and
that in the evidence and demonstration, not so much of art, or nature,
as of the spirit and grace; regarding onely, that the people know Christ
and him crucified; not caring whether they know what wee have read, how
many quotations our memory will carry levell, how roundly wee can utter
our minde in new minted words, in like sounding, idle, vaine, and
offensive _Paranomasies_; I blush to fall into the least touch of that
kinde: yet at once to shew and reproove that childish folly, It is a
vaine of vaine preaching, turning sound preaching into a sound of
preaching, tickling mens eares, like a tinckling cymball, feeding them,
[Greek: hedusmati kai ouk edesmasi], spoyling the plaine song, with
descant and division: what is this but to shew our owne levitie and want
of true Art; indeede affecting such a dancing, piperly and effeminate
eloquence (as _Tully, Demosthenes_, or any Masculine Oratour would
scorne) in steade of that divine powerfull deliverie, which becommeth
him, that speakes the Oracles of God. If ever wee meane to doe any good,
wee must exhort and reproove, with all vehemency and authority; lifting
upp our voyce as a trumpet, as the sonnes of thunder; pearcing their
eares, witnessing, striving and contending, according to our gift
whatsoever it bee, to manifest our affections, that wee may worke upon
the people; which all the Art in the world will not teach us to doe:
onely zeale at the heart will naturally produce it, without straining or
affecting. If God require the heart as well as the head; why should wee
not labour to moove the affections, as well as enforme the judgement;
There is a doctrinall, and as some tearme it, a Doctorly kinde of
preaching, which is admired of some that understand it not; of others
that could be content with the Masse againe, because it was gentle, and
had no teeth in it. And such Sermons I have sometimes heard, for matter
voyd of exception, but so delivered, as if one were acting a part, or
saying a lesson by heart. It hath called to minde a song which sometimes
I have met withall, excellently composed, full of sweet ayre, surely and
truely sung; but with flat and dead voyces without spirit, which hath
marred the musique: Of such a Sermon and Preacher, the Countreymans
verdict did well, that said, this man may bee a great scholler, but hee
wants beetle and wedges to heaw our knotted timber withall, our greene
wood will not burn unlesse it be better blown; you shall sometimes see
an excellent horse of shape and colour, having many of those markes _Du
Bartes_ describes in _Caines_ supposed horse; which yet wanting mettle
hath beene of little worth, and lesse use. If there were no other
Preachers then these, which hold themselves the onely profound and
learned Preachers, I muse what should become of conversion of soules,
which they that covet; must come with the spirit of _Elias_, to turne
the hearts of the fathers to their children, I may in truth, and I hope
with modesty speake with the Preacher, that in observing I have
observed, and have found, that divers great Clarkes have had but little
fruit of their ministery; but hardly any truely zealous man of God
(though of lesser gifts) but have had much comfort of their labours, in
their owne and bordering parishes, being in this likened by _Gregorie_,
to the yron on the Smiths anvile sparkling round about. And if for this
any bordering neighbours, whose cold labours worke not the like
successe, shall accuse them of some kinde (I know not what) of policie
in bewitching the people; they may well reply, Behold our zealous
affections are our charmes, and zeale all our witchcraft, as _Latimer_
well answered one that accused the people of partiality, for not
affecting him that preached one of his printed Sermons, that hee had
indeede his Sticke, but wanted his Rosen; meaning his zealous manner of
preaching and living, without which last, all the former will doe but
little good, if a good ensample of life accompany not their doctrine, as
lightning doth thunder. For there are some (I speake with sorrow of
heart) that seeme to have fire in their preaching, but carry water in
their life; being notoriously proud, covetous, or debauched, stained
with odious vices. Let us heare the summ of all. Doe wee love Christ
more then ordinary? would wee give proofe of our trebble love to him?
Let us then feede his flocke with a trebble zeale, expressed in our
prayer, preaching and living: Let us make it appeare to the consciences
of all, that the top of our ambition is Gods glory: and that wee preferr
the winning of soules, to the winning of the world.

This title of Angels why may it not also be extended to Magistrates, as
well as that higher stile, of Gods; Sure I am, that the scarlet robe of
zeale would exceeding well become them. _Jethro_ maketh it their prime
and essentiall character; God and _Moses_, their onely and sole, in the
charge and commission to _Jehoshuah_ so oft repeated; _Onely be of good
courage_. And if _David_ were now to re-pen his Psalme; I thinke hee
might alter the forme of his counsell, and say, _Bee zealous yee Rulers
and Judges of the world_, and not wise and politique: or rather under
the tearmes of wisdome, hee comprehends indeede the zeale wee call for,
the most now adayes being _Gallio's_, wise onely for the matters of the
Commonwealth; not having a sparke of that spirit which was in _Phineas,
Daniel_, and _Nehemias_, &c. for the Lord of hosts, or to his Lawes and
Commandements; as if God had made Magistrates keepers onely of the
second Table, governours of men, and not of Christians; guardians onely
of civill societies, and not of his Church, and shepheards also of his
flocke. Are Idolatries, blasphemies, prophaning of Saboths, no sinns?
Why then either have not the lawes force and strength enough in them (as
sometime wee are answered when wee complaine) or why are they not
executed for the suppressing of these raging sins? are not all they
punished with death in the Scriptures, as well as breaches of the second
table? Blood I leave to the malignant Church, and admire clemency in
Rulers, as much as any; but yet I know the prophane dissolutenesse of
the times, requires a three stringed whipp of severity to purge our
_Augean_ stable of the soule abuses, whipt often with penns and
tongues, but spared by them that beare the sword (a man may say of many
Governours) altogether in vaine for matters of religion. Are not kings
of the earth charg'd to render double to the bloody strumpet of Rome?
Why then doth the hurtfull pitty of our times imbolden and increase
their numbers? _Laodicea_ it selfe, I doubt not, for matters of mine and
thine, had (as their name imports) good civill justice and justicers;
but what was God the neerer for it? doth hee not threaten for all that
to spue them out of his mouth? shall hee not curse those that doe his
worke negligently, fearfully & partially? Our times complaine of two
speciall canker wormes of justice, which eat up zeale in Magistrates.
The first is _Covetousnesse_, which makes men of place to transgresse
for a morsell of bread; the zeale of their owne houses consumes the
zeale of Gods house: The building of great houses, keeping of great
houses, and matching with great houses, raising and leaving of great
houses behinde them, makes them so ravenous, that they devoure so much,
as choakes all their zeale; which would teach them to shake their laps
of bribes, and scorne to accept gifts, though men would augment them for
the perverting of judgement. The other is _Cowardice_ and _Fearfulnes_:
which how unfit, and base a quality did _Nehemiah_ thinke it for a man
of his place? no better then shynesse in a fore-horse, whose eyes men
fence on both sides, that they may lead the way, and goe without
starting; unto which, zeale is answerable in Magistrates, causing them
onely to see him that is invisible, without casting a squint eye at men;
to sing to God onely of judgement and mercy, without tuning their songs
to mans eare; to walke in the perfect way, without turning, either to
the right or left hand for feare of favour. Oh that there were such an
heart in our leaders; how easily would our people follow! what a spring
tide of zeale should wee have, if the Sunne and Moone would cast out a
benigne aspect upon them! Doth it not flourish in all those shires and
townes, where the Word and Sword doe joyntly cherish it? In others which
are the greatest number, how doth it languish and wane away, and hang
downe the head? where is it in diverse places of the land to bee seene?
I had almost sayd in my haste and heat, there is none that hath zeale,
no not one, there is no courage for the truth; but that I remember that
_Eliah_ was checked for over-shooting himselfe in his too short and
quicke computation. I hope the Lord hath his fifties amongst us, though
but thinn sowne in comparison of the swarmes of professed Recusants, and
Church-Papists, of prophane Atheists, key-cold worldlings, and lukewarme
professors. The bodies of our many severall Congregations, yea even of
the better sort, whereunto have they beene likened by our separated
adversaries; but unto the Prophet _Hosea_ his cake, halfe baked upon the
hearth, having one side, that is, the one side to the world-ward, in
publique service, scorched a little and browned over; but the inside to
God-ward, in private, and family-duties, no better then dough; many of
them making indeede some shew, as the out-landish fruits that are
plashed upon our walls, but wanting heat never come to maturity. If wee
should make good their resemblances, how then should wee please the
stomacke of God? who hath indeede brooked and borne us a long time, I
doubt but wamblingly. How neare were wee going in 88. and in the powder
treason? Doe we thinke he will ever digest us, in the temper wee are in?
which (to confesse the truth of the fashionable Christian) what is it
but a state of neutrality, indifferency, or such a mediocrity, as will
just serve the time, satisfie Law, or stand with reputation of
neighbours? beyond which, if any step a little forward, do not the rest
hunt upon the stop? If there hap to breake out a sparkle of zeale in any
one house in a parish; is not the whole towne in an uprore, as when the
bells ring awke every man brings his bucket, to the quenching of this
fire? If hell bee in an Ale-house, who cryes out of it? & as for our
Sundayes Church-service, which is all that God gets at our hands; how
perfunctorily, and fashionably is it slubbered over; how are his Saboths
made the voyder and dung-hill for all refuse businesse, divided betweene
the Church and the Ale-house, the May-pole commonly beguiling the
Pulpit? What man would not spue to see God thus worshipped? This want of
devotion makes the foule mouthed Papists to spet at us: this want of
reformation, makes the queasie-stomacked Brownists cast themselves out
of the Church; and shall God alwayes suffer the land to beare us? But
behold, he stands at the door & knocks, by treasons, by plagues, by the
hammer of dearths, discontents, fires, inundations, especially by the
word; his locks are wet with waiting. Oh before hee shake off the dust
of his feet against us, and turne to some other nation more worthy, let
us open the doore, that hee may come in and sup with us; if hee love us,
hee will purge us, and scoure us, by one chastizement or other: if hee
have no pleasure in us, hee cannot but unburthen his stomacke of us; If
all the land besides should turne the deafe eare, yet let mee entreat
and charge you of my flock to heare his voyce, & be zealous. Since my
comming amongst you, I have handled some bookes of the olde Testament,
