to compare mortal lives with this model is to subject them to severe
scrutiny. Without question, the subtlest forms of sin are trying to force
the doors of Science and enter in; but this white sanctuary will never
admit such as come to steal and to rob. Through long ages people have
slumbered over Christ's commands, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel;" "Heal the sick, cast out devils;" and now the Church seems almost
chagrined that by new discoveries of Truth sin is losing prestige and
power.

The Rev. Dr. A.J. Gordon, a Boston Baptist clergyman, said in a sermon:
"The prayer of faith shall save the sick, and it is doing it to-day; and as
the faith of the Church increases, and Christians more and more learn
their duty to believe all things written in the Scriptures, will such
manifestations of God's power increase among us." Such sentiments are
wholesome avowals of Christian Science. God is not unable or unwilling to
heal, and mortals are not compelled to have other gods before Him, and
employ material forms to meet a mental want. The divine Spirit supplies all
human needs. Jesus said to the sick, "Thy sins are forgiven thee; rise up
and walk!" God's pardon is the destruction of all "the ills that flesh is
heir to."

All power belongs to God; and it is not in all the vain power of dogma and
philosophy to dispossess the divine Mind of healing power, or to cast out
error with error, even in the name and for the sake of Christ, and so heal
the sick. While Science is engulfing error in bottomless oblivion, the
material senses would enthrone error as omnipotent and omnipresent, with
power to determine the fact and fate to being. It is said that the devil is
the ape of God. The lie of evil holds its own by declaring itself both true
and good. The path of Christian Science is beset with false claimants,
aping its virtues, but cleaving to their own vices. Denial of the
authorship of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" would make a
lie the author of Truth, and so make Truth itself a lie.

A distinguished clergyman came to be healed. He said: "I am suffering from
nervous prostration, and have to eat beefsteak and drink strong coffee to
support me through a sermon." Here a skeptic might well ask if the
atonement had lost its efficacy for him, and if Christ's power to heal was
not equal to the power of daily meat and drink. The power of Truth is not
contingent on matter. Our Master said, "Come unto me, all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest." Truth rebukes error; and
whether stall-fed or famishing, theology needs Truth to stimulate and
sustain a good sermon.

A lady said: "Only He who knows all things can estimate the good your books
are doing."

A distinguished Doctor of Divinity said: "Your book leavens my sermons."

The following extract from a letter is a specimen of those received daily:
"Your book Science and Health is healing the sick, binding up the
broken-hearted, preaching deliverance to the captive, convicting the
infidel, alarming the hypocrite, and quickening the Christian."

Christian Science Mind-healing is dishonored by those who take it up from
mercenary motives, for wealth and fame, or think to build a baseless fabric
of their own on another's foundation. They cannot put the "new wine into
old bottles;" they can never engraft Truth into error. Such students come
to my College to learn a system which they go away to disgrace. Stealing or
garbling my statements of Mind-science will never prevent or reconstruct
the wrecks of "_isms_" and help humanity.

Science often suffers blame through the sheer ignorance of people, while
envy and hatred bark and bite at its heels. A man's inability to heal, on
the Principle of Christian Science, substantiates his ignorance of its
Principle and practice, and incapacitates him for correct comment. This
failure should make him modest.

Christian Science involves a new language, and a higher demonstration of
medicine and religion. It is the "new tongue" of Truth, having its best
interpretation in the power of Christianity to heal. My system of
Mind-healing swerves not from the highest ethics and from the spiritual
goal. To climb up by some other way than Truth is to fall. Error has no
hobby, however boldly ridden or brilliantly caparisoned, that can leap into
the sanctum of Christian Science.

In Queen Elizabeth's time Protestantism could sentence men to the dungeon
or stake for their religion, and so abrogate the rights of conscience and
choke the channels of God. Ecclesiastical tyranny muzzled the mouth lisping
God's praise; and instead of healing, it palsied the weak hand outstretched
to God. Progress, legitimate to the human race, pours the healing balm of
Truth and Love into every wound. It reassures us that no Reign of Terror or
rule of error will again unite Church and State, or re-enact, through the
civil arm of government, the horrors of religious persecution.

The Rev. S.E. Herrick, a Congregational clergyman of Boston, says:
"Heretics of yesterday are martyrs to-day." In every age and clime, "On
earth peace, good will toward men" must be the watchword of Christianity.

Jesus said: "I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that Thou
hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them
unto babes."

St. Paul said that without charity we are "as sounding brass, or a tinkling
cymbal;" and he added: "Charity suffereth long, and is kind; ... doth not
behave itself unseemly, ... thinketh no evil, ... but rejoiceth in the
truth."

To hinder the unfolding truth, to ostracize whatever uplifts mankind, is of
course out of the question. Such an attempt indicates weakness, fear, or
malice; and such efforts arise from a spiritual lack, felt, though
unacknowledged.

Let it not be heard in Boston that woman, "last at the cross and first at
the sepulchre," has no rights which man is bound to respect. In natural law
and in religion the right of woman to fill the highest measure of
enlightened understanding and the highest places in government, is
inalienable, and these rights are ably vindicated by the noblest of both
sexes. This is woman's hour, with all its sweet amenities and its moral and
religious reforms.

Drifting into intellectual wrestlings, we should agree to disagree; and
this harmony would anchor the Church in more spiritual latitudes, and so
fulfil her destiny.

Let the Word have free course and be glorified. The people clamor to leave
cradle and swaddling-clothes. The spiritual status is urging its highest
demands on mortals, and material history is drawing to a close. Truth
cannot be stereotyped; it unfoldeth forever. "One on God's side is a
majority;" and "Lo, I am with you alway," is the pledge of the Master.

The question now at issue is: Shall we have a practical, spiritual
Christianity, with its healing power, or shall we have material medicine
and superficial religion? The advancing hope of the race, craving health
and holiness, halts for a reply; and the reappearing Christ, whose
life-giving understanding Christian Science imparts, must answer the
constant inquiry: "Art thou he that should come?" Woman should not be
ordered to the rear, or laid on the rack, for joining the overture of
angels. Theologians descant pleasantly upon free moral agency; but they
should begin by admitting individual rights.

The author's ancestors were among the first settlers of New Hampshire. They
reared there the Puritan standard of undefiled religion. As dutiful
descendants of Puritans, let us lift their standard higher, rejoicing, as
Paul did, that we are _free born_.

Man has a noble destiny; and the full-orbed significance of this destiny
has dawned on the sick-bound and sin-enslaved. For the unfolding of this
upward tendency to health, greatness, and goodness, I shall continue to
labor and wait.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NO AND YES***


******* This file should be named 16624.txt or 16624.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/6/2/16624



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
