faithfully performed. She of herself had no power. But God has fulfilled
His promises to her and to the world. If you have faith, you can move
mountains."

Mrs. Henrietta N. Cole is also a very prominent member of the church. When
seen yesterday she emphasized herself as being of the same theory as Mrs.
Copeland. Mrs. Cole has made a careful and searching study in the beliefs
of Scientists, and is perfectly versed in all their beliefs and doctrines.
She stated that man of himself has no power, but that all comes from God.
She placed no credit whatever in the reports from New York that Mrs. Eddy
has been accredited as having been deified. She referred the reporter to
the large volume which Mrs. Eddy had herself written, and said that no more
complete and yet concise idea of her belief could be obtained than by a
perusal of it.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_New York Herald_, February 6, 1895]


MRS. EDDY SHOCKED

[By Telegraph to the _Herald_]

Concord, N.H., February 4, 1895.--The article published in the _Herald_ on
January 29, regarding a statement made by Mrs. Laura Lathrop, pastor of the
Christian Science congregation that meets every Sunday in Hodgson Hall, New
York, was shown to Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy, the Christian Science
"Discoverer," to-day.

Mrs. Eddy preferred to prepare a written answer to the interrogatory, which
she did in this letter, addressed to the editor of the _Herald_:--

    "A despatch is given me, calling for an interview to answer for
    myself, 'Am I the second Christ?'

    "Even the question shocks me. What I am is for God to declare in
    His infinite mercy. As it is, I claim nothing more than what I am,
    the Discoverer and Founder of Christian Science, and the blessing
    it has been to mankind which eternity enfolds.

    "I think Mrs. Lathrop was not understood. If she said aught with
    intention to be thus understood, it is not what I have taught her,
    and not at all as I have heard her talk.

    "My books and teachings maintain but one conclusion and statement
    of the Christ and the deification of mortals.

    "Christ is individual, and one with God, in the sense of divine
    Love and its compound divine ideal.

    "There was, is, and never can be but one God, one Christ, one
    Jesus of Nazareth. Whoever in any age expresses most of the spirit
    of Truth and Love, the Principle of God's idea, has most of the
    spirit of Christ, of that Mind which was in Christ Jesus.

    "If Christian Scientists find in my writings, teachings, and
    example a greater degree of this spirit than in others, they can
    justly declare it. But to think or speak of me in any manner as a
    Christ, is sacrilegious. Such a statement would not only be false,
    but the absolute antipode of Christian Science, and would savor
    more of heathenism than of my doctrines.

    "MARY BAKER EDDY."

       *       *       *       *       *


[_The Globe_, Toronto, Canada, January 12, 1895]

[Extract]


CHRISTIAN SCIENTISTS

DEDICATION TO THE FOUNDER OF THE ORDER OF A BEAUTIFUL CHURCH AT
BOSTON--MANY TORONTO SCIENTISTS PRESENT

The Christian Scientists of Toronto, to the number of thirty, took part in
the ceremonies at Boston last Sunday and for the day or two following, by
which the members of that faith all over North America celebrated the
dedication of the church constructed in the great New England capital as a
testimonial to the Discoverer and Founder of Christian Science, Rev. Mary
Baker Eddy.

The temple is believed to be the most nearly fire-proof church structure on
the continent, the only combustible material used in its construction
being that used in the doors and pews. A striking feature of the church is
a beautiful apartment known as the "Mother's Room," which is approached
through a superb archway of Italian marble set in the wall. The furnishing
of the "Mother's Room" is described as "particularly beautiful, and blends
harmoniously with the pale green and gold decoration of the walls. The
floor is of mosaic in elegant designs, and two alcoves are separated from
the apartment by rich hangings of deep green plush, which in certain lights
has a shimmer of silver. The furniture frames are of white mahogany in
special designs, elaborately carved, and the upholstery is in white and
gold tapestry. A superb mantel of Mexican onyx with gold decoration adorns
the south wall, and before the hearth is a large rug composed entirely of
skins of the eider-down duck, brought from the Arctic regions. Pictures and
bric-a-brac everywhere suggest the tribute of loving friends. One of the
two alcoves is a retiring-room and the other a lavatory in which the
plumbing is all heavily plated with gold."

       *       *       *       *       *


[_Evening Monitor_, Concord, N.H., February 27, 1895]


AN ELEGANT SOUVENIR

REV. MARY BAKER EDDY MEMORIALIZED BY A CHRISTIAN SCIENCE CHURCH

Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, Discoverer of Christian Science, has received from
the members of The First Church of Christ, Scientist, Boston, an invitation
formally to accept the magnificent new edifice of worship which the church
has just erected.

The invitation itself is one of the most chastely elegant memorials ever
prepared, and is a scroll of solid gold, suitably engraved, and encased in
a handsome plush casket with white silk linings. Attached to the scroll is
a golden key of the church structure.

The inscription reads thus:--

    _Dear Mother_:--During the year eighteen hundred and ninety-four a
    church edifice was erected at the intersection of Falmouth and
    Norway Streets, in the city of Boston, by the loving hands of four
    thousand members. This edifice is built as a testimonial to Truth,
    as revealed by divine Love through you to this age. You are hereby
    most lovingly invited to visit and formally accept this
    testimonial on the twentieth day of February, eighteen hundred and
    ninety-five, at high noon.

    "The First Church of Christ, Scientist, at Boston, Mass.

    "By EDWARD P. BATES,

    "CAROLINE S. BATES.

    "To the Reverend Mary Baker Eddy,

    "Boston, January 6th, 1895."



       *       *       *       *       *

[_People and Patriot_, Concord, N.H., February 27, 1895]


MAGNIFICENT TESTIMONIAL

Members of The First Church of Christ, Scientist, at Boston, have forwarded
to Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy of this city, the Founder of Christian Science, a
testimonial which is probably one of the most magnificent examples of the
goldsmith's art ever wrought in this country. It is in the form of a gold
scroll, twenty-six inches long, nine inches wide, and an eighth of an inch
thick.

It bears upon its face the following inscription, cut in script letters:--

    "_Dear Mother_:--During the year 1894 a church edifice was erected
    at the intersection of Falmouth and Norway Streets, in the city of
    Boston, by the loving hands of four thousand members. This edifice
    is built as a testimonial to Truth, as revealed by divine Love
    through you to this age. You are hereby most lovingly invited to
    visit and formally accept this testimonial on the 20th day of
    February, 1895, at high noon.

    "The First Church of Christ, Scientist, at Boston, Mass.

    "By EDWARD P. BATES,

    "CAROLINE S. BATES.

    "To the Rev. Mary Baker Eddy,

    "Boston, January 6, 1895."

Attached by a white ribbon to the scroll is a gold key to the church door.

The testimonial is encased in a white satin-lined box of rich green velvet.

The scroll is on exhibition in the window of J.C. Derby's jewelry store.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The Union Signal_, Chicago]

[Extract]


THE NEW WOMAN AND THE NEW CHURCH

The dedication, in Boston, of a Christian Science temple costing over two
hundred thousand dollars, and for which the money was all paid in so that
no debt had to be taken care of on dedication day, is a notable event.
While we are not, and never have been, devotees of Christian Science, it
becomes us as students of public questions not to ignore a movement which,
starting fifteen years ago, has already gained to itself adherents in every
part of the civilized world, for it is a significant fact that one cannot
take up a daily paper in town or village--to say nothing of cities--without
seeing notices of Christian Science meetings, and in most instances they
are held at "headquarters."

We believe there are two reasons for this remarkable development, which has
shown a vitality so unexpected. The first is that a revolt was inevitable
from the crass materialism of the cruder science that had taken possession
of men's minds, for as a wicked but witty writer has said, "If there were
no God, we should be obliged to invent one." There is something in the
constitution of man that requires the religious sentiment as much as his
lungs call for breath; indeed, the breath of his soul is a belief in God.

But when Christian Science arose, the thought of the world's scientific
leaders had become materialistically "lopsided," and this condition can
never long continue. There must be a righting-up of the mind as surely as
of a ship when under stress of storm it is ready to capsize. The pendulum
that has swung to one extreme will surely find the other. The religious
sentiment in women is so strong that the revolt was headed by them; this
was inevitable in the nature of the case. It began in the most intellectual
city of the freest country in the world--that is to say, it sought the line
of least resistance. Boston is emphatically the women's
paradise,--numerically, socially, indeed every way. Here they have the
largest individuality, the most recognition, the widest outlook. Mrs. Eddy
we have never seen; her book has many a time been sent us by interested
friends, and out of respect to them we have fairly broken our mental teeth
over its granitic pebbles. That we could not understand it might be rather
to the credit of the book than otherwise. On this subject we have no
opinion to pronounce, but simply state the fact.

We do not, therefore, speak of the system it sets forth, either to praise
or blame, but this much is true: the spirit of Christian Science ideas has
caused an army of well-meaning people to believe in God and the power of
faith, who did not believe in them before. It has made a myriad of women
more thoughtful and devout; it has brought a hopeful spirit into the homes
of unnumbered invalids. The belief that "thoughts are things," that the
invisible is the only real world, that we are here to be trained into
harmony with the laws of God, and that what we are here determines where we
shall be hereafter--all these ideas are Christian.

The chimes on the Christian Science temple in Boston played "All hail the
power of Jesus' name," on the morning of the dedication. We did not attend,
but we learn that the name of Christ is nowhere spoken with more reverence
than it was during those services, and that he is set forth as the power of
God for righteousness and the express image of God for love.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The New Century_, Boston, February, 1895]


ONE POINT OF VIEW--THE NEW WOMAN

We all know her--she is simply the woman of the past with an added grace--a
newer charm. Some of her dearest ones call her "selfish" because she thinks
so much of herself she spends her whole time helping others. She represents
the composite beauty, sweetness, and nobility of all those who scorn self
for the sake of love and her handmaiden duty--of all those who seek the
brightness of truth not as the moth to be destroyed thereby, but as the
lark who soars and sings to the great sun. She is of those who have so much
to give they want no time to take, and their name is legion. She is as full
of beautiful possibilities as a perfect harp, and she realizes that all the
harmonies of the universe are in herself, while her own soul plays upon
magic strings the unwritten anthems of love. She is the apostle of the
true, the beautiful, the good, commissioned to complete all that the twelve
have left undone. Hers is the mission of missions--the highest of all--to
make the body not the prison, but the palace of the soul, with the brain
for its great white throne.

When she comes like the south wind into the cold haunts of sin and sorrow,
her words are smiles and her smiles are the sunlight which heals the
stricken soul. Her hand is tender--but steel tempered with holy resolve,
and as one whom her love had glorified once said--she is soft and gentle,
but you could no more turn her from her course than winter could stop the
coming of spring. She has long learned with patience, and to-day she knows
many things dear to the soul far better than her teachers. In olden times
the Jews claimed to be the conservators of the world's morals--they treated
woman as a chattel, and said that because she was created after man, she
was created solely for man. Too many still are Jews who never called
Abraham "Father," while the Jews themselves have long acknowledged woman as
man's proper helpmeet. In those days women had few lawful claims and no one
to urge them. True, there were Miriam and Esther, but they sang and
sacrificed for their people, not for their sex.

To-day there are ten thousand Esthers, and Miriams by the million, who sing
best by singing most for their own sex. They are demanding the right to
help make the laws, or at least to help enforce the laws upon which depends
the welfare of their husbands, their children, and themselves. Why should
our selfish self longer remain deaf to their cry? The date is no longer
B.C. Might no longer makes right, and in this fair land at least fear has
ceased to kiss the iron heel of wrong. Why then should we continue to
demand woman's love and woman's help while we recklessly promise as lover
and candidate what we never fulfil as husband and office-holder? In our
secret heart our better self is shamed and dishonored, and appeals from
Philip drunk to Philip sober, but has not yet the moral strength and
courage to prosecute the appeal. But the east is rosy, and the sunlight
cannot long be delayed. Woman must not and will not be disheartened by a
thousand denials or a million of broken pledges. With the assurance of
faith she prays, with the certainty of inspiration she works, and with the
patience of genius she waits. At last she is becoming "as fair as the morn,
as bright as the sun, and as terrible as an army with banners" to those who
march under the black flag of oppression and wield the ruthless sword of
injustice.

In olden times it was the Amazons who conquered the invincibles, and we
