called and chosen people of God.  Psalmists and prophets had enriched
their life with the outpouring of their moral and spiritual revelations,
and fired their hopes with promises.  They lived in the expectation of
the Messiah who was to complete these revelations of the God who had led
them and taught them ever since the days of their Egyptian bondage.

Yet, when this crowning revelation came to them, they could not even
recognise it.  The Son of God "came unto His own and His own received Him
not."  As St. Paul expresses it in my text, while grieving for them with
all the intensity of his fervid affection, their life was overgrown with
a sort of spiritual dulness.  They were suffering from a sort of
ossification of the spirit, so that the last and greatest revelation of
God could make no impression upon them.

But this picture of the Jews rejecting and crucifying their Saviour, and
unable to appreciate or to receive the gift of new life which was offered
to them, blind to its beauty, unattracted by its charm, is not only one
of the saddest sights in history, it is very instructive for every one of
us, because it is charged with warnings that are never out of date.  For
there is no individual life, and no society, that is not liable to drift
into a similar dulness of vision, and so to reject or disregard what God
gives for its enlightenment.  The great critical events in the world's
history, the events that make epochs in the consciousness of men, are not
different in kind from those of our own obscure lives.  They are, as it
were, our own familiar experience, written prophetically and written
large.

So the blindness that happened to Israel, and arrested their spiritual
growth, may be happening no less to any of us.  As God gave them the
spirit of slumber, so it may be with our lives.

And the very thought of our possible risks in this respect is valuable to
us.

To be conscious that in regard to any of the higher and better things of
life our eyes may possibly be growing dim, and our ears dull of hearing,
and that God may be pressing upon us gifts of great price which we are
too dull to see or to accept--if our soul is sufficiently awake to feel
this, then the very feeling may of itself be the germ of new life in us.

 And it is very certain, on the other hand, that if we are altogether
without any such feelings there is a risk, which even amounts to a
probability, that the hardening or deadening influences of custom and
tradition will sooner or later degrade our life.  And if it should be
asked,--How comes it that we are so liable to be affected by this dulness
of spirit and of general habit?--we have to reply that it is because of
the sensitiveness of the human soul to surrounding influences.

It is because our souls are so receptive, so imitative, and in
consequence so easily perverted, darkened, blinded, or misled.  I suppose
we are all of us conscious of this sensitiveness of the moral and
spiritual nature; we should all say, if questioned, that we are quite
aware of it, and that no one would dispute it.  The soul of every child
or man, we should say, is a fine and delicate and sensitive instrument,
with the possibilities in it of we know not what Divine harmonies, but
easily spoilt.

 And yet, when we look at all the common and traditional ordering of
daily life, whether in our educating of the young or in the influences
that we allow to prevail among young and old, it would seem sometimes as
if this thought of the soul's sensitiveness had never dawned upon us.
When we once really grasp this thought, or, let us rather say, when this
thought has once really fastened upon our mind, and fixed itself there,
so that it remains with us, and goes about with us; and when, in
consequence, we come to feel how easily any soul may be perverted, or
rendered hard or dull; in one word, how easily it may be degraded; then
it follows that we look with new eyes on many things, many customs, many
influences which the unthinking hardly notice, or notice only to
misjudge.

In the light of this feeling of the soul's sensitiveness, the thoughtful
man is very often intolerant of things which to others seem of little
moment, because he sees how they are tending to dull or deaden the eye of
the soul, or to pervert or to kill its finer instincts; and how, in
consequence, though tradition may have given them a sort of spurious
consecration, or the world in its blindness may have come to honour them,
they are in fact laden with mischief to the general life.

It was the thought of this sensitiveness of the soul to external
influences, and of the ease with which any bad influence, or bad custom
or practice or fashion, perverts common lives, and of the untold mischief
which is consequently latent in it, that winged the words of a well-known
writer when she protested, some years ago, against what she designated as
debasing the moral currency.

That writer was thinking primarily of vulgar jesting on great subjects,
which should stir us to admiration and reverence, and so debasing men's
tastes.  She had in her mind the class of persons who have the art of
spoiling things that are noble or beautiful by their vulgar handling of
them; and of the mischief which is done by such persons to public taste
and tone and character.

 But we may widen the reference.  Whosoever, in anything that concerns
the conduct of life, spreads low notions, or drags down men's opinion or
taste, thus helping to pervert ordinary minds from those higher aims and
motives and those reverent views of character and life which should be
cherished for our common use and service, is debasing the moral currency.

Here, then, we have a very practical question for our consideration and
answering.  "Is there anything in my life"--so the question comes to us
in our self-examination--"which could be so described? any influence,
spreading from my conduct, of which men might truly say that it also is
helping to debase the moral currency?  Is there to be seen in it anything
that tends towards the lowering of common standards? any misuse of things
sacred or holy? any foolish or vulgar estimate of the higher things of
life?"  And if we are in any doubt how to put these questions in a
concrete and practical shape, we have only to remember how any one who
helps to lower any standard of taste or conduct is debasing the moral
currency of life; how, for instance, all those are debasing it who
substitute any wrong notion of honour for right notions of honour, or who
put roughness and coarseness in place of manliness, or who set the
fashion of cynical judgments on good and bad characters.

Or we might take an illustration from what is, unhappily, a very common
element in English life: the habit of gambling sport.  Wherever this
habit spreads, in any class of society, from the highest to the lowest,
its effect is invariable; it undermines integrity, it hardens the heart
and debases taste, and is the willing handmaid of other vices.  Moral
degradation is its inseparable companion.  Therefore, if you mix in it,
or share in it, or give any adhesion or countenance to it, which helps,
as men say, to make it respectable, and so to spread its influence, you
are debasing the moral currency.

Or take another common case.  You are familiar with the poet's
description, "And thus he bore without abuse the grand old name of
gentleman."  That is a noble thing for any man or boy to have said of
him; and there is not one among you who does not desire always to be able
to claim that name as his own.

But, wherever we go in the world, how many men there are who claim it and
yet debase it by ignoble use!  They help to spread the notion that a man
may be a man of low morality and still a gentleman; that his
gentlemanliness may be a mere varnish of culture and manners, a thin
veneering having underneath it only meanness, or coarseness, or
corruption; and that, notwithstanding this, he may still claim to be
called a gentleman.  Those who spread such doctrines are debasing the
moral currency of English life.  And it should be the mission of schools
like this, and of those who grow up in them, to pour upon all such
persons the contempt which they deserve, and to restore the currency of
common life to something of Christian purity.

 Remembering, then, how sensitive the soul is, and how easily by example,
or conduct, or fashion it may be so perverted as to lose its clear vision
and higher aims, its pure tastes and ennobling emotions, we have to make
it our ambition and endeavour that our life may be kept free from such
debasement.

But, if we are to succeed in this, we must make it our daily prayer that
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ will enlighten the eyes of our
understanding, and give unto us the spirit of wisdom and revelation in
the knowledge and love of Him.




 XVII.  A NEW HEART.


   "A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
   you."--EZEKIEL xxxvi. 26.

In the beautiful and suggestive dream of Solomon, which is recorded in
the third chapter of the First Book of Kings, God appears to him, saying,
"Ask what I shall give thee"; and Solomon's answer is, "O Lord, I am but
a child set over this great people, give me, I pray Thee, a hearing
heart."  And God said to him, "Because thou hast asked this thing, and
hast not asked for thyself long life, nor riches; behold, I have done
according to thy words.  I have given thee a wise and understanding
heart, and I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both
riches and honour."  And the record of this vision was clearly meant to
indicate that the supreme gift of the wisest of men was the hearing or
understanding heart.  On the other hand, there is nothing against which
our Lord in the Gospels utters stronger warnings than that dulness or
deadness of spirit which is described as having eyes that see not, and
ears that are dull of hearing, and hearts that do not understand.  And in
illustration of this we read how, while the crowds throng or press upon
Jesus, it is the stricken woman who, with soul sensitive to His
influence, feels the virtue come out of Him though she only touches the
hem of His garment.

Thus we are warned to beware lest that should come upon us which was the
ruin of the Jews, dulness or deadness of spiritual faculty; and we are
exhorted to pray for and to cherish the hearing heart, the soul that sees
and feels spiritual influences, and is sensitive to every high call.  And
if your soul is thus open and receptive, it is marvellous how full the
world becomes to you of Divine voices.  They come upon you unexpected,
unsought, sending through your heart some illuminating flash of surprise,
so that you wonder at your previous dulness; they strike you with the
sudden shock of some new knowledge or insight, and make you feel, as
never before, the true nature of your daily conduct or your duty and your
relation to other men; or they come as the unresting presence of some new
thought, which, once roused, haunts and troubles you with questions which
you cannot answer, or feelings which you cannot get rid of.

When the soul is roused in this way we see and feel the hatefulness of
any sin that may have tempted or beset us; or we contrast our own life
with that of those whose lot is so much harder than ours, and we are
struck with shame at our selfishness, or waste, or our indifference to
the privation, and sin, and suffering that are all around us in the
world.

Or sometimes these Divine voices in our ears bring it home to us how much
we are losing out of our life's higher possibilities, if from sinful or
selfish habit, from dulness of spirit or lack of sympathy, we cut
ourselves off in thought and feeling and interest from the great needs,
the great sorrows, the great pulsations of the larger world.

But why, you may ask, do I dwell on all this?  It is because these are
the true Advent voices for us, coming as they do to rouse us out of
narrow preoccupation, to open our eyes to the sinfulness of sin, to make
us feel that the self-centred, isolated, self-seeking life is a life of a
low type, and to stir us with social and religious interests and
enthusiasms.

These calls that come to you, whether invited or not, and that stir your
heart, speaking to you out of the multitudinous life of the time you live
in, are like the watchmen on the walls of Jerusalem, which never hold
their peace day nor night.

This ferment of higher life within us and around us, these voices of the
Spirit in us, as it struggles to lift us out of the region of fleshly
influences, is renewed in every generation and in every single life.  If
you hear no such voices, if the phenomena of life make no such impression
upon you, if you are deaf to all these calls, and care for none of these
things, then it is clear that your soul is not yet awake in you; you are
living with a dull or darkened heart.  It is a sort of cave life, or
subterranean life, you lead in such a case, a life of lower rank and
lesser hopes.

Yet these voices from above, that come as the witness of the Divine
Spirit with our spirit that we are the children of God, never fail us.
They do not belong only to times far off.  We are not to think of them
merely as enshrined in the Bible and peculiar to it; but as living voices
that are speaking to us to-day out of the depths of the Divine life, in
which our life is sustained.

But we have always to bear this in mind, that the Divine voices speak to
men with most stirring effect in every generation when they speak to them
through the pressing needs of their own day.  To the Jews the voice of
God came in the inspired language of their deliverers and prophets--in
their unceasing warnings, and their impassioned appeals, and their
revelations of new truth.  To the first generation of Christians these
same voices came in the shape of strong Advent hopes.  Many things
contributed to lift the Apostles and their followers nearer to God than
men of ordinary times.  They had seen the Lord; they had lived in His
presence; they had gone through much tribulation; the tongue of fire had
rested on them; the Spirit had taken full possession of them; but we
cannot read the New Testament without feeling that the most stirring, the
most regenerative influence in their society was the vividness and
intensity of their Advent hope.  Their expectation of the Lord's return
lifted them out of the temptations of the world and above the trials of
it.  It took hold of their active powers, and made them new men.

Their Advent expectation was not the vague, half mystic, half sentimental
movement of the heart, which just touches the lives of so many Christians
during our Advent seasons, while it does not really alter any of their
earthly concerns.

Christ was very near to the Apostolic Christians.  As the eastern sky
brightened every morning they felt that it might be the light of His
coming; they thought of Him as only hidden from them by the neighbouring
cloud.  They looked for Him to return at midnight, or at the
cock-crowing, or in the noonday, and none could say how soon.  And so it
came to pass that this expectation made those first believers, those
humble followers of Christ, those Galilean fishermen, those obscure
provincials, instinct with that great life which lifts men above the
world, and constitutes them a new power in it.

Our lives are largely influenced by the thought of slow development; but
we miss a great deal of the secret of all higher life if we forget this
wonderful exaltation of the poor and ignorant and obscure by this gift of
the Spirit and the inspiration of Divine hope.  It was not by any method
which we could have forecast that those men found out this charm which
takes the heart captive and regenerates the life.  In their presence we
feel the force of the prophet's words, "Not by might nor by power, but by
My spirit, saith the Lord."

 But then there rises the question, How are these Divine influences to
become powerful in us also?

On the one hand, we are conscious that as we live involved or entangled
in the worldly life, or in any form of external life around us, the
spiritual part of us slumbers or is overlaid.  It loses its practical
power over our thought, our feeling, and our conduct--our lamp goes out.
Whilst on the other hand we are conscious that the special form of Advent
expectation which inspired and possessed the first generation of
Christians is gone from us past recovery.  We see clearly enough as we
read the New Testament what that first generation expected, and how the
expectation transformed their lives; but we see also that they were
mistaken in their hope, and that God's providential plan proved to be far
greater than their human conception of it.  What, then, are our Advent
hopes?

There are two things which we should keep clear in our minds concerning
them.  One, that they must be based upon our feeling of the living
influence of Christ and the working of the Holy Spirit; and the other is
that the voices of the Spirit must come to us out of the needs of our own
life and of the time we live in if they are to lead us to practical
issues.  When we look out upon the world and its life we feel that Advent
hopes must take some new form if they are to preserve reality and to be
fulfilled.

We see decaying faith in some quarters, and selfishness growing where
faith decays; we see ignorance and want and all their crop of sin and
misery deep-rooted in the life of every city; and the prospect which
these things suggest, the problems that meet us as we think of them,
might well fill us with misgiving.  And they would indeed do so were it
not for the fact that the revelation of such things brings with it
another revelation also; it seizes on men's souls and stirs them as with
a Divine summons.  And thus we have these hopeful signs for the future
rising around us, even where things look darkest, that the great problems
of humanity are felt in our day to be above all things its social and
religious problems.  And seeing that the aspirations of the time--the
feelings, the purposes, the aims, and hopes that lift men--grow out of
the needs of the time and the problems of its life, we look forward--we
have good ground for looking forward--to a generation of men who shall be
distinguished by religious earnestness and by social enthusiasm.

But if this be so, what will your share be in this coming life?  The
Spirit of God, as we now understand it, comes to us with calls of this
kind.

If you would hasten the Advent of Christ in your own soul and in the
souls of others, you must discard selfishness, you must rise above self-
indulgence, you must prepare to merge yourself in the social life, for
the social good; seeing that the growth of this good is the only sure and
certain sign of the coming of the Lord.  So, then, the Angel of the
Advent is thus calling us.  The future before you is big with social and
religious issues, and the Spirit of Christ is brooding over it, and you
and such as you are to be His chosen instruments in helping forward these
issues.




 XVIII.  SPIRITUAL POWER.


   "And behold I send _the promise of My Father upon you_; but tarry ye
   in the city of Jerusalem until ye be _endued with power from on
   high_."--ST. LUKE xxiv. 49.

   "Ye shall receive _power_, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon
   you."--ACTS i. 8.

To-day we are celebrating the last of the series of historical festivals
which mark the springtime of our Christian year.  And without this one
the rest would leave us with a sense of incompleteness; for we should be
without its gift of the abiding and indwelling Spirit, and the fulfilment
of the last promise.

What, then, are we learning of its practical lessons, and gathering into
our life?  We have read the Pentecostal narrative, and others that
illustrate it.  We have sung Pentecostal hymns.  We have joined in
special prayer for the light of the Holy Spirit to shine in our hearts,
giving us a right judgment; and if we are led to ask, "To what purpose is
all this?" the answer is to be seen in the texts I have just read to you,
the burden of which is the gift of power from on high.  Do we not
recognise this as the end of the New Testament revelation?  And do we not
acknowledge that this revelation fails, so far as we are concerned, if it
gives us no such _power_?  It is, indeed, in considering this power of
the Spirit that we touch to the quick the real influence of religion in
the practical life of men; for experience shows that it is possible for a
man to be endowed with almost every other gift and yet to lack this
one--this indwelling gift of the Holy Ghost the Comforter.

Our life is filled with almost everything we could ask or require to
enlighten us or to guide and direct, and yet it fails sometimes.

It may be failing in some of us here to-day, just from want of this
Divine spark, this influence of a Spirit from above taking up His abode
in us, burning and shining in our hearts so as to purge our affections
from sinful taint and purify our tastes, lifting up and enlarging our
capacities, and rousing our energies--in one word, fusing all our life
into a new form with its refining power.

And the question of all questions for each of us to consider is, "How am
I to make my life the home and embodiment of this power from above?"  If
we turn to our Lord's own example, or to the life of Paul or any other of
His followers, or to any life we have known and felt to breathe around it
this same power of the Spirit, some things become at once very obvious
and clear to us.

That supreme example and those lives declare that whoever desires to have
his soul purified and invigorated, to be charged with this Divine
electric influence, must have something of separateness and independence
in his life; he must feel himself as not merely one of a crowd moved by
the desires, aims, hopes, tastes, and ambitions which may chance to
prevail around him, but as a separate soul in direct communion with the
Spirit of God.

But if we are to realise this in our own life, it means that our times of
daily prayer, whether in private or in public, are times at which we lay
open our secret life to the Divine presence and influence; it means that
we give some real thought and meditation to this presence of God in our
life, and that we thus feed our souls continually on wholesome spiritual
food.  It is in this way that men's lives become in a real sense the
