S: Surely those whom you call on besides Allah are in a state of
subjugation like yourselves; therefore call on them, then let them
answer you if you are truthful.

007.195
Y: Have they feet to walk with? Or hands to lay hold with? Or eyes to
see with? Or ears to hear with? Say: "Call your 'god-partners', scheme
(your worst) against me, and give me no respite!"

P: Have they feet wherewith they walk, or have they hands wherewith they
hold, or have they eyes wherewith they see, or have they ears wherewith
they hear? Say: Call upon your (so-called) partners (of Allah), and
then contrive against me, spare me not!

S: Have they feet with which they walk, or have they hands with which
they hold, or have they eyes with which they see, or have they ears
with which they hear? Say: Call your associates, then make a struggle
(to prevail) against me and give me no respite.

007.196
Y: "For my Protector is Allah, Who revealed the Book (from time to
time), and He will choose and befriend the righteous."

P: Lo! my Protecting Friend is Allah Who revealeth the Scripture. He
befriendeth the righteous.

S: Surely my guardian is Allah, Who revealed the Book, and He befriends
the good.

007.197
Y: "But those ye call upon besides Him, are unable to help you, and
indeed to help themselves."

P: They on whom ye call beside Him have no power to help you, nor can
they help you, nor can they help themselves.

S: And those whom you call upon besides Him are not able to help you,
nor can they help themselves.

007.198
Y: If thou callest them to guidance, they hear not. Thou wilt see them
looking at thee, but they see not.

P: And if ye (Muslims) call them to the guidance they hear not; and thou
(Muhammad) seest them looking toward thee, but they see not.

S: And if you invite them to guidance, they do not hear; and you see
them looking towards you, yet they do not see.

007.199
Y: Hold to forgiveness; command what is right; But turn away from the
ignorant.

P: Keep to forgiveness (O Muhammad), and enjoin kindness, and turn away
from the ignorant.

S: Take to forgiveness and enjoin good and turn aside from the ignorant.

007.200
Y: If a suggestion from Satan assail thy (mind), seek refuge with Allah;
for He heareth and knoweth (all things).

P: And if a slander from the devil wound thee, then seek refuge in
Allah. Lo! He is Hearer, Knower.

S: And if a false imputation from the Shaitan afflict you, seek refuge
in Allah; surely He is Hearing, Knowing.

007.201
Y: Those who fear Allah, when a thought of evil from Satan assaults
them, bring Allah to remembrance, when lo! they see (aright)!

P: Lo! those who ward off (evil), when a glamour from the devil
troubleth them, they do but remember (Allah's Guidance) and behold them
seers!

S: Surely those who guard (against evil), when a visitation from the
Shaitan afflicts them they become mindful, then lo! they see.

007.202
Y: But their brethren (the evil ones) plunge them deeper into error, and
never relax (their efforts).

P: Their brethren plunge them further into error and cease not.

S: And their brethren increase them in error, then they cease not.

007.203
Y: If thou bring them not a revelation, they say: "Why hast thou not got
it together?" Say: "I but follow what is revealed to me from my Lord:
this is (nothing but) lights from your Lord, and Guidance, and mercy,
for any who have faith."

P: And when thou bringest not a verse for them they say: Why hast thou
not chosen it? Say: I follow only that which is inspired in me from my
Lord. This (Qur'an) is insight from your Lord, and a guidance and a
mercy for a people that believe.

S: And when you bring them not a revelation they say: Why do you not
forge it? Say: I only follow what is revealed to me from my Lord; these
are clear proofs from your Lord and a guidance and a mercy for a people
who believe.

007.204
Y: When the Qur'an is read, listen to it with attention, and hold your
peace: that ye may receive Mercy.

P: And when the Qur'an is recited, give ear to it and pay heed, that ye
may obtain mercy.

S: And when the Quran is recited, then listen to it and remain silent,
that mercy may be shown to you.

007.205
Y: And do thou (O reader!) Bring thy Lord to remembrance in thy (very)
soul, with humility and in reverence, without loudness in words, in the
mornings and evenings; and be not thou of those who are unheedful.

P: And do thou (O Muhammad) remember thy Lord within thyself humbly and
with awe, below thy breath, at morn and evening. And be not thou of the
neglectful.

S: And remember your Lord within yourself humbly and fearing and in a
voice not loud in the morning and the evening and be not of the
heedless ones.

007.206
Y: Those who are near to thy Lord, disdain not to do Him worship: They
celebrate His praises, and prostrate before Him.

P: Lo! those who are with thy Lord are not too proud to do Him service,
but they praise Him and prostrate before Him.

S: Surely those who are with your Lord are not too proud to serve Him,
and they declare His glory and prostrate in humility before Him.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 8:

                      AL-ANFAL (SPOILS OF WAR, BOOTY)
 Total Verses: 75 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

008.001
Y: They ask thee concerning (things taken as) spoils of war. Say:
"(such) spoils are at the disposal of Allah and the Messenger: So fear
Allah, and keep straight the relations between yourselves: Obey Allah
and His Messenger, if ye do believe."

P: They ask thee (O Muhammad) of the spoils of war. Say: The spoils of
war belong to Allah and the messenger, so keep your duty to Allah, and
adjust the matter of your difference, and obey Allah and His messenger,
if ye are (true) believers.

S: They ask you about the windfalls. Say: The windfalls are for Allah
and the Messenger. So be careful of (your duty to) Allah and set aright
matters of your difference, and obey Allah and His Messenger if you are
believers.

008.002
Y: For, Believers are those who, when Allah is mentioned, feel a tremor
in their hearts, and when they hear His signs rehearsed, find their
faith strengthened, and put (all) their trust in their Lord;

P: They only are the (true) believers whose hearts feel fear when Allah
is mentioned, and when His revelations are recited unto them they
increase their faith, and who trust in their Lord;

S: Those only are believers whose hearts become full of fear when Allah
is mentioned, and when His communications are recited to them they
increase them in faith, and in their Lord do they trust.

008.003
Y: Who establish regular prayers and spend (freely) out of the gifts We
have given them for sustenance:

P: Who establish worship and spend of that We have bestowed on them.

S: Those who keep up prayer and spend (benevolently) out of what We have
given them.

008.004
Y: Such in truth are the believers: they have grades of dignity with
their Lord, and forgiveness, and generous sustenance:

P: Those are they who are in truth believers. For them are grades (of
honour) with their Lord, and pardon, and a bountiful provision.

S: These are the believers in truth; they shall have from their Lord
exalted grades and forgiveness and an honorable sustenance.

008.005
Y: Just as thy Lord ordered thee out of thy house in truth, even though
a party among the Believers disliked it,

P: Even as thy Lord caused thee (Muhammad) to go forth from thy home
with the Truth, and lo! a party of the believers were averse (to it).

S: Even as your Lord caused you to go forth from your house with the
truth, though a party of the believers were surely averse;

008.006
Y: Disputing with thee concerning the truth after it was made manifest,
as if they were being driven to death and they (actually) saw it.

P: Disputing with thee of the Truth after it had been made manifest, as
if they were being driven to death visible.

S: They disputed with you about the truth after it had become clear,
(and they went forth) as if they were being driven to death while they
saw (it).

008.007
Y: Behold! Allah promised you one of the two (enemy) parties, that it
should be yours: Ye wished that the one unarmed should be yours, but
Allah willed to justify the Truth according to His words and to cut off
the roots of the Unbelievers;-

P: And when Allah promised you one of the two bands (of the enemy) that
it should be yours, and ye longed that other than the armed one might
be yours. And Allah willed that He should cause the Truth to triumph by
His words, and cut the root of the disbelievers;

S: And when Allah promised you one of the two parties that it shall be
yours and you loved that the one not armed should he yours and Allah
desired to manifest the truth of what was true by His words and to cut
off the root of the unbelievers.

008.008
Y: That He might justify Truth and prove Falsehood false, distasteful
though it be to those in guilt.

P: That He might cause the Truth to triumph and bring vanity to naught,
however much the guilty might oppose;

S: That He may manifest the truth of what was true and show the
falsehood of what was false, though the guilty disliked.

008.009
Y: Remember ye implored the assistance of your Lord, and He answered
you: "I will assist you with a thousand of the angels, ranks on ranks."

P: When ye sought help of your Lord and He answered you (saying): I will
help you with a thousand of the angels, rank on rank.

S: When you sought aid from your Lord, so He answered you: I will assist
you with a thousand of the angels following one another.

008.010
Y: Allah made it but a message of hope, and an assurance to your hearts:
(in any case) there is no help except from Allah: and Allah is Exalted
in Power, Wise.

P: Allah appointed it only as good tidings, and that your hearts thereby
might be at rest. Victory cometh only by the help of Allah. Lo! Allah
is Mighty, Wise.

S: And Allah only gave it as a good news and that your hearts might be
at ease thereby; and victory is only from Allah; surely Allah is
Mighty, Wise.

008.011
Y: Remember He covered you with a sort of drowsiness, to give you calm
as from Himself, and he caused rain to descend on you from heaven, to
clean you therewith, to remove from you the stain of Satan, to
strengthen your hearts, and to plant your feet firmly therewith.

P: When He made the slumber fall upon you as a reassurance from him and
sent down water from the sky upon you, that thereby He might purify
you, and remove from you the fear of Satan, and make strong your hearts
and firm (your) feet thereby.

S: When He caused calm to fall on you as a security from Him and sent
down upon you water from the cloud that He might thereby purify you,
and take away from you the uncleanness of the Shaitan, and that He
might fortify your hearts and steady (your) footsteps thereby.

008.012
Y: Remember thy Lord inspired the angels (with the message): "I am with
you: give firmness to the Believers: I will instil terror into the
hearts of the Unbelievers: smite ye above their necks and smite all
their finger-tips off them."

P: When thy Lord inspired the angels, (saying): I am with you. So make
those who believe stand firm. I will throw fear into the hearts of
those who disbelieve. Then smite the necks and smite of them each
finger.

S: When your Lord revealed to the angels: I am with you, therefore make
firm those who believe. I will cast terror into the hearts of those who
disbelieve. Therefore strike off their heads and strike off every
fingertip of them.

008.013
Y: This because they contended against Allah and His Messenger: If any
contend against Allah and His Messenger, Allah is strict in punishment.

P: That is because they opposed Allah and His messenger. Whoso opposeth
Allah and His messenger, (for him) lo! Allah is severe in punishment.

S: This is because they acted adversely to Allah and His Messenger; and
whoever acts adversely to Allah and His Messenger-- then surely Allah
is severe in requiting (evil).

008.014
Y: Thus (will it be said): "Taste ye then of the (punishment): for those
who resist Allah, is the penalty of the Fire."

P: That (is the award), so taste it, and (know) that for disbelievers is
the torment of the Fire.

S: This-- taste it, and (know) that for the unbelievers is the
chastisement of fire.

008.015
Y: O ye who believe! when ye meet the Unbelievers in hostile array,
never turn your backs to them.

P: O ye who believe! When ye meet those who disbelieve in battle, turn
not your backs to them.

S: O you who believe! when you meet those who disbelieve marching for
war, then turn not your backs to them.

008.016
Y: If any do turn his back to them on such a day - unless it be in a
stratagem of war, or to retreat to a troop (of his own)- he draws on
himself the wrath of Allah, and his abode is Hell,- an evil refuge
(indeed)!

P: Whoso on that day turneth his back to them, unless maneuvering for
battle or intent to join a company, he truly hath incurred wrath from
Allah, and his habitation will be hell, a hapless journey's end.

S: And whoever shall turn his back to them on that day-- unless he turn
aside for the sake of fighting or withdraws to a company-- then he,
indeed, becomes deserving of Allah's wrath, and his abode is hell; and
an evil destination shall it be.

008.017
Y: It is not ye who slew them; it was Allah: when thou threwest (a
handful of dust), it was not thy act, but Allah'S: in order that He
might test the Believers by a gracious trial from Himself: for Allah is
He Who heareth and knoweth (all things).

P: Ye (Muslims) slew them not, but Allah slew them. And thou (Muhammad)
threwest not when thou didst throw, but Allah threw, that He might test
the believers by a fair test from Him. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: So you did not slay them, but it was Allah Who slew them, and you did
not smite when you smote (the enemy), but it was Allah Who smote, and
that He might confer upon the believers a good gift from Himself;
surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

008.018
Y: That, and also because Allah is He Who makes feeble the plans and
stratagem of the Unbelievers.

P: That (is the case); and (know) that Allah (it is) Who maketh weak the
plan of disbelievers.

S: This, and that Allah is the weakener of the struggle of the
unbelievers.

008.019
Y: (O Unbelievers!) if ye prayed for victory and judgment, now hath the
judgment come to you: if ye desist (from wrong), it will be best for
you: if ye return (to the attack), so shall We. Not the least good will
your forces be to you even if they were multiplied: for verily Allah is
with those who believe!

P: (O Qureysh!) If ye sought a judgment, now hath the judgment come unto
you. And if ye cease (from persecuting the believers) it will be better
for you, but if ye return (to the attack) We also shall return. And
your host will avail you naught, however numerous it be, and (know)
that Allah is with the believers (in His Guidance).

S: If you demanded a judgment, the judgment has then indeed come to you;
and if you desist, it will be better for you; and if you turn back (to
fight), We (too) shall turn back, and your forces shall avail you
nothing, though they may be many, and (know) that Allah is with the
believers.

008.020
Y: O ye who believe! Obey Allah and His Messenger, and turn not away
from him when ye hear (him speak).

P: O ye who believe! Obey Allah and His messenger, and turn not away
from him when ye hear (him speak).

S: O you who believe! obey Allah and His Messenger and do not turn back
from Him while you hear.

008.021
Y: Nor be like those who say, "We hear," but listen not:

P: Be not as those who say, we hear, and they hear not.

S: And be not like those who said, We hear, and they did not obey.

008.022
Y: For the worst of beasts in the sight of Allah are the deaf and the
dumb,- those who understand not.

P: Lo! the worst of beasts in Allah's sight are the deaf, the dumb, who
have no sense.

S: Surely the vilest of animals, in Allah's sight, are the deaf, the
dumb, who do not understand.

008.023
Y: If Allah had found in them any good. He would indeed have made them
listen: (As it is), if He had made them listen, they would but have
turned back and declined (Faith).

P: Had Allah known of any good in them He would have made them hear, but
had He made them hear they would have turned away, averse.

S: And if Allah had known any good in them He would have made them hear,
and if He makes them hear they would turn back while they withdraw.

008.024
Y: O ye who believe! give your response to Allah and His Messenger, when
He calleth you to that which will give you life; and know that Allah
cometh in between a man and his heart, and that it is He to Whom ye
shall (all) be gathered.

P: O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and the messenger when He calleth you
to that which quickeneth you, and know that Allah cometh in between the
man and his own heart, and that He it is unto Whom ye will be gathered.

S: O you who believe! answer (the call of) Allah and His Messenger when
he calls you to that which gives you life; and know that Allah
intervenes between man and his heart, and that to Him you shall be
gathered.

008.025
Y: And fear tumult or oppression, which affecteth not in particular
(only) those of you who do wrong: and know that Allah is strict in
punishment.

P: And guard yourselves against a chastisement which cannot fall
exclusively on those of you who are wrong-doers, and know that Allah is
severe in punishment.

S: And fear an affliction which may not smite those of you in particular
who are unjust; and know that Allah is severe in requiting (evil).

008.026
Y: Call to mind when ye were a small (band), despised through the land,
and afraid that men might despoil and kidnap you; But He provided a
safe asylum for you, strengthened you with His aid, and gave you Good
things for sustenance: that ye might be grateful.

P: And remember, when ye were few and reckoned feeble in the land, and
were in fear lest men should extirpate you, how He gave you refuge, and
strengthened you with His help, and made provision of good things for
you, that haply ye might be thankful.

S: And remember when you were few, deemed weak in the land, fearing lest
people might carry you off by force, but He sheltered you and
strengthened you with His aid and gave you of the good things that you
may give thanks.

008.027
Y: O ye that believe! betray not the trust of Allah and the Messenger,
nor misappropriate knowingly things entrusted to you.

P: O ye who believe! Betray not Allah and His messenger, nor knowingly
betray your trusts.

S: O you who believe! be not unfaithful to Allah and the Messenger, nor
be unfaithful to your trusts while you know.

008.028
Y: And know ye that your possessions and your progeny are but a trial;
and that it is Allah with Whom lies your highest reward.

P: And know that your possessions and your children are a test, and that
with Allah is immense reward.

S: And know that your property and your children are a temptation, and
that Allah is He with Whom there is a mighty reward.

008.029
Y: O ye who believe! if ye fear Allah, He will grant you a criterion (to
judge between right and wrong), remove from you (all) evil (that may
afflict) you, and forgive you: for Allah is the Lord of grace
unbounded.

P: O ye who believe! If ye keep your duty to Allah, He will give you
discrimination (between right and wrong) and will rid you of your evil
thoughts and deeds, and will forgive you. Allah is of Infinite Bounty.

S: O you who believe! If you are careful of (your duty to) Allah, He
will grant you a distinction and do away with your evils and forgive
you; and Allah is the Lord of mighty grace.

008.030
Y: Remember how the Unbelievers plotted against thee, to keep thee in
bonds, or slay thee, or get thee out (of thy home). They plot and plan,
and Allah too plans; but the best of planners is Allah.

P: And when those who disbelieve plot against thee (O Muhammad) to wound
thee fatally, or to kill thee or to drive thee forth; they plot, but
Allah (also) plotteth; and Allah is the best of plotters.

S: And when those who disbelieved devised plans against you that they
might confine you or slay you or drive you away; and they devised plans
and Allah too had arranged a plan; and Allah is the best of planners.

008.031
Y: When Our Signs are rehearsed to them, they say: "We have heard this
(before): if we wished, we could say (words) like these: these are
nothing but tales of the ancients."

P: And when Our revelations are recited unto them they say: We have
heard. If we wish we can speak the like of this. Lo! this is naught but
fables of the men of old.

S: And when Our communications are recited to them, they say: We have
heard indeed; if we pleased we could say the like of it; this is
nothing but the stories of the ancients.

008.032
Y: Remember how they said: "O Allah if this is indeed the Truth from
Thee, rain down on us a shower of stones form the sky, or send us a
grievous penalty."

P: And when they said: O Allah! If this be indeed the truth from Thee,
then rain down stones on us or bring on us some painful doom!

S: And when they said: O Allah! if this is the truth from Thee, then
rain upon us stones from heaven or inflict on us a painful punishment.

008.033
Y: But Allah was not going to send them a penalty whilst thou wast
amongst them; nor was He going to send it whilst they could ask for
pardon.

P: But Allah would not punish them while thou wast with them, nor will
He punish them while they seek forgiveness.

S: But Allah was not going to chastise them while you were among them,
nor is Allah going to chastise them while yet they ask for forgiveness.

008.034
Y: But what plea have they that Allah should not punish them, when they
keep out (men) from the sacred Mosque - and they are not its guardians?
No men can be its guardians except the righteous; but most of them do
not understand.

P: What (plea) have they that Allah should not punish them, when they
debar (His servants) from the Inviolable Place of Worship, though they
are not its fitting guardians. Its fitting guardians are those only who
keep their duty to Allah. But most of them know not.

S: And what (excuse) have they that Allah should not chastise them while
they hinder (men) from the Sacred Mosque and they are not (fit to be)
guardians of it; its guardians are only those who guard (against evil),
but most of them do not know.

008.035
Y: Their prayer at the House (of Allah) is nothing but whistling and
clapping of hands: (Its only answer can be), "Taste ye the penalty
because ye blasphemed."

P: And their worship at the (holy) House is naught but whistling and
hand-clapping. Therefore (it is said unto them): Taste of the doom
because ye disbelieve.

S: And their prayer before the House is nothing but whistling and
clapping of hands; taste then the chastisement, for you disbelieved.

008.036
Y: The Unbelievers spend their wealth to hinder (man) from the path of
Allah, and so will they continue to spend; but in the end they will
have (only) regrets and sighs; at length they will be overcome: and the
Unbelievers will be gathered together to Hell;-

P: Lo! those who disbelieve spend their wealth in order that they may
debar (men) from the way of Allah. They will spend it, then it will
become an anguish for them, then they will be conquered. And those who
disbelieve will be gathered unto hell,

S: Surely those who disbelieve spend their wealth to hinder (people)
from the way of Allah; so they shall spend it, then it shall be to them
an intense regret, then they shall be overcome; and those who
disbelieve shall be driven together to hell.

008.037
Y: In order that Allah may separate the impure from the pure, put the
impure, one on another, heap them together, and cast them into Hell.
They will be the ones to have lost.

P: That Allah may separate the wicked from the good, The wicked will He
place piece upon piece, and heap them all together, and consign them
unto hell. Such verily are the losers.

S: That Allah might separate the impure from the good, and put the
impure, some of it upon the other, and pile it up together, then cast
it into hell; these it is that are the losers.

008.038
Y: Say to the Unbelievers, if (now) they desist (from Unbelief), their
past would be forgiven them; but if they persist, the punishment of
those before them is already (a matter of warning for them).

P: Tell those who disbelieve that if they cease (from persecution of
believers) that which is past will be forgiven them; but if they return
(thereto) then the example of the men of old hath already gone (before
them, for a warning).

S: Say to those who disbelieve, if they desist, that which is past shall
be forgiven to them; and if they return, then what happened to the
ancients has already passed.

008.039
Y: And fight them on until there is no more tumult or oppression, and
there prevail justice and faith in Allah altogether and everywhere; but
if they cease, verily Allah doth see all that they do.

P: And fight them until persecution is no more, and religion is all for
Allah. But if they cease, then lo! Allah is Seer of what they do.

S: And fight with them until there is no more persecution and religion
should be only for Allah; but if they desist, then surely Allah sees
what they do.

008.040
Y: If they refuse, be sure that Allah is your Protector - the best to
protect and the best to help.

P: And if they turn away, then know that Allah is your Befriender - a
Transcendent Patron, a Transcendent Helper!

S: And if they turn back, then know that Allah is your Patron; most
excellent is the Patron and most excellent the Helper.

008.041
Y: And know that out of all the booty that ye may acquire (in war), a
fifth share is assigned to Allah,- and to the Messenger, and to near
relatives, orphans, the needy, and the wayfarer,- if ye do believe in
Allah and in the revelation We sent down to Our servant on the Day of
Testing,- the Day of the meeting of the two forces. For Allah hath
power over all things.

P: And know that whatever ye take as spoils of war, lo! a fifth thereof
is for Allah, and for the messenger and for the kinsman (who hath need)
and orphans and the needy and the wayfarer, if ye believe in Allah and
that which We revealed unto Our slave on the Day of Discrimination, the
day when the two armies met. And Allah is Able to do all things.

S: And know that whatever thing you gain, a fifth of it is for Allah and
for the Messenger and for the near of kin and the orphans and the needy
and the wayfarer, if you believe in Allah and in that which We revealed
to Our servant, on the day of distinction, the day on which the two
parties met; and Allah has power over all things.

008.042
Y: Remember ye were on the hither side of the valley, and they on the
farther side, and the caravan on lower ground than ye. Even if ye had
made a mutual appointment to meet, ye would certainly have failed in
the appointment: But (thus ye met), that Allah might accomplish a
matter already enacted; that those who died might die after a clear
Sign (had been given), and those who lived might live after a Clear
Sign (had been given). And verily Allah is He Who heareth and knoweth
(all things).

P: When ye were on the near bank (of the valley) and they were on the
yonder bank, and the caravan was below you (on the coast plain). And
had ye trysted to meet one another ye surely would have failed to keep
the tryst, but (it happened, as it did, without the forethought of
either of you) that Allah might conclude a thing that must be done;
that he who perished (on that day) might perish by a clear proof (of
His Sovereignty) and he who survived might survive by a clear proof (of
His Sovereignty). Lo! Allah in truth is Hearer, Knower.

S: When you were on the nearer side (of the valley) and they were on the
farthest side, while the caravan was in a lower place than you; and if
you had mutually made an appointment, you would certainly have broken
away from the appointment, but-- in order that Allah might bring about
a matter which was to be done, that he who would perish might perish by
clear proof, and he who would live might live by clear proof; and most
surely Allah is Hearing, Knowing;

008.043
Y: Remember in thy dream Allah showed them to thee as few: if He had
shown them to thee as many, ye would surely have been discouraged, and
ye would surely have disputed in (your) decision; but Allah saved
(you): for He knoweth well the (secrets) of (all) hearts.

P: When Allah showed them unto thee (O Muhammad) in thy dream as few in
number, and if He had shown them to thee as many, ye (Muslims) would
have faltered and would have quarreled over the affair. But Allah
saved (you). Lo! He knoweth what is in the breasts (of men).

S: When Allah showed them to you in your dream as few; and if He had
shown them to you as many you would certainly have become weak-hearted
and you would have disputed about the matter, but Allah saved (you);
surely He is the Knower of what is in the breasts.

008.044
Y: And remember when ye met, He showed them to you as few in your eyes,
and He made you appear as contemptible in their eyes: that Allah might
accomplish a matter already enacted. For to Allah do all questions go
back (for decision).

P: And when He made you (Muslims), when ye met (them), see them with
your eyes as few, and lessened you in their eyes, (it was) that Allah
might conclude a thing that must be done. Unto Allah all things are
brought back.

S: And when He showed them to you, when you met, as few in your eyes and
He made you to appear little in their eyes, in order that Allah might
bring about a matter which was to be done, and to Allah are all affairs
returned.

008.045
Y: O ye who believe! When ye meet a force, be firm, and call Allah in
remembrance much (and often); that ye may prosper:

P: O ye who believe! When ye meet an army, hold firm and think of Allah
much, that ye may be successful.

S: O you who believe! when you meet a party, then be firm, and remember
Allah much, that you may be successful.

008.046
Y: And obey Allah and His Messenger; and fall into no disputes, lest ye
lose heart and your power depart; and be patient and persevering: For
Allah is with those who patiently persevere:

P: And obey Allah and His messenger, and dispute not one with another
lest ye falter and your strength depart from you; but be steadfast! Lo!
Allah is with the steadfast.

S: And obey Allah and His Messenger and do not quarrel for then you will
be weak in hearts and your power will depart, and be patient; surely
Allah is with the patient.

008.047
Y: And be not like those who started from their homes insolently and to
be seen of men, and to hinder (men) from the path of Allah: For Allah
compasseth round about all that they do.

P: Be not as those who came forth from their dwellings boastfully and to
be seen of men, and debar (men) from the way of Allah, while Allah is
surrounding all they do.

S: And be not like those who came forth from their homes in great
exultation and to be seen of men, and (who) turn away from the way of
Allah, and Allah comprehends what they do.

008.048
Y: Remember Satan made their (sinful) acts seem alluring to them, and
said: "No one among men can overcome you this day, while I am near to
you": But when the two forces came in sight of each other, he turned on
his heels, and said: "Lo! I am clear of you; lo! I see what ye see not;
Lo! I fear Allah: for Allah is strict in punishment."

P: And when Satan made their deeds seem fair to them and said: No one of
mankind can conquer you this day, for I am your protector. But when the
armies came in sight of one another, he took flight, saying: Lo! I am
guiltless of you. Lo! I see that which ye see not. Lo! I fear Allah.
And Allah is severe in punishment.

S: And when the Shaitan made their works fair seeming to them, and said:
No one can overcome you this day, and surely I am your protector: but
when the two parties came in sight of each other he turned upon his
heels, and said: Surely I am clear of you, surely I see what you do not
see, surely I fear Allah; and Allah is severe in requiting (evil).

008.049
Y: Lo! the hypocrites say, and those in whose hearts is a disease:
"These people,- their religion has misled them." But if any trust in
Allah, behold! Allah is Exalted in might, Wise.

P: When the hypocrites and those in whose hearts is a disease said:
Their religion hath deluded these. Whoso putteth his trust in Allah
(will find that) lo! Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: When the hypocrites and those in whose hearts was disease said: Their
religion has deceived them; and whoever trusts in Allah, then surely
Allah is Mighty, Wise.

008.050
Y: If thou couldst see, when the angels take the souls of the
Unbelievers (at death), (How) they smite their faces and their backs,
(saying): "Taste the penalty of the blazing Fire-"

P: If thou couldst see how the angels receive those who disbelieve,
smiting faces and their backs and (saying): Taste the punishment of
burning!

S: And had you seen when the angels will cause to die those who
disbelieve, smiting their faces and their backs, and (saying): Taste
the punishment of burning.

008.051
Y: "Because of (the deeds) which your (own) hands sent forth; for Allah
is never unjust to His servants:"

P: This is for that which your own hands have sent before (to the
Judgment), and (know) that Allah is not a tyrant to His slaves.

S: This is for what your own hands have sent on before, and because
Allah is not in the least unjust to the servants;

008.052
Y: "(Deeds) after the manner of the people of Pharaoh and of those
before them: They rejected the Signs of Allah, and Allah punished them
for their crimes: for Allah is Strong, and Strict in punishment:"

P: (Their way is) as the way of Pharaoh's folk and those before them;
they disbelieved the revelations of Allah, and Allah took them in their
sins. Lo! Allah is Strong, severe in punishment.

S: In the manner of the people of Firon and those before them; they
disbelieved in Allah's communications, therefore Allah destroyed them
on account of their faults; surely Allah is strong, severe in requiting
(evil).

008.053
Y: "Because Allah will never change the grace which He hath bestowed on
a people until they change what is in their (own) souls: and verily
Allah is He Who heareth and knoweth (all things)."

P: That is because Allah never changeth the grace He hath bestowed on
any people until they first change that which is in their hearts, and
(that is) because Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: This is because Allah has never changed a favor which He has
conferred upon a people until they change their own condition; and
because Allah is Hearing, Knowing;

008.054
Y: "(Deeds) after the manner of the people of Pharaoh and those before
them": They treated as false the Signs of their Lord: so We destroyed
them for their crimes, and We drowned the people of Pharaoh: for they
were all oppressors and wrong-doers.

P: (Their way is) as the way of Pharaoh's folk and those before them;
they denied the revelations of their Lord, so We destroyed them in
their sins. And We drowned the folk of Pharaoh. All were evil-doers.

S: In the manner of the people of Firon and those before them; they
rejected the communications of their Lord, therefore We destroyed them
on account of their faults and We drowned Firon's people, and they were
all unjust.

008.055
Y: For the worst of beasts in the sight of Allah are those who reject
Him: They will not believe.

P: Lo! the worst of beasts in Allah's sight are the ungrateful who will
not believe.

S: Surely the vilest of animals in Allah's sight are those who
disbelieve, then they would not believe.

008.056
Y: They are those with whom thou didst make a covenant, but they break
their covenant every time, and they have not the fear (of Allah).

P: Those of them with whom thou madest a treaty, and then at every
opportunity they break their treaty, and they keep not duty (to Allah).

S: Those with whom you make an agreement, then they break their
agreement every time and they do not guard (against punishment).

008.057
Y: If ye gain the mastery over them in war, disperse, with them, those
who follow them, that they may remember.

P: If thou comest on them in the war, deal with them so as to strike
fear in those who are behind them, that haply they may remember.

S: Therefore if you overtake them in fighting, then scatter by (making
an example of) them those who are in their rear, that they may be
mindful.

008.058
Y: If thou fearest treachery from any group, throw back (their covenant)
to them, (so as to be) on equal terms: for Allah loveth not the
treacherous.

P: And if thou fearest treachery from any folk, then throw back to them
(their treaty) fairly. Lo! Allah loveth not the treacherous.

S: And if you fear treachery on the part of a people, then throw back to
them on terms of equality; surely Allah does not love the treacherous.

008.059
Y: Let not the unbelievers think that they can get the better (of the
godly): they will never frustrate (them).

P: And let not those who disbelieve suppose that they can outstrip
(Allah's Purpose). Lo! they cannot escape.

S: And let not those who disbelieve think that they shall come in first;
surely they will not escape.

008.060
Y: Against them make ready your strength to the utmost of your power,
including steeds of war, to strike terror into (the hearts of) the
enemies, of Allah and your enemies, and others besides, whom ye may not
know, but whom Allah doth know. Whatever ye shall spend in the cause of
Allah, shall be repaid unto you, and ye shall not be treated unjustly.

P: Make ready for them all thou canst of (armed) force and of horses
tethered, that thereby ye may dismay the enemy of Allah and your enemy,
and others beside them whom ye know not. Allah knoweth them. Whatsoever
ye spend in the way of Allah it will be repaid to you in full, and ye
will not be wronged.

S: And prepare against them what force you can and horses tied at the
frontier, to frighten thereby the enemy of Allah and your enemy and
others besides them, whom you do not know (but) Allah knows them; and
whatever thing you will spend in Allah's way, it will be paid back to
you fully and you shall not be dealt with unjustly.

008.061
Y: But if the enemy incline towards peace, do thou (also) incline
towards peace, and trust in Allah: for He is One that heareth and
knoweth (all things).

P: And if they incline to peace, incline thou also to it, and trust in
Allah. Lo! He, even He, is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: And if they incline to peace, then incline to it and trust in Allah;
surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

008.062
Y: Should they intend to deceive thee,- verily Allah sufficeth thee: He
it is That hath strengthened thee with His aid and with (the company
of) the Believers;

P: And if they would deceive thee, then lo! Allah is Sufficient for
thee. He it is Who supporteth thee with His help and with the
believers,

S: And if they intend to deceive you-- then surely Allah is sufficient
for you; He it is Who strengthened you with His help and with the
believers,

008.063
Y: And (moreover) He hath put affection between their hearts: not if
thou hadst spent all that is in the earth, couldst thou have produced
that affection, but Allah hath done it: for He is Exalted in might,
Wise.

P: And (as for the believers) hath attuned their hearts. If thou hadst
spent all that is in the earth thou couldst not have attuned their
hearts, but Allah hath attuned them. Lo! He is Mighty, Wise.

S: And united their hearts; had you spent all that is in the earth, you
could not have united their hearts, but Allah united them; surely He is
Mighty, Wise.

008.064
Y: O Prophet! sufficient unto thee is Allah,- (unto thee) and unto those
who follow thee among the Believers.

P: O Prophet! Allah is Sufficient for thee and those who follow thee of
the believers.

S: O Prophet! Allah is sufficient for you and (for) such of the
believers as follow you.

008.065
Y: O Prophet! rouse the Believers to the fight. If there are twenty
amongst you, patient and persevering, they will vanquish two hundred:
if a hundred, they will vanquish a thousand of the Unbelievers: for
these are a people without understanding.

P: O Prophet! Exhort the believers to fight. If there be of you twenty
steadfast they shall overcome two hundred, and if there be of you a
hundred (steadfast) they shall overcome a thousand of those who
disbelieve, because they (the disbelievers) are a folk without
intelligence.

S: O Prophet! urge the believers to war; if there are twenty patient
ones of you they shall overcome two hundred, and if there are a hundred
of you they shall overcome a thousand of those who disbelieve, because
they are a people who do not understand.

008.066
Y: For the present, Allah hath lightened your (task), for He knoweth
that there is a weak spot in you: But (even so), if there are a hundred
of you, patient and persevering, they will vanquish two hundred, and if
a thousand, they will vanquish two thousand, with the leave of Allah:
for Allah is with those who patiently persevere.

P: Now hath Allah lightened your burden, for He knoweth that there is
weakness in you. So if there be of you a steadfast hundred they shall
overcome two hundred, and if there be of you a thousand (steadfast)
they shall overcome two thousand by permission of Allah. Allah is with
the steadfast.

S: For the present Allah has made light your burden, and He knows that
there is weakness in you; so if there are a hundred patient ones of you
they shall overcome two hundred, and if there are a thousand they shall
overcome two thousand by Allah's permission, and Allah is with the
patient.

008.067
Y: It is not fitting for a prophet that he should have prisoners of war
until he hath thoroughly subdued the land. Ye look for the temporal
goods of this world; but Allah looketh to the Hereafter: And Allah is
Exalted in might, Wise.

P: It is not for any prophet to have captives until he hath made
slaughter in the land. Ye desire the lure of this world and Allah
desireth (for you) the Hereafter, and Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: It is not fit for a prophet that he should take captives unless he
has fought and triumphed in the land; you desire the frail goods of
this world, while Allah desires (for you) the hereafter; and Allah is
Mighty, Wise.

008.068
Y: Had it not been for a previous ordainment from Allah, a severe
penalty would have reached you for the (ransom) that ye took.

P: Had it not been for an ordinance of Allah which had gone before, an
awful doom had come upon you on account of what ye took.

S: Were it not for an ordinance from Allah that had already gone forth,
surely there would have befallen you a great chastisement for what you
had taken to.

008.069
Y: But (now) enjoy what ye took in war, lawful and good: but fear Allah:
for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Now enjoy what ye have won, as lawful and good, and keep your duty to
Allah. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Eat then of the lawful and good (things) which you have acquired in
war, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.

008.070
Y: O Prophet! say to those who are captives in your hands: "If Allah
findeth any good in your hearts, He will give you something better than
what has been taken from you, and He will forgive you: for Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: O Prophet! Say unto those captives who are in your hands: If Allah
knoweth any good in your hearts He will give you better than that which
hath been taken from you, and will forgive you. Lo! Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.

S: O Prophet! say to those of the captives who are in your hands: If
Allah knows anything good in your hearts, He will give to you better
than that which has been taken away from you and will forgive you, and
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

008.071
Y: But if they have treacherous designs against thee, (O Messenger!),
they have already been in treason against Allah, and so hath He given
(thee) power over them. And Allah so He Who hath (full) knowledge and
wisdom.

P: And if they would betray thee, they betrayed Allah before, and He
gave (thee) power over them. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: And if they intend to act unfaithfully towards you, so indeed they
acted unfaithfully towards Allah before, but He gave (you) mastery over
them; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

008.072
Y: Those who believed, and adopted exile, and fought for the Faith, with
their property and their persons, in the cause of Allah, as well as
those who gave (them) asylum and aid,- these are (all) friends and
protectors, one of another. As to those who believed but came not into
exile, ye owe no duty of protection to them until they come into exile;
but if they seek your aid in religion, it is your duty to help them,
except against a people with whom ye have a treaty of mutual alliance.
And (remember) Allah seeth all that ye do.

P: Lo! those who believed and left their homes and strove with their
wealth and their lives for the cause of Allah, and those who took them
in and helped them: these are protecting friends one of another. And
those who believed but did not leave their homes, ye have no duty to
protect them till they leave their homes; but if they seek help from
you in the matter of religion then it is your duty to help (them)
except against a folk between whom and you there is a treaty. Allah is
Seer of what ye do.

S: Surely those who believed and fled (their homes) and struggled hard
in Allah's way with their property and their souls, and those who gave
shelter and helped-- these are guardians of each other; and (as for)
those who believed and did not fly, not yours is their guardianship
until they fly; and if they seek aid from you in the matter of
religion, aid is incumbent on you except against a people between whom
and you there is a treaty, and Allah sees what you do.

008.073
Y: The Unbelievers are protectors, one of another: Unless ye do this,
(protect each other), there would be tumult and oppression on earth,
and great mischief.

P: And those who disbelieve are protectors one of another - If ye do not
so, there will be confusion in the land, and great corruption.

S: And (as for) those who disbelieve, some of them are the guardians of
others; if you will not do it, there will be in the land persecution
and great mischief.

008.074
Y: Those who believe, and adopt exile, and fight for the Faith, in the
cause of Allah as well as those who give (them) asylum and aid,- these
are (all) in very truth the Believers: for them is the forgiveness of
sins and a provision most generous.

P: Those who believed and left their homes and strove for the cause of
Allah, and those who took them in and helped them - these are the
believers in truth. For them is pardon, and bountiful provision.

S: And (as for) those who believed and fled and struggled hard in
Allah's way, and those who gave shelter and helped, these are the
believers truly; they shall have forgiveness and honorable provision.

008.075
Y: And those who accept Faith subsequently, and adopt exile, and fight
for the Faith in your company,- they are of you. But kindred by blood
have prior rights against each other in the Book of Allah. Verily Allah
is well-acquainted with all things.

P: And those who afterwards believed and left their homes and strove
along with you, they are of you; and those who are akin are nearer one
to another in the ordinance of Allah. Lo! Allah is Knower of all
things.

S: And (as for) those who believed afterwards and fled and struggled
hard along with you, they are of you; and the possessors of
relationships are nearer to each other in the ordinance of Allah;
surely Allah knows all things.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 9:

                    AL-TAWBA (REPENTANCE, DISPENSATION)
 Total Verses: 129 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

009.001
Y: A (declaration) of immunity from Allah and His Messenger, to those of
the Pagans with whom ye have contracted mutual alliances:-

P: Freedom from obligation (is proclaimed) from Allah and His messenger
toward those of the idolaters with whom ye made a treaty.

S: (This is a declaration of) immunity by Allah and His Messenger
towards those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement.

009.002
Y: Go ye, then, for four months, backwards and forwards, (as ye will),
throughout the land, but know ye that ye cannot frustrate Allah (by
your falsehood) but that Allah will cover with shame those who reject
Him.

P: Travel freely in the land four months, and know that ye cannot escape
Allah and that Allah will confound the disbelievers (in His Guidance).

S: So go about in the land for four months and know that you cannot
weaken Allah and that Allah will bring disgrace to the unbelievers.

009.003
Y: And an announcement from Allah and His Messenger, to the people
(assembled) on the day of the Great Pilgrimage,- that Allah and His
Messenger dissolve (treaty) obligations with the Pagans. If then, ye
repent, it were best for you; but if ye turn away, know ye that ye
cannot frustrate Allah. And proclaim a grievous penalty to those who
reject Faith.

P: And a proclamation from Allah and His messenger to all men on the day
of the Greater Pilgrimage that Allah is free from obligation to the
idolaters, and (so is) His messenger. So, if ye repent, it will be
better for you; but if ye are averse, then know that ye cannot escape
Allah. Give tidings (O Muhammad) of a painful doom to those who
disbelieve,

S: And an announcement from Allah and His Messenger to the people on the
day of the greater pilgrimage that Allah and His Messenger are free
from liability to the idolaters; therefore if you repent, it will be
better for you, and if you turn back, then know that you will not
weaken Allah; and announce painful punishment to those who disbelieve.

009.004
Y: (But the treaties are) not dissolved with those Pagans with whom ye
have entered into alliance and who have not subsequently failed you in
aught, nor aided any one against you. So fulfil your engagements with
them to the end of their term: for Allah loveth the righteous.

P: Excepting those of the idolaters with whom ye (Muslims) have a
treaty, and who have since abated nothing of your right nor have
supported anyone against you. (As for these), fulfil their treaty to
them till their term. Lo! Allah loveth those who keep their duty (unto
Him).

S: Except those of the idolaters with whom you made an agreement, then
they have not failed you in anything and have not backed up any one
against you, so fulfill their agreement to the end of their term;
surely Allah loves those who are careful (of their duty).

009.005
Y: But when the forbidden months are past, then fight and slay the
Pagans wherever ye find them, an seize them, beleaguer them, and lie in
wait for them in every stratagem (of war); but if they repent, and
establish regular prayers and practise regular charity, then open the
way for them: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Then, when the sacred months have passed, slay the idolaters wherever
ye find them, and take them (captive), and besiege them, and prepare
for them each ambush. But if they repent and establish worship and pay
the poor-due, then leave their way free. Lo! Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.

S: So when the sacred months have passed away, then slay the idolaters
wherever you find them, and take them captives and besiege them and lie
in wait for them in every ambush, then if they repent and keep up
prayer and pay the poor-rate, leave their way free to them; surely
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

009.006
Y: If one amongst the Pagans ask thee for asylum, grant it to him, so
that he may hear the word of Allah; and then escort him to where he can
be secure. That is because they are men without knowledge.

P: And if anyone of the idolaters seeketh thy protection (O Muhammad),
then protect him so that he may hear the Word of Allah, and afterward
convey him to his place of safety. That is because they are a folk who
know not.

S: And if one of the idolaters seek protection from you, grant him
protection till he hears the word of Allah, then make him attain his
place of safety; this is because they are a people who do not know.

009.007
Y: How can there be a league, before Allah and His Messenger, with the
Pagans, except those with whom ye made a treaty near the sacred Mosque?
As long as these stand true to you, stand ye true to them: for Allah
doth love the righteous.

P: How can there be a treaty with Allah and with His messenger for the
idolaters save those with whom ye made a treaty at the Inviolable Place
of Worship? So long as they are true to you, be true to them. Lo! Allah
loveth those who keep their duty.

S: How can there be an agreement for the idolaters with Allah and with
His Messenger; except those with whom you made an agreement at the
Sacred Mosque? So as long as they are true to you, be true to them;
surely Allah loves those who are careful (of their duty).

009.008
Y: How (can there be such a league), seeing that if they get an
advantage over you, they respect not in you the ties either of kinship
or of covenant? With (fair words from) their mouths they entice you,
but their hearts are averse from you; and most of them are rebellious
and wicked.

P: How (can there be any treaty for the others) when, if they have the
upper hand of you, they regard not pact nor honour in respect of you?
They satisfy you with their mouths the while their hearts refuse. And
most of them are wrongdoers.

S: How (can it be)! while if they prevail against you, they would not
pay regard in your case to ties of relationship, nor those of covenant;
they please you with their mouths while their hearts do not consent;
and most of them are transgressors.

009.009
Y: The Signs of Allah have they sold for a miserable price, and (many)
have they hindered from His way: evil indeed are the deeds they have
done.

P: They have purchased with the revelations of Allah a little gain, so
they debar (men) from His way. Lo! evil is that which they are wont to
do.

S: They have taken a small price for the communications of Allah, so
they turn away from His way; surely evil is it that they do.

009.010
Y: In a Believer they respect not the ties either of kinship or of
covenant! It is they who have transgressed all bounds.

P: And they observe toward a believer neither pact nor honour. These are
they who are transgressors.

S: They do not pay regard to ties of relationship nor those of covenant
in the case of a believer; and these are they who go beyond the limits.

009.011
Y: But (even so), if they repent, establish regular prayers, and
practise regular charity,- they are your brethren in Faith: (thus) do
We explain the Signs in detail, for those who understand.

P: But if they repent and establish worship and pay the poor-due, then
are they your brethren in religion. We detail Our revelations for a
people who have knowledge.

S: But if they repent and keep up prayer and pay the poor-rate, they are
your brethren in faith; and We make the communications clear for a
people who know.

009.012
Y: But if they violate their oaths after their covenant, and taunt you
for your Faith,- fight ye the chiefs of Unfaith: for their oaths are
nothing to them: that thus they may be restrained.

P: And if they break their pledges after their treaty (hath been made
with you) and assail your religion, then fight the heads of disbelief -
Lo! they have no binding oaths - in order that they may desist.

S: And if they break their oaths after their agreement and (openly)
revile your religion, then fight the leaders of unbelief-- surely their
oaths are nothing-- so that they may desist.

009.013
Y: Will ye not fight people who violated their oaths, plotted to expel
the Messenger, and took the aggressive by being the first (to assault)
you? Do ye fear them? Nay, it is Allah Whom ye should more justly fear,
if ye believe!

P: Will ye not fight a folk who broke their solemn pledges, and purposed
to drive out the messenger and did attack you first? What! Fear ye
them? Now Allah hath more right that ye should fear Him, if ye are
believers.

S: What! will you not fight a people who broke their oaths and aimed at
the expulsion of the Messenger, and they attacked you first; do you
fear them? But Allah is most deserving that you should fear Him, if you
are believers.

009.014
Y: Fight them, and Allah will punish them by your hands, cover them with
shame, help you (to victory) over them, heal the breasts of Believers,

P: Fight them! Allah will chastise them at your hands, and He will lay
them low and give you victory over them, and He will heal the breasts
of folk who are believers.

S: Fight them, Allah will punish them by your hands and bring them to
disgrace, and assist you against them and heal the hearts of a
believing people.

009.015
Y: And still the indignation of their hearts. For Allah will turn (in
mercy) to whom He will; and Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

P: And He will remove the anger of their hearts. Allah relenteth toward
whom He will. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: And remove the rage of their hearts; and Allah turns (mercifully) to
whom He pleases, and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

009.016
Y: Or think ye that ye shall be abandoned, as though Allah did not know
those among you who strive with might and main, and take none for
friends and protectors except Allah, His Messenger, and the (community
of) Believers? But Allah is well-acquainted with (all) that ye do.

P: Or deemed ye that ye would be left (in peace) when Allah yet knoweth
not those of you who strive, choosing for familiar none save Allah and
His messenger and the believers? Allah is Informed of what ye do.

S: What! do you think that you will be left alone while Allah has not
yet known those of you who have struggled hard and have not taken any
one as an adherent besides Allah and His Messenger and the believers;
and Allah is aware of what you do.

009.017
Y: It is not for such as join gods with Allah, to visit or maintain the
mosques of Allah while they witness against their own souls to
infidelity. The works of such bear no fruit: In Fire shall they dwell.

P: It is not for the idolaters to tend Allah's sanctuaries, bearing
witness against themselves of disbelief. As for such, their works are
vain and in the Fire they will abide.

S: The idolaters have no right to visit the mosques of Allah while
bearing witness to unbelief against themselves, these it is whose
doings are null, and in the fire shall they abide.

009.018
Y: The mosques of Allah shall be visited and maintained by such as
believe in Allah and the Last Day, establish regular prayers, and
practise regular charity, and fear none (at all) except Allah. It is
they who are expected to be on true guidance.

P: He only shall tend Allah's sanctuaries who believeth in Allah and the
Last Day and observeth proper worship and payeth the poor-due and
feareth none save Allah. For such (only) is it possible that they can
be of the rightly guided.

S: Only he shall visit the mosques of Allah who believes in Allah and
the latter day, and keeps up prayer and pays the poor-rate and fears
none but Allah; so (as for) these, it may be that they are of the
followers of the right course.

009.019
Y: Do ye make the giving of drink to pilgrims, or the maintenance of the
Sacred Mosque, equal to (the pious service of) those who believe in
Allah and the Last Day, and strive with might and main in the cause of
Allah? They are not comparable in the sight of Allah: and Allah guides
not those who do wrong.

P: Count ye the slaking of a pilgrim's thirst and tendance of the
Inviolable Place of Worship as (equal to the worth of) him who
believeth in Allah and the Last Day, and striveth in the way of Allah?
They are not equal in the sight of Allah. Allah guideth not wrongdoing
folk.

S: What! do you make (one who undertakes) the giving of drink to the
pilgrims and the guarding of the Sacred Mosque like him who believes in
Allah and the latter day and strives hard in Allah's way? They are not
equal with Allah; and Allah does not guide the unjust people.

009.020
Y: Those who believe, and suffer exile and strive with might and main,
in Allah's cause, with their goods and their persons, have the highest
rank in the sight of Allah: they are the people who will achieve
(salvation).

P: Those who believe, and have left their homes and striven with their
wealth and their lives in Allah's way are of much greater worth in
Allah's sight. These are they who are triumphant.

S: Those who believed and fled (their homes), and strove hard in Allah's
way with their property and their souls, are much higher in rank with
Allah; and those are they who are the achievers (of their objects).

009.021
Y: Their Lord doth give them glad tidings of a Mercy from Himself, of
His good pleasure, and of gardens for them, wherein are delights that
endure:

P: Their Lord giveth them good tidings of mercy from Him, and
acceptance, and Gardens where enduring pleasure will be theirs;

S: Their Lord gives them good news of mercy from Himself and (His) good
pleasure and gardens, wherein lasting blessings shall be theirs;

009.022
Y: They will dwell therein for ever. Verily in Allah's presence is a
reward, the greatest (of all).

P: There they will abide for ever. Lo! with Allah there is immense
reward.

S: Abiding therein for ever; surely Allah has a Mighty reward with Him.

009.023
Y: O ye who believe! take not for protectors your fathers and your
brothers if they love infidelity above Faith: if any of you do so, they
do wrong.

P: O ye who believe! Choose not your fathers nor your brethren for
friends if they take pleasure in disbelief rather than faith. Whoso of
you taketh them for friends, such are wrong-doers.

S: O you who believe! do not take your fathers and your brothers for
guardians if they love unbelief more than belief; and whoever of you
takes them for a guardian, these it is that are the unjust.

009.024
Y: Say: If it be that your fathers, your sons, your brothers, your
mates, or your kindred; the wealth that ye have gained; the commerce in
which ye fear a decline: or the dwellings in which ye delight - are
dearer to you than Allah, or His Messenger, or the striving in His
cause;- then wait until Allah brings about His decision: and Allah
guides not the rebellious.

P: Say: If your fathers, and your sons, and your brethren, and your
wives, and your tribe, and the wealth ye have acquired, and merchandise
for which ye fear that there will no sale, and dwellings ye desire are
dearer to you than Allah and His messenger and striving in His way:
then wait till Allah bringeth His command to pass. Allah guideth not
wrongdoing folk.

S: Say: If your fathers and your sons and your brethren and your mates
and your kinsfolk and property which you have acquired, and the
slackness of trade which you fear and dwellings which you like, are
dearer to you than Allah and His Messenger and striving in His way,
then wait till Allah brings about His command: and Allah does not guide
the transgressing people.

009.025
Y: Assuredly Allah did help you in many battle-fields and on the day of
Hunain: Behold! your great numbers elated you, but they availed you
naught: the land, for all that it is wide, did constrain you, and ye
turned back in retreat.

P: Allah hath given you victory on many fields and on the day of Huneyn,
when ye exulted in your multitude but it availed you naught, and the
earth, vast as it is, was straitened for you; then ye turned back in
flight;

S: Certainly Allah helped you in many battlefields and on the day of
Hunain, when your great numbers made you vain, but they availed you
nothing and the earth became strait to you notwithstanding its
spaciousness, then you turned back retreating.

009.026
Y: But Allah did pour His calm on the Messenger and on the Believers,
and sent down forces which ye saw not: He punished the Unbelievers;
thus doth He reward those without Faith.

P: Then Allah sent His peace of reassurance down upon His messenger and
upon the believers, and sent down hosts ye could not see, and punished
those who disbelieved. Such is the reward of disbelievers.

S: Then Allah sent down His tranquillity upon His Messenger and upon the
believers, and sent down hosts which you did not see, and chastised
those who disbelieved, and that is the reward of the unbelievers.

009.027
Y: Again will Allah, after this, turn (in mercy) to whom He will: for
Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Then afterward Allah will relent toward whom He will; for Allah is
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Then will Allah after this turn (mercifully) to whom He pleases, and
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

009.028
Y: O ye who believe! Truly the Pagans are unclean; so let them not,
after this year of theirs, approach the Sacred Mosque. And if ye fear
poverty, soon will Allah enrich you, if He wills, out of His bounty,
for Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

P: O ye who believe! The idolaters only are unclean. So let them not
come near the Inviolable Place of Worship after this their year. If ye
fear poverty (from the loss of their merchandise) Allah shall preserve
you of His bounty if He will. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: O you who believe! the idolaters are nothing but unclean, so they
shall not approach the Sacred Mosque after this year; and if you fear
poverty then Allah will enrich you out of His grace if He please;
surely Allah is Knowing Wise.

009.029
Y: Fight those who believe not in Allah nor the Last Day, nor hold that
forbidden which hath been forbidden by Allah and His Messenger, nor
acknowledge the religion of Truth, (even if they are) of the People of
the Book, until they pay the Jizya with willing submission, and feel
themselves subdued.

P: Fight against such of those who have been given the Scripture as
believe not in Allah nor the Last Day, and forbid not that which Allah
hath forbidden by His messenger, and follow not the Religion of Truth,
until they pay the tribute readily, being brought low.

S: Fight those who do not believe in Allah, nor in the latter day, nor
do they prohibit what Allah and His Messenger have prohibited, nor
follow the religion of truth, out of those who have been given the
Book, until they pay the tax in acknowledgment of superiority and they
are in a state of subjection.

009.030
Y: The Jews call 'Uzair a son of Allah, and the Christians call Christ
the son of Allah. That is a saying from their mouth; (in this) they but
imitate what the unbelievers of old used to say. Allah's curse be on
them: how they are deluded away from the Truth!

P: And the Jews say: Ezra is the son of Allah, and the Christians say:
The Messiah is the son of Allah. That is their saying with their
mouths. They imitate the saying of those who disbelieved of old. Allah
(Himself) fighteth against them. How perverse are they!

S: And the Jews say: Uzair is the son of Allah; and the Christians say:
The Messiah is the son of Allah; these are the words of their mouths;
they imitate the saying of those who disbelieved before; may Allah
destroy them; how they are turned away!

009.031
Y: They take their priests and their anchorites to be their lords in
derogation of Allah, and (they take as their Lord) Christ the son of
Mary; yet they were commanded to worship but One Allah: there is no god
but He. Praise and glory to Him: (Far is He) from having the partners
they associate (with Him).

P: They have taken as lords beside Allah their rabbis and their monks
and the Messiah son of Mary, when they were bidden to worship only One
Allah. There is no God save Him. Be He Glorified from all that they
ascribe as partner (unto Him)!

S: They have taken their doctors of law and their monks for lords
besides Allah, and (also) the Messiah son of Marium and they were
enjoined that they should serve one Allah only, there is no god but He;
far from His glory be what they set up (with Him).

009.032
Y: Fain would they extinguish Allah's light with their mouths, but Allah
will not allow but that His light should be perfected, even though the
Unbelievers may detest (it).

P: Fain would they put out the light of Allah with their mouths, but
Allah disdaineth (aught) save that He shall perfect His light, however
much the disbelievers are averse.

S: They desire to put out the light of Allah with their mouths, and
Allah will not consent save to perfect His light, though the
unbelievers are averse.

009.033
Y: It is He Who hath sent His Messenger with guidance and the Religion
of Truth, to proclaim it over all religion, even though the Pagans may
detest (it).

P: He it is Who hath sent His messenger with the guidance and the
Religion of Truth, that He may cause it to prevail over all religion,
however much the idolaters may be averse.

S: He it is Who sent His Messenger with guidance and the religion of
truth, that He might cause it to prevail over all religions, though the
polytheists may be averse.

009.034
Y: O ye who believe! there are indeed many among the priests and
anchorites, who in Falsehood devour the substance of men and hinder
(them) from the way of Allah. And there are those who bury gold and
silver and spend it not in the way of Allah: announce unto them a most
grievous penalty-

P: O ye who believe! Lo! many of the (Jewish) rabbis and the (Christian)
monks devour the wealth of mankind wantonly and debar (men) from the
way of Allah. They who hoard up gold and silver and spend it not in the
way of Allah, unto them give tidings (O Muhammad) of a painful doom,

S: O you who believe! most surely many of the doctors of law and the
monks eat away the property of men falsely, and turn (them) from
Allah's way; and (as for) those who hoard up gold and silver and do not
spend it in Allah's way, announce to them a painful chastisement,

009.035
Y: On the Day when heat will be produced out of that (wealth) in the
fire of Hell, and with it will be branded their foreheads, their
flanks, and their backs, their flanks, and their backs.- "This is the
(treasure) which ye buried for yourselves: taste ye, then, the
(treasures) ye buried!"

P: On the day when it will (all) be heated in the fire of hell, and
their foreheads and their flanks and their backs will be branded
therewith (and it will be said unto them): Here is that which ye
hoarded for yourselves. Now taste of what ye used to hoard.

S: On the day when it shall be heated in the fire of hell, then their
foreheads and their sides and their backs shall be branded with it;
this is what you hoarded up for yourselves, therefore taste what you
hoarded.

009.036
Y: The number of months in the sight of Allah is twelve (in a year)- so
ordained by Him the day He created the heavens and the earth; of them
four are sacred: that is the straight usage. So wrong not yourselves
therein, and fight the Pagans all together as they fight you all
together. But know that Allah is with those who restrain themselves.

P: Lo! the number of the months with Allah is twelve months by Allah's
ordinance in the day that He created the heavens and the earth. Four of
them are sacred: that is the right religion. So wrong not yourselves in
them. And wage war on all of the idolaters as they are waging war on
all of you. And know that Allah is with those who keep their duty (unto
Him).

S: Surely the number of months with Allah is twelve months in Allah's
ordinance since the day when He created the heavens and the earth, of
these four being sacred; that is the right reckoning; therefore be not
unjust to yourselves regarding them, and fight the polytheists all
together as they fight you all together; and know that Allah is with
those who guard (against evil).

009.037
Y: Verily the transposing (of a prohibited month) is an addition to
Unbelief: the Unbelievers are led to wrong thereby: for they make it
lawful one year, and forbidden another year, in order to adjust the
number of months forbidden by Allah and make such forbidden ones
lawful. The evil of their course seems pleasing to them. But Allah
guideth not those who reject Faith.

P: Postponement (of a sacred month) is only an excess of disbelief
whereby those who disbelieve are misled; they allow it one year and
forbid it (another) year, that they may make up the number of the
months which Allah hath hallowed, so that they allow that which Allah
hath forbidden. The evil of their deeds is made fairseeming unto them.
Allah guideth not the disbelieving folk.

S: Postponing (of the sacred month) is only an addition in unbelief,
wherewith those who disbelieve are led astray, violating it one year
and keeping it sacred another, that they may agree in the number (of
months) that Allah has made sacred, and thus violate what Allah has
made sacred; the evil of their doings is made fairseeming to them; and
Allah does not guide the unbelieving people.

009.038
Y: O ye who believe! what is the matter with you, that, when ye are
asked to go forth in the cause of Allah, ye cling heavily to the earth?
Do ye prefer the life of this world to the Hereafter? But little is the
comfort of this life, as compared with the Hereafter.

P: O ye who believe! What aileth you that when it is said unto you: Go
forth in the way of Allah, ye are bowed down to the ground with
heaviness. Take ye pleasure in the life of the world rather than in the
Hereafter? The comfort of the life of the world is but little in the
Hereafter.

S: O you who believe! What (excuse) have you that when it is said to
you: Go forth in Allah's way, you should incline heavily to earth; are
you contented with this world's life instead of the hereafter? But the
provision of this world's life compared with the hereafter is but
little.

009.039
Y: Unless ye go forth, He will punish you with a grievous penalty, and
put others in your place; but Him ye would not harm in the least. For
Allah hath power over all things.

P: If ye go not forth He will afflict you with a painful doom, and will
choose instead of you a folk other than you. Ye cannot harm Him at all.
Allah is Able to do all things.

S: If you do not go forth, He will chastise you with a painful
chastisement and bring in your place a people other than you, and you
will do Him no harm; and Allah has power over all things.

009.040
Y: If ye help not (your leader), (it is no matter): for Allah did indeed
help him, when the Unbelievers drove him out: he had no more than one
companion; they two were in the cave, and he said to his companion,
"Have no fear, for Allah is with us": then Allah sent down His peace
upon him, and strengthened him with forces which ye saw not, and
humbled to the depths the word of the Unbelievers. But the word of
Allah is exalted to the heights: for Allah is Exalted in Might, Wise.

P: If ye help him not, still Allah helped him when those who disbelieve
drove him forth, the second of two; when they two were in the cave,
when he said unto his comrade: Grieve not. Lo! Allah is with us. Then
Allah caused His peace of reassurance to descend upon him and supported
him with hosts ye cannot see, and made the word of those who
disbelieved the nethermost, while Allah's Word it was that became the
uppermost. Allah is Mighty, Wise.

S: If you will not aid him, Allah certainly aided him when those who
disbelieved expelled him, he being the second of the two, when they
were both in the cave, when he said to his companion: Grieve not,
surely Allah is with us. So Allah sent down His tranquillity upon him
and strengthened him with hosts which you did not see, and made lowest
the word of those who disbelieved; and the word of Allah, that is the
highest; and Allah is Mighty, Wise.

009.041
Y: Go ye forth, (whether equipped) lightly or heavily, and strive and
struggle, with your goods and your persons, in the cause of Allah. That
is best for you, if ye (but) knew.

P: Go forth, light-armed and heavy-armed, and strive with your wealth
and your lives in the way of Allah! That is best for you if ye but
knew.

S: Go forth light and heavy, and strive hard in Allah's way with your
property and your persons; this is better for you, if you know.

009.042
Y: If there had been immediate gain (in sight), and the journey easy,
they would (all) without doubt have followed thee, but the distance was
long, (and weighed) on them. They would indeed swear by Allah, "If we
only could, we should certainly have come out with you": They would
destroy their own souls; for Allah doth know that they are certainly
lying.

P: Had it been a near adventure and an easy journey they had followed
thee, but the distance seemed too far for them. Yet will they swear by
Allah (saying): If we had been able we would surely have set out with
you. They destroy their souls, and Allah knoweth that they verily are
liars.

S: Had it been a near advantage and a short journey, they would
certainly have followed you, but the tedious journey was too long for
them; and they swear by Allah: If we had been able, we would certainly
have gone forth with you; they cause their own souls to perish, and
Allah knows that they are most surely liars.

009.043
Y: Allah give thee grace! why didst thou grant them exemption until those
who told the truth were seen by thee in a clear light, and thou hadst
proved the liars?

P: Allah forgive thee (O Muhammad)! Wherefore didst thou grant them leave
ere those who told the truth were manifest to thee and thou didst know
the liars?

S: Allah pardon you! Why did you give them leave until those who spoke
the truth had become manifest to you and you had known the liars?

009.044
Y: Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day ask thee for no exemption
from fighting with their goods and persons. And Allah knoweth well
those who do their duty.

P: Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day ask no leave of thee lest
they should strive with their wealth and their lives. Allah is Aware of
those who keep their duty (unto Him).

S: They do not ask leave of you who believe in Allah and the latter day
(to stay away) from striving hard with their property and their
persons, and Allah knows those who guard (against evil).

009.045
Y: Only those ask thee for exemption who believe not in Allah and the
Last Day, and whose hearts are in doubt, so that they are tossed in
their doubts to and fro.

P: They alone ask leave of thee who believe not in Allah and the Last
Day, and whose hearts feel doubt, so in their doubt they waver.

S: They only ask leave of you who do not believe in Allah and the latter
day and their hearts are in doubt, so in their doubt do they waver.

009.046
Y: If they had intended to come out, they would certainly have made some
preparation therefor; but Allah was averse to their being sent forth;
so He made them lag behind, and they were told, "Sit ye among those who
sit (inactive)."

P: And if they had wished to go forth they would assuredly have made
ready some equipment, but Allah was averse to their being sent forth
and held them back and it was said (unto them): Sit ye with the
sedentary!

S: And if they had intended to go forth, they would certainly have
provided equipment for it, but Allah did not like their going forth, so
He withheld them, and it was said (to them): Hold back with those who
hold back.

009.047
Y: If they had come out with you, they would not have added to your
(strength) but only (made for) disorder, hurrying to and fro in your
midst and sowing sedition among you, and there would have been some
among you who would have listened to them. But Allah knoweth well those
who do wrong.

P: Had they gone forth among you they had added to you naught save
trouble and had hurried to and fro among you, seeking to cause sedition
among you; and among you there are some who would have listened to
them. Allah is Aware of evil-doers.

S: Had they gone forth with you, they would not have added to you aught
save corruption, and they would certainly have hurried about among you
seeking (to sow) dissension among you, and among you there are those
who hearken for their sake; and Allah knows the unjust.

009.048
Y: Indeed they had plotted sedition before, and upset matters for thee,
until,- the Truth arrived, and the Decree of Allah became manifest much
to their disgust.

P: Aforetime they sought to cause sedition and raised difficulties for
thee till the Truth came and the decree of Allah was made manifest,
though they were loth.

S: Certainly they sought (to sow) dissension before, and they meditated
plots against you until the truth came, and Allah's commandment
prevailed although they were averse (from it).

009.049
Y: Among them is (many) a man who says: "Grant me exemption and draw me
not into trial." Have they not fallen into trial already? and indeed
Hell surrounds the Unbelievers (on all sides).

P: Of them is he who saith: Grant me leave (to stay at home) and tempt
me not. Surely it is into temptation that they (thus) have fallen. Lo!
hell verily is all around the disbelievers.

S: And among them there is he who says: Allow me and do not try me.
Surely into trial have they already tumbled down, and most surely hell
encompasses the unbelievers.

009.050
Y: If good befalls thee, it grieves them; but if a misfortune befalls
thee, they say, "We took indeed our precautions beforehand," and they
turn away rejoicing.

P: If good befalleth thee (O Muhammad) it afflicteth them, and if
calamity befalleth thee, they say: We took precaution, and they turn
away well pleased.

S: If good befalls you, it grieves them, and if hardship afflicts you,
they say: Indeed we had taken care of our affair before; and they turn
back and are glad.

009.051
Y: Say: "Nothing will happen to us except what Allah has decreed for us:
He is our protector": and on Allah let the Believers put their trust.

P: Say: Naught befalleth us save that which Allah hath decreed for us.
He is our Protecting Friend. In Allah let believers put their trust!

S: Say: Nothing will afflict us save what Allah has ordained for us; He
is our Patron; and on Allah let the believers rely.

009.052
Y: Say: "Can you expect for us (any fate) other than one of two glorious
things- (Martyrdom or victory)? But we can expect for you either that
Allah will send his punishment from Himself, or by our hands. So wait
(expectant); we too will wait with you."

P: Say: Can ye await for us aught save one of two good things (death or
victory in Allah's way)? while we await for you that Allah will afflict
you with a doom from Him or at our hands. Await then! Lo! We are
awaiting with you.

S: Say: Do you await for us but one of two most excellent things? And we
await for you that Allah will afflict you with punishment from Himself
or by our hands. So wait; we too will wait with you.

009.053
Y: Say: "Spend (for the cause) willingly or unwillingly: not from you
will it be accepted: for ye are indeed a people rebellious and wicked."

P: Say: Pay (your contribution), willingly or unwillingly, it will not
be accepted from you. Lo! ye were ever froward folk.

S: Say: Spend willingly or unwillingly, it shall not be accepted from
you; surely you are a transgressing people.

009.054
Y: The only reasons why their contributions are not accepted are: that
they reject Allah and His Messenger; that they come to prayer without
earnestness; and that they offer contributions unwillingly.

P: And naught preventeth that their contributions should be accepted
from them save that they have disbelieved in Allah and in His
messenger, and they come not to worship save as idlers, and pay not
(their contribution) save reluctantly.

S: And nothing hinders their spendings being accepted from them, except
that they disbelieve in Allah and in His Messenger and they do not come
to prayer but while they are sluggish, and they do not spend but while
they are unwilling.

009.055
Y: Let not their wealth nor their (following in) sons dazzle thee: in
reality Allah's plan is to punish them with these things in this life,
and that their souls may perish in their (very) denial of Allah.

P: So let not their riches nor their children please thee (O Muhammad).
Allah thereby intendeth but to punish them in the life of the world and
that their souls shall pass away while they are disbelievers.

S: Let not then their property and their children excite your
admiration; Allah only wishes to chastise them with these in this
world's life and (that) their souls may depart while they are
unbelievers.

009.056
Y: They swear by Allah that they are indeed of you; but they are not of
you: yet they are afraid (to appear in their true colours).

P: And they swear by Allah that they are in truth of you, when they are
not of you, but they are folk who are afraid.

S: And they swear by Allah that they are most surely of you, and they
are not of you, but they are a people who are afraid (of you).

009.057
Y: If they could find a place to flee to, or caves, or a place of
concealment, they would turn straightaway thereto, with an obstinate
rush.

P: Had they but found a refuge, or caverns, or a place to enter, they
surely had resorted thither swift as runaways.

S: If they could find a refuge or cave or a place to enter into, they
would certainly have turned thereto, running away in all haste.

009.058
Y: And among them are men who slander thee in the matter of (the
distribution of) the alms: if they are given part thereof, they are
pleased, but if not, behold! they are indignant!

P: And of them is he who defameth thee in the matter of the alms. If
they are given thereof they are content, and if they are not given
thereof, behold! they are enraged.

S: And of them there are those who blame you with respect to the alms;
so if they are given from it they are pleased, and if they are not
given from it, lo! they are full of rage.

009.059
Y: If only they had been content with what Allah and His Messenger gave
them, and had said, "Sufficient unto us is Allah! Allah and His
Messenger will soon give us of His bounty: to Allah do we turn our
hopes!" (that would have been the right course).

P: (How much more seemly) had they been content with that which Allah
and His messenger had given them and had said: Allah sufficeth us.
Allah will give us of His bounty, and (also) His messenger. Unto Allah
we are suppliants.

S: And if they were content with what Allah and His Messenger gave them,
and had said: Allah is sufficient for us; Allah will soon give us
(more) out of His grace and His Messenger too; surely to Allah do we
make our petition.

009.060
Y: Alms are for the poor and the needy, and those employed to administer
the (funds); for those whose hearts have been (recently) reconciled (to
Truth); for those in bondage and in debt; in the cause of Allah; and
for the wayfarer: (thus is it) ordained by Allah, and Allah is full of
knowledge and wisdom.

P: The alms are only for the poor and the needy, and those who collect
them, and those whose hearts are to be reconciled, and to free the
captives and the debtors, and for the cause of Allah, and (for) the
wayfarer; a duty imposed by Allah. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: Alms are only for the poor and the needy, and the officials
(appointed) over them, and those whose hearts are made to incline (to
truth) and the (ransoming of) captives and those in debts and in the
way of Allah and the wayfarer; an ordinance from Allah; and Allah is
knowing, Wise.

009.061
Y: Among them are men who molest the Prophet and say, "He is (all) ear."
Say, "He listens to what is best for you: he believes in Allah, has
faith in the Believers, and is a Mercy to those of you who believe."
But those who molest the Messenger will have a grievous penalty.

P: And of them are those who vex the Prophet and say: He is only a
hearer. Say: A hearer of good for you, who believeth in Allah and is
true to the believers, and a mercy for such of you as believe. Those
who vex the messenger of Allah, for them there is a painful doom.

S: And there are some of them who molest the Prophet and say: He is one
who believes every thing that he hears; say: A hearer of good for you
(who) believes in Allah and believes the faithful and a mercy for those
of you who believe; and (as for) those who molest the Messenger of
Allah, they shall have a painful punishment.

009.062
Y: To you they swear by Allah. In order to please you: But it is more
fitting that they should please Allah and His Messenger, if they are
Believers.

P: They swear by Allah to you (Muslims) to please you, but Allah, with
His messenger, hath more right that they should please Him if they are
believers.

S: They swear to you by Allah that they might please you and, Allah, as
well as His Messenger, has a greater right that they should please Him,
if they are believers.

009.063
Y: Know they not that for those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, is
the Fire of Hell?- wherein they shall dwell. That is the supreme
disgrace.

P: Know they not that whoso opposeth Allah and His messenger, his verily
is fire of hell, to abide therein? That is the extreme abasement.

S: Do they not know that whoever acts in opposition to Allah and His
Messenger, he shall surely have the fire of hell to abide in it? That
is the grievous abasement.

009.064
Y: The Hypocrites are afraid lest a Sura should be sent down about them,
showing them what is (really passing) in their hearts. Say: "Mock ye!
But verily Allah will bring to light all that ye fear (should be
revealed)."

P: The hypocrites fear lest a surah should be revealed concerning them,
proclaiming what is in their hearts. Say: Scoff (your fill)! Lo! Allah
is disclosing what ye fear.

S: The hypocrites fear lest a Chapter should be sent down to them
telling them plainly of what is in their hearts. Say: Go on mocking,
surely Allah will bring forth what you fear.

009.065
Y: If thou dost question them, they declare (with emphasis): "We were
only talking idly and in play." Say: "Was it at Allah, and His Signs,
and His Messenger, that ye were mocking?"

P: And if thou ask them (O Muhammad) they will say: We did but talk and
jest. Say: Was it at Allah and His revelations and His messenger that
ye did scoff?

S: And if you should question them, they would certainly say: We were
only idly discoursing and sporting. Say: Was it at Allah and His
communications and His Messenger that you mocked?

009.066
Y: Make ye no excuses: ye have rejected Faith after ye had accepted it.
If We pardon some of you, We will punish others amongst you, for that
they are in sin.

P: Make no excuse. Ye have disbelieved after your (confession of)
belief. If We forgive a party of you, a party of you We shall punish
because they have been guilty.

S: Do not make excuses; you have denied indeed after you had believed;
if We pardon a party of you, We will chastise (another) party because
they are guilty.

009.067
Y: The Hypocrites, men and women, (have an understanding) with each
other: They enjoin evil, and forbid what is just, and are close with
their hands. They have forgotten Allah; so He hath forgotten them.
Verily the Hypocrites are rebellious and perverse.

P: The hypocrites, both men and women, proceed one from another. They
enjoin the wrong, and they forbid the right, and they withhold their
hands (from spending for the cause of Allah). They forget Allah, so He
hath forgotten them. Lo! the hypocrites, they are the transgressors.

S: The hypocritical men and the hypocritical women are all alike; they
enjoin evil and forbid good and withhold their hands; they have
forsaken Allah, so He has forsaken them; surely the hypocrites are the
transgressors.

009.068
Y: Allah hath promised the Hypocrites men and women, and the rejecters,
of Faith, the fire of Hell: Therein shall they dwell: Sufficient is it
for them: for them is the curse of Allah, and an enduring punishment,-

P: Allah promiseth the hypocrites, both men and women, and the
disbelievers fire of hell for their abode. It will suffice them. Allah
curseth them, and theirs is lasting torment.

S: Allah has promised the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women
and the unbelievers the fire of hell to abide therein; it is enough for
them; and Allah has cursed them and they shall have lasting punishment.

009.069
Y: As in the case of those before you: they were mightier than you in
power, and more flourishing in wealth and children. They had their
enjoyment of their portion: and ye have of yours, as did those before
you; and ye indulge in idle talk as they did. They!- their work are
fruitless in this world and in the Hereafter, and they will lose (all
spiritual good).

P: Even as those before you who were mightier than you in strength, and
more affluent than you in wealth and children. They enjoyed their lot
awhile, so ye enjoy your lot awhile even as those before you did enjoy
their lot awhile. And ye prate even as they prated. Such are they whose
works have perished in the world and the Hereafter. Such are they who
are the losers.

S: Like those before you; they were stronger than you in power and more
abundant in wealth and children, so they enjoyed their portion; thus
have you enjoyed your portion as those before you enjoyed their
portion; and you entered into vain discourses like the vain discourses
in which entered those before you. These are they whose works are null
in this world and the hereafter, and these are they who are the losers.

009.070
Y: Hath not the story reached them of those before them?- the People of
Noah, and 'Ad, and Thamud; the People of Abraham, the men of Midian,
and the cities overthrown. To them came their messengers with clear
signs. It is not Allah Who wrongs them, but they wrong their own souls.

P: Hath not the fame of those before them reached them - the folk of
Noah, A'ad, Thamud, the folk of Abraham, the dwellers of Midian and the
disasters (which befell them)? Their messengers (from Allah) came unto
them with proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty). So Allah surely wronged them
not, but they did wrong themselves.

S: Has not the news of those before them come to them; of the people of
Nuh and Ad and Samood, and the people of Ibrahim and the dwellers of
Madyan and the overthrown cities; their messengers came to them with
clear arguments; so it was not Allah Who should do them injustice, but
they were unjust to themselves.

009.071
Y: The Believers, men and women, are protectors one of another: they
enjoin what is just, and forbid what is evil: they observe regular
prayers, practise regular charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. On
them will Allah pour His mercy: for Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise.

P: And the believers, men and women, are protecting friends one of
another; they enjoin the right and forbid the wrong, and they establish
worship and they pay the poor-due, and they obey Allah and His
messenger. As for these, Allah will have mercy on them. Lo! Allah is
Mighty, Wise.

S: And (as for) the believing men and the believing women, they are
guardians of each other; they enjoin good and forbid evil and keep up
prayer and pay the poor-rate, and obey Allah and His Messenger; (as
for) these, Allah will show mercy to them; surely Allah is Mighty,
Wise.

009.072
Y: Allah hath promised to Believers, men and women, gardens under which
rivers flow, to dwell therein, and beautiful mansions in gardens of
everlasting bliss. But the greatest bliss is the good pleasure of
Allah: that is the supreme felicity.

P: Allah promiseth to the believers, men and women, Gardens underneath
which rivers flow, wherein they will abide - blessed dwellings in
Gardens of Eden. And - greater (far)! - acceptance from Allah. That is
the supreme triumph.

S: Allah has promised to the believing men and the believing women
gardens, beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them, and goodly
dwellings in gardens of perpetual abode; and best of all is Allah's
goodly pleasure; that is the grand achievement.

009.073
Y: O Prophet! strive hard against the unbelievers and the Hypocrites,
and be firm against them. Their abode is Hell,- an evil refuge indeed.

P: O Prophet! Strive against the disbelievers and the hypocrites! Be
harsh with them. Their ultimate abode is hell, a hapless journey's end.

S: O Prophet! strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites and
be unyielding to them; and their abode is hell, and evil is the
destination.

009.074
Y: They swear by Allah that they said nothing (evil), but indeed they
uttered blasphemy, and they did it after accepting Islam; and they
meditated a plot which they were unable to carry out: this revenge of
theirs was (their) only return for the bounty with which Allah and His
Messenger had enriched them! If they repent, it will be best for them;
but if they turn back (to their evil ways), Allah will punish them with
a grievous penalty in this life and in the Hereafter: They shall have
none on earth to protect or help them.

P: They swear by Allah that they said nothing (wrong), yet they did say
the word of disbelief, and did disbelieve after their Surrender (to
Allah). And they purposed that which they could not attain, and they
sought revenge only that Allah by His messenger should enrich them of
His bounty. If they repent it will be better for them; and if they turn
away, Allah will afflict them with a painful doom in the world and the
Hereafter, and they have no protecting friend nor helper in the earth.

S: They swear by Allah that they did not speak, and certainly they did
speak, the word of unbelief, and disbelieved after their Islam, and
they had determined upon what they have not been able to effect, and
they did not find fault except because Allah and His Messenger enriched
them out of His grace; therefore if they repent, it will be good for
them; and if they turn back, Allah will chastise them with a painful
chastisement in this world and the hereafter, and they shall not have
in the land any guardian or a helper.

009.075
Y: Amongst them are men who made a covenant with Allah, that if He
bestowed on them of His bounty, they would give (largely) in charity,
and be truly amongst those who are righteous.

P: And of them is he who made a covenant with Allah (saying): If He give
us of His bounty we will give alms and become of the righteous.

S: And there are those of them who made a covenant with Allah: If He
give us out of His grace, we will certainly give alms and we will
certainly be of the good.

009.076
Y: But when He did bestow of His bounty, they became covetous, and
turned back (from their covenant), averse (from its fulfilment).

P: Yet when He gave them of His bounty, they hoarded it and turned away,
averse;

S: But when He gave them out of His grace, they became niggardly of it
and they turned back and they withdrew.

009.077
Y: So He hath put as a consequence hypocrisy into their hearts, (to
last) till the Day, whereon they shall meet Him: because they broke
their covenant with Allah, and because they lied (again and again).

P: So He hath made the consequence (to be) hypocrisy in their hearts
until the day when they shall meet Him, because they broke their word
to Allah that they promised Him, and because they lied.

S: So He made hypocrisy to follow as a consequence into their hearts
till the day when they shall meet Him because they failed to perform
towards Allah what they had promised with Him and because they told
lies.

009.078
Y: Know they not that Allah doth know their secret (thoughts) and their
secret counsels, and that Allah knoweth well all things unseen?

P: Know they not that Allah knoweth both their secret and the thought
that they confide, and that Allah is the Knower of Things Hidden?

S: Do they not know that Allah knows their hidden thoughts and their
secret counsels, and that Allah is the great Knower of the unseen
things?

009.079
Y: Those who slander such of the believers as give themselves freely to
(deeds of) charity, as well as such as can find nothing to give except
the fruits of their labour,- and throw ridicule on them,- Allah will
throw back their ridicule on them: and they shall have a grievous
penalty.

P: Those who point at such of the believers as give the alms willingly
and such as can find naught to give but their endeavours, and deride
them - Allah (Himself) derideth them. Theirs will be a painful doom.

S: They who taunt those of the faithful who give their alms freely, and
those who give to the extent of their earnings and scoff at them; Allah
will pay them back their scoffing, and they shall have a painful
chastisement.

009.080
Y: Whether thou ask for their forgiveness, or not, (their sin is
unforgivable): if thou ask seventy times for their forgiveness, Allah
will not forgive them: because they have rejected Allah and His
Messenger: and Allah guideth not those who are perversely rebellious.

P: Ask forgiveness for them (O Muhammad), or ask not forgiveness for
them; though thou ask forgiveness for them seventy times Allah will not
forgive them. That is because they disbelieved in Allah and His
messenger, and Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.

S: Ask forgiveness for them or do not ask forgiveness for them; even if
you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not forgive
them; this is because they disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger, and
Allah does not guide the transgressing people.

009.081
Y: Those who were left behind (in the Tabuk expedition) rejoiced in
their inaction behind the back of the Messenger of Allah: they hated to
strive and fight, with their goods and their persons, in the cause of
Allah: they said, "Go not forth in the heat." Say, "The fire of Hell is
fiercer in heat." If only they could understand!

P: Those who were left behind rejoiced at sitting still behind the
messenger of Allah, and were averse to striving with their wealth and
their lives in Allah's way. And they said: Go not forth in the heat!
Say: The fire of hell is more intense of heat, if they but understood.

S: Those who were left behind were glad on account of their sitting
behind Allah's Messenger and they were averse from striving in Allah's
way with their property and their persons, and said: Do not go forth in
the heat. Say: The fire of hell is much severe in heat. Would that they
understood (it).

009.082
Y: Let them laugh a little: much will they weep: a recompense for the
(evil) that they do.

P: Then let them laugh a little: they will weep much, as the reward of
what they used to earn.

S: Therefore they shall laugh little and weep much as a recompense for
what they earned.

009.083
Y: If, then, Allah bring thee back to any of them, and they ask thy
permission to come out (with thee), say: "Never shall ye come out with
me, nor fight an enemy with me: for ye preferred to sit inactive on the
first occasion: Then sit ye (now) with those who lag behind."

P: If Allah bring thee back (from the campaign) unto a party of them and
they ask of thee leave to go out (to fight), then say unto them: Ye
shall never more go out with me nor fight with me against a foe. Ye
were content with sitting still the first time. So sit still, with the
useless.

S: Therefore if Allah brings you back to a party of them and then they
ask your permission to go forth, say: By no means shall you ever go
forth with me and by no means shall you fight an enemy with me; surely
you chose to sit the first time, therefore sit (now) with those who
remain behind.

009.084
Y: Nor do thou ever pray for any of them that dies, nor stand at his
grave; for they rejected Allah and His Messenger, and died in a state
of perverse rebellion.

P: And never (O Muhammad) pray for one of them who dieth, nor stand by
his grave. Lo! they disbelieved in Allah and His messenger, and they
died while they were evil-doers.

S: And never offer prayer for any one of them who dies and do not stand
by his grave; surely they disbelieve in Allah and His Messenger and
they shall die in transgression.

009.085
Y: Nor let their wealth nor their (following in) sons dazzle thee:
Allah's plan is to punish them with these things in this world, and
that their souls may perish in their (very) denial of Allah.

P: Let not their wealth nor their children please thee! Allah purposeth
only to punish them thereby in the world, and that their souls shall
pass away while they are disbelievers.

S: And let not their property and their children excite your admiration;
Allah only wishes to chastise them with these in this world and (that)
their souls may depart while they are unbelievers.

009.086
Y: When a Sura comes down, enjoining them to believe in Allah and to
strive and fight along with His Messenger, those with wealth and
influence among them ask thee for exemption, and say: "Leave us
(behind): we would be with those who sit (at home)."

P: And when a surah is revealed (which saith): Believe in Allah and
strive along with His messenger, the men of wealth among them still ask
leave of thee and say: Suffer us to be with those who sit (at home).

S: And whenever a Chapter is revealed, saying: Believe in Allah and
