warmth in the stomach; he had then found that, for the first time for
many months, he wished for food; he was given it, and he enjoyed it. He
moved his fingers in a normal manner, raised his arm and let it fall.

Then for the first time in the Bureau I heard a sharp controversy. One
doctor suddenly broke out, saying that there was no actual proof that it
was not all "hysterical simulation." Another answered him; an appeal was
made to the certificate. Then the first doctor delivered a little
speech, in excellent taste, though casting doubt upon the case; and the
matter was then set aside for investigation with the rest. I heard Dr.
Boissarie afterwards thank him for his admirable little discourse.

Finally, though it was getting late, Honorie Gras, aged thirty-five,
came in to give her evidence. She had suffered till to-day from
"purulent arthritis" and "white swellings" on the left knee. To-day she
walked. Her certificate confirmed her, and she was dismissed.

It was all very matter-of-fact. There is no reason to fear that Lourdes
is all hymn-singing and adjurations. It is a pleasure to think that, on
the right of the Rosary Church, and within a hundred yards of the
Grotto, there is this little room, filled with keen-eyed doctors from
every school of faith and science, who have only to present their cards
and be made free of all that Lourdes has to show. They are keen-brained
as well as keen-eyed. I heard one of them say quietly that if the Mother
of God, as it appeared, cured incurable cases, it was hard to deny to
her the power of curing curable cases also. It does not prove, that is
to say, that a cure is not miraculous, if it might have been cured by
human aid. And it is interesting and suggestive to remember that of such
cases one hears little or nothing. For every startling miracle that is
verified in the Bureau, I wonder how many persons go home quietly, freed
from some maddening little illness by the mercy of Mary--some illness
that is worthless as a "case" in scientific eyes, yet none the less as
real as is its cure?

Of course one element that tends to keep from the grasp of the
imagination all the miracles of the place is all this scientific
phraseology. In the simple story of the Gospel, it seems almost
supernaturally natural that a man should have "lain with an infirmity
for forty years," and should, at the word of Jesus Christ, have taken up
his bed and walked; or that, as in the "Acts," another's "feet and
ankle-bones should receive strength" by the power of the Holy Name. But
when we come to tuberculosis and _mal de Pott_ and _lesion incurable_
and "hysterical simulation," in some manner we seem to find ourselves in
rather a breathless and stuffy room, where the white flower of the
supernatural appears strangely languid to the eye of the imagination.

That, however, is all as it should be. We are bound to have these
things. Perhaps the most startling miracle of all is that the Bureau and
the Grotto stand side by side, and that neither stifles the other. Is it
possible that here at last Science and Religion will come to terms, and
each confess with wonder the capacities of the other, and, with awe,
that divine power that makes them what they are, and has "set them their
bounds which they shall not pass?" It would be remarkable if France, of
all countries, should be the scene of that reconciliation between these
estranged sisters.

That night, after dinner, I went out once more to see the procession
with torches; and this time my friend and I each took a candle, that we
might join in that act of worship. First, however, I went down to the
_robinets_--the taps which flow between the Grotto and the
_piscines_--and, after a heartcrushing struggle, succeeded in filling my
bottle with the holy water. It was astonishing how selfish one felt
while still in the battle, and how magnanimous when one had gained the
victory. I filled also the bottle of a voluble French priest, who
despairingly extended it toward me as he still fought in the turmoil.
"_Eh, bien!_" cried a stalwart Frenchwoman at my side, who had filled
her bottle and could not extricate herself. "If you will not permit me
to depart, I remain!" The argument was irresistible; the crowd laughed
childishly and let her out.

Now, I regret to say that once more the churches were outlined in fairy
electric lamps, that the metallic garlands round our Mother's statue
blazed with them; that, even worse, the old castle on the hill and the
far away Calvary were also illuminated; and, worst of all, that the
procession concluded with fireworks--rockets and bombs. Miracles in the
afternoon; fireworks in the evening!

Yet the more I think of it, the less am I displeased. When one reflects
that more than half of the enormous crowd came, probably, from tiny
villages in France--where a rocket is as rare as an angelic visitation;
and, on the carnal side, as beautiful in their eyes--it seems a very
narrow-minded thing to object. It is true that you and I connect
fireworks with Mafeking night or Queen Victoria's Jubilee; and that they
seem therefore incongruous when used to celebrate a visitation of God.
But it is not so with these people. For them it is a natural and
beautiful way of telling the glory of Him who is the Dayspring from on
high, who is the Light to lighten the Gentiles, whose Mother is the
_Stella Matutina_, whose people once walked in darkness and now have
seen a great Light. It is their answer--the reflection in the depths of
their sea--to the myriad lights of that heaven which shines over
Lourdes. Therefore let us leave the fireworks in peace.

It was a very moving thing to walk in that procession, with a candle in
one hand and a little paper book in the other, and help to sing the
story of Bernadette, with the unforgettable _Aves_ at the end of each
verse, and the _Laudate Mariam_, and the Nicene Creed. _Credo in ...
unam sanctam Catholicam et Apostolicam Ecclesiam._ My heart leaped at
that. For where else but in the Catholic Church do such things happen as
these that I had seen? Imagine, if you please, miracles in Manchester!
Certainly they might happen there, if there were sufficient Catholics
gathered in His Name; but put for Manchester, Exeter Hall or St. Paul's
Cathedral! The thought is blindingly absurd. No; the Christianity of
Jesus Christ lives only in the Catholic Church.

There alone in the whole round world do you find that combination of
lofty doctrine, magnificent moral teaching, the frank recognition of the
Cross; sacramentalism logically carried out, yet gripping the heart as
no amateur mysticism can do; and miracles. "Mercy and Truth have met
together." "These signs shall follow them that believe.... Faith can
remove mountains.... All things are possible to him that believes....
Whatsoever you shall ask of the Father in My Name.... Where two or three
are gathered together in My Name, there am I in the midst of them."
There alone, where souls are built upon Peter, do these things really
happen.

I have been asked lately whether I am "happy" in the Catholic Church.
Happy! What can one say to a question like that? Does one ask a man who
wakes up from a foolish dream to sunshine in his room, and to life and
reality, whether he is happy? Of course many non-Catholics are happy. I
was happy myself as an Anglican; but as a Catholic one does not use the
word; one does not think about it. The whole of life is different; that
is all that can be said. Faith is faith, not hope; God is Light, not
twilight; eternity, heaven, hell, purgatory, sin and its
consequences--these things are facts, not guesses and conjectures and
suspicions desperately clung to. "How hard it is to be a Christian!"
moans the persevering non-Catholic. "How impossible it is to be anything
else!" cries the Catholic.

We went round, then, singing. The procession was so huge that it seemed
to have no head and no tail. It involved itself a hundred times over; it
swirled in the square, it humped itself over the Rosary Church; it
elongated itself half a mile away up beyond our Mother's garlanded
statue; it eddied round the Grotto. It was one immense pool and river of
lights and song. Each group sang by itself till it was overpowered by
another; men and women and children strolled along patiently singing and
walking, knowing nothing of where they went, nothing of what they would
be singing five minutes hence. It depended on the voice-power of their
neighbours.

For myself, I found myself in a dozen groups, before, at last, after an
hour or so, I fell out of the procession and went home. Now I walked
cheek by jowl with a retired officer; now with an artisan; once there
came swiftly up behind a company of "Noelites"--those vast organizations
of boys and girls in France--singing the _Laudate Mariam_ to my _Ave
Maria_; now in the middle of a group of shop-girls who exchanged remarks
with one another whenever they could fetch breath. I think it was all
the most joyous and the most spontaneous (as it was certainly the
largest) human function in which I have ever taken part. I have no idea
whether there were any organizers of it all--at least I saw none. Once
or twice a solitary priest in the midst, walking backward and waving
his arms, attempted to reconcile conflicting melodies; once a very old
priest; with a voice like the tuba stop on the organ, turned a
humorously furious face over his shoulder to quell some mistake--from
his mouth, the while issuing this amazingly pungent volume of sound. But
I think these were the only attempts at organization that I saw.

And so at last I dropped out and went home, hoarse but very well
content. I had walked for more than an hour--from the statue, over the
lower church and down again, up the long avenue, and back again to the
statue. The fireworks were over, the illuminations died, and the day was
done; yet still the crowds went round and the voice of conflicting
melody went up without cessation. As I went home the sound was still in
my ears. As I dropped off to sleep, I still heard it.




IX.


Next morning I awoke with a heavy heart, for we were to leave in the
motor at half-past eight, I had still a few errands to do, and had made
no arrangements for saying Mass; so I went out quickly, a little after
seven, and up to the Rosary Church to get some pious objects blessed. It
was useless: I could not find the priest of whom I had been told, whose
business it is perpetually to bless such things. I went to the basilica,
then round by the hill-path down to the Grotto, where I became wedged
suddenly and inextricably into a silent crowd.

For a while I did not understand what they were doing beyond hearing
Mass; for I knew that, of course, a Mass was proceeding just round the
corner in the cave. But presently I perceived that these were intending
communicants. So I made what preparation I could, standing there; and
thanked God and His Mother for this unexpected opportunity of saying
good-bye in the best way--for I was as sad as a school-boy going the
rounds of the house on Black Monday--and after a quarter of an hour or
so I was kneeling at the grill, beneath the very image of Mary. After
making my thanksgiving, still standing on the other side, I blessed the
objects myself--strictly against all rules, I imagine--and came home to
breakfast; and before nine we were on our way.

We were all silent as we progressed slowly and carefully through the
crowded streets, seeing once more the patient _brancardiers_ and the
pitiful litters on their way to the _piscines_. I could not have
believed that I could have become so much attached to a place in three
summer days. As I have said before, everything was against it. There was
no leisure, no room to move, no silence, no sense of familiarity. All
was hot and noisy and crowded and dusty and unknown. Yet I felt that it
was such a home of the soul as I never visited before--of course it is a
home, for it is the Mother that makes the home.

We saw no more of the Grotto nor the churches nor the square nor the
statue. Our road led out in such a direction that, after leaving the
hotel, we had only commonplace streets, white houses, shops, hotels and
crowds; and soon we had passed from the very outskirts of the town, and
were beginning with quickening speed to move out along one of those
endless straight roads that are the glory of France's locomotion.

Yet I turned round in my seat, sick at heart, and pulled the blind that
hung over the rear window of the car. No, Lourdes was gone! There was
the ring of the eternal hills, blue against the blue summer sky, with
their shades of green beneath sloping to the valleys, and the rounded
bastions that hold them up. The Gave was gone, the churches gone, the
Grotto--all was gone. Lourdes might be a dream of the night.

No, Lourdes was not gone. For there, high on a hill, above where the
holy city lay, stood the cross we had seen first upon our entrance,
telling us that if health is a gift of God, it is not the greatest; that
the Physician of souls, who healed the sick, and without whom not one
sparrow falls to the ground, and not one pang is suffered, Himself had
not where to lay His head, and died in pain upon the Tree.

And even as I looked we wheeled a corner, and the cross was gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

How is it possible to end such a story without bathos? I think it is not
possible, yet I must end it. An old French priest said one day at
Lourdes, to one of those with whom I travelled, that he feared that in
these times the pilgrims did not pray so much as they once did, and that
this was a bad sign. He spoke also of France as a whole, and its fall.
My friend said to him that, in her opinion, if these pilgrims could but
be led as an army to Paris--an army, that is, with no weapons except
their Rosaries--the country could be retaken in a day.

Now, I do not know whether the pilgrims once prayed more than they do
