branches of it, in reference to them more immediately concerned in it.

For though good and wise men, and elders too, may reside in such places,
who are of worth and importance in the general, and in other places; yet
it does not always follow, that they may have the room they deserve in
the hearts of the people they live among; or some particular occasion may
make it unfit for him or them to use that authority.  But you that travel
as God's messengers, if they receive you in the greater, shall they
refuse you in the less?  And if they own the general testimony, can they
withstand the particular application of it in their own cases?  Thus ye
will show yourselves workmen indeed, and carry your business before you,
to the praise of his name that hath called you from darkness to light,
that you might turn others from satan's power unto God and his kingdom,
which is within.  And O that there were more of such faithful labourers
in the vineyard of the Lord!--Never more need since the day of God.

Wherefore I cannot but cry and call aloud to you, that have been long
professors of the truth, and know the truth in the convincing power of
it, and have had a sober conversation among men; yet content yourselves
only to know truth for yourselves, to go to meetings, and exercise an
ordinary charity in the church, and an honest behaviour in the world, and
limit yourselves within those bounds; feeling little or no concern upon
your spirits, for the glory of the Lord in the prosperity of his truth in
the earth, more than to be glad that others succeed in such service.
Arise ye in the name and power of the Lord Jesus!  Behold how white the
fields are unto harvest, in this and other nations, and how few able and
faithful labourers there are to work therein!  Your country-folks,
neighbours, and kindred, want to know the Lord and his truth, and to walk
in it.  Does nothing lie at your door upon their account!  Search and
see, and lose no time, I beseech you, for the Lord is at hand.

I do not judge you; there is one that judgeth all men, and his judgment
is true.  You have mightily increased in your outward substance, may you
equally increase in your inward riches, and do good with both, while you
have a day to do good.  Your enemies would once have taken what you had,
from you, for his name's sake in whom you have believed; wherefore he has
given you much of the world, in the face of your enemies.  But O, let it
be your servant, and not your master! your diversion rather than your
business! let the Lord be chiefly in your eye, and ponder your ways, and
see if God has nothing more for you to do: and if you find yourselves
short in your account with him, then wait for his preparation, and be
ready to receive the word of command, and be not weary of well-doing,
when you have put your hand to the plough; and, assuredly, you shall
reap, if you faint not, the fruit of your heavenly labour in God's
everlasting kingdom.

And you, young convinced ones, be you entreated and exhorted to a
diligent and chaste waiting upon God, in the way of his blessed
manifestation and appearance of himself to you.  Look not out, but
within: let not another's liberty be your snare: neither act by
imitation, but by sense and feeling of God's power in yourselves: crush
not the tender buddings of it in your souls, nor over-run, in your
desires and warmness of affections, the holy and gentle motions of it.
Remember it is a still voice that speaks to us in this day, and that it
is not to be heard in the noises and hurries of the mind; but is
distinctly understood in a retired frame.  Jesus loved and chose
solitudes, often going to mountains, gardens, and sea sides, to avoid
crowds and hurries: to show his disciples it was good to be solitary, and
sit loose to the world.  Two enemies lie near your states, imagination
and liberty; but the plain, practical, living, holy truth, that has
convinced you, will preserve you, if you mind it in yourselves, and bring
all thoughts, inclinations, and affections, to the test of it, to see if
they are wrought in God, or of the enemy, or of your ownselves: so will a
true taste, discerning, and judgment, be preserved to you, of what you
should do and leave undone.  And in your diligence and faithfulness in
this way, you will come to inherit substance; and Christ, the eternal
wisdom, will fill your treasury.  And when you are converted, as well as
convinced, then confirm your brethren; and be ready to every good word
and work, that the Lord shall call you to: that you may be to his praise,
who has chosen you to be partakers, with the saints in light, of a
kingdom that cannot be shaken, an inheritance incorruptible in eternal
habitations.

And now, as for you that are the children of God's people, a great
concern is upon my spirit for your good and often are my knees bowed to
the God of your fathers for you, that you may come to be partakers of the
same divine life and power, that have been the glory of this day: that a
generation you may be to God, a holy nation, and a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, when all our heads are laid in the dust.  O! you
young men and women, let it not suffice you, that you are the children of
the people of the Lord; you must also be born again, if you will inherit
the kingdom of God.  Your fathers are but such after the flesh, and could
but beget you into the likeness of the first Adam; but you must be
begotten into the likeness of the second Adam, by a spiritual generation,
or you will not, you cannot, be of his children or offspring.  And
therefore look carefully about you, O ye children of the children of God;
consider your standing, and see what you are in relation to this divine
kindred, family, and birth.  Have you obeyed the light, and received and
walked in the Spirit, which is the incorruptible seed of the word and
kingdom of God, of which you must be born again?  God is no respecter of
persons.  The father cannot save or answer for the child, or the child
for the father; but in the sin thou sinnest thou shalt die; and in the
righteousness thou doest, through Christ Jesus, thou shalt live: for it
is the willing and obedient that shall eat the good of the land.  Be not
deceived, God is mocked.  Such as all nations and people sow, such they
shall reap at the hand of the just God.  And then your many and great
privileges, above the children of other people, will add weight in the
scale against you, if you choose not the way of the Lord.  For you have
had line upon line, and precept upon precept, and not only good doctrine
but good example; and which is more, you have been turned to, and
acquainted with, a principle in yourselves, which others too generally
have been ignorant of: and you know you may be as good as you please,
without the fear of frowns and blows, or being turned out of doors, and
forsaken of father and mother, for God's sake and his holy religion; as
has been the case of some of your fathers in the day they first entered
into this holy path.  And if you, after hearing and seeing the wonders
that God has wrought in the deliverance and preservation of them, through
a sea of troubles, and the manifold temporal, as well as spiritual,
blessings that he has filled them with, in the sight of their enemies,
should neglect and turn your backs upon so great and near a salvation,
you would not only be most ungrateful children to God and them, but must
expect that God will call the children of those that knew him not, to
take the crown out of your hands, and that your lot will be a dreadful
judgment at the hand of the Lord: but, O that it may never be so with any
of you!  The Lord forbid, saith my soul.

Wherefore, O ye young men and women! look to the rock of your fathers:
there is no other God but him, no other light but his, no other grace but
his, nor spirit but his, to convince you, quicken, and comfort you; to
lead, guide, and preserve you to God's everlasting kingdom.  So will you
be possessors as well as professors of the truth, embracing it, not only
by education, but judgment and conviction; from a sense begotten in your
souls, through the operation of the eternal Spirit and power of God; by
which you may come to be the seed of Abraham, through faith, and the
circumcision not made with hands; and so heirs of the promise made to the
fathers, of an incorruptible crown.  That, as I said before, a generation
you may be to God, holding up the profession of the blessed truth in the
life and power of it.  For formality in religion is nauseous to God and
good men; and the more so, where any form or appearance has been new and
peculiar, and begun and practised, upon a principle, with an uncommon
zeal and strictness.  Therefore I say, for you to fall flat and formal,
and continue the profession, without that salt and savour by which it is
come to obtain a good report among men, is not to answer God's love, or
your parents' care, or the mind of truth in yourselves, or in those that
are without: who, though they will not obey the truth, have sight and
sense enough to see if they do that make a profession of it.  For where
the divine virtue of it is not felt in the soul, and waited for and lived
in, imperfections will quickly break out, and show themselves, and detect
the unfaithfulness of such persons; and that their insides are not
seasoned with the nature of that holy principle which they profess.

Wherefore, dear children, let me entreat you to shut your eyes at the
temptations and allurements of this low and perishing world, and not
suffer your affections to be captivated by those lusts and vanities that
your fathers, for the truth's sake, long since turned their backs upon:
but as you believe it to be the truth, receive it into your hearts, that
you may become the children of God: so that it may never be said of you,
as the evangelist writes of the Jews in his time, that Christ, the true
light, "came to his own, but his own received him not; but to as many as
received him, to them he gave power to become the children of God; which
were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God;" a most close and comprehensive passage to this
occasion.  You exactly and peculiarly answer to those professing Jews, in
that you bear the name of God's people, by being the children, and
wearing of the form of God's people: and he, by his light in you, may be
very well said to come to his own, and if you obey it not, but turn your
backs upon it, and walk after the vanities of your minds, you will be of
those that received him not; which I pray God may never be your case and
judgment.  But that you may be thoroughly sensible of the many and great
obligations you lie under to the Lord for his love, and to your parents
for their care: and with all your heart, and all your soul, and all your
strength, turn to the Lord, to his gift and Spirit in you; and hear his
voice, and obey it, that you may seal to the testimony of your fathers,
by the truth and evidence of your own experience: that your children's
children may bless you, and the Lord for you, as those that delivered a
faithful example, as well as record of the truth of God unto them.  So
will the grey hairs of your dear parents, yet alive, go down to the grave
with joy, to see you the posterity of truth, as well as theirs: and that
not only their nature, but spirit, shall live in you when they are gone.

* * * * *

I shall conclude this account with a few words to those who are not of
our communion, into whose hands this may come; especially those of our
own nation.

* * * * *

Friends, as you are the sons and daughters of Adam, and my brethren after
the flesh, often and earnest have been my desires and prayers to God on
your behalf, that you may come to know your Creator to be your Redeemer,
and Restorer to the holy image that through sin you have lost, by the
power and Spirit of his Son Jesus Christ, whom he hath given for the
light and life of the world.  And O that you, who are called Christians,
would receive him into your hearts! for there it is you want him, and at
that door he stands knocking, that you might let him in; but you do not
open to him; you are full of other guests, so that a manger is his lot
among you now as well as of old.  Yet you are full of profession, as were
the Jews when he came among them, who knew him not, but rejected and
evily entreated him.  So that if you come not to the possession and
experience of what you profess, all your formality and religion will
stand you in no stead in the day of God's judgment.

I beseech you ponder with yourselves your eternal condition, and see what
title, what ground and foundation you have for your Christianity: if more
than a profession, and an historical belief of the gospel.  Have you
known the baptism of fire, and the Holy Ghost, and the fan of Christ that
winnows away the chaff in your minds, the carnal lusts, and affections;
that divine leaven of the kingdom, that, being received, leavens the
whole lump of man, sanctifying him throughout in body, soul, and spirit?
If this be not the ground of your confidence, you are in a miserable
state.

You will say, perhaps, that though you are sinners, and live in daily
commission of sin, and are not sanctified, as I have been speaking, yet
you have faith in Christ, who has borne the curse for you, and in him you
are complete by faith, his righteousness being imputed to you.

But, my friends, let me entreat you not to deceive yourselves, in so
important a point, as is that of your immortal souls.  If you have true
faith in Christ, your faith will make you clean; it will sanctify you:
for the saints' faith was their victory of old: by this they overcame sin
within, and sinful man without.  And if thou art in Christ, thou walkest
not after the flesh, but after the Spirit, whose fruits are manifest.
Yea, thou art a new creature: new made, new fashioned, after God's will
and mould.  Old things are done away, and, behold, all things are become
new: new love, desires, will, affections, and practices.  It is not any
longer thou that livest; (thou disobedient, carnal, worldly one;) but it
is Christ that liveth in thee; and to live is Christ, and to die is thy
eternal gain: because thou art assured, that thy corruptible shall put on
incorruption, and thy mortal, immortality, and that thou hast a glorious
house, eternal in the heavens, that will never wax old or pass away.  All
this follows being in Christ, as heat follows fire, and light the sun.

Therefore have a care how you presume to rely upon such a notion, as that
you are in Christ, whilst in your old fallen nature.  For what communion
hath light with darkness, or Christ with Belial?  Hear what the beloved
disciple tells you: "If we say we have fellowship with God, and walk in
darkness, we lie, and do not the truth."  That is, if we go on in a
sinful way, are captivated by our carnal affections, and are not
converted to God, we walk in darkness, and cannot possibly in that state
have any fellowship with God.  Christ clothes them with his
righteousness, that receive his grace in their hearts, and deny
themselves, and take up his cross daily, and follow him.  Christ's
righteousness makes men inwardly holy; of holy minds, wills, and
practices.  It is not the less Christ's, because we have it; for it is
ours, not by nature, but by faith and adoption: it is the gift of God.
But, still, though not ours, as of or from ourselves, (for in that sense
it is Christ's, for it is of and from him,) yet it is ours, and must be
ours, in possession, efficacy, and enjoyment, to do us any good; or
Christ's righteousness will profit us nothing.  It was after this manner
that he was made to the primitive Christians, righteousness,
sanctification, justification, and redemption; and if ever you will have
the comfort, kernel, and marrow of the Christian religion, thus you must
come to learn and obtain it.

Now, my friends, by what you have read, you may perceive that God has
visited a poor people among you, with this saving knowledge and
testimony, whom he has upheld and increased to this day, notwithstanding
the fierce opposition they have met withal.  Despise not the meanness of
this appearance: it was, and yet is, we know, a day of small things and
of small account with too many; and many hard and ill names are given to
it; but it is of God, it came from him, because it leads to him.  This we
know, but we cannot make another to know it, unless he will take the same
way to know it that we took.  The world talks of God, but what do they
do?  They pray for power, but reject the principle in which it is.  If
you would know God, and worship and serve God as you should do, you must
come to the means he has ordained and given for that purpose.  Some seek
it in books, some in learned men; but what they look for is in
themselves, (though not of themselves,) but they overlook it.  The voice
is too still, the seed too small, and the light shineth in darkness; they
are abroad, and so cannot divide the spoil: but the woman that lost her
silver, found it at home, after she had lighted her candle, and swept her
house.  Do you so too, and you shall find what Pilate wanted to know,
viz. Truth.  Truth in the inward parts, so valuable in the sight of God.

The light of Christ within, who is the light of the world, and so a light
to you, that tells you the truth of your condition, leads all, that take
heed unto it, out of darkness into God's marvellous light.  For light
grows upon the obedient; it is sown for the righteous, and their way is a
shining light, that shines forth more and more to the perfect day.

Wherefore, O friends, turn in, turn in, I beseech you: where is the
poison, there is the antidote.  There you want Christ, and there you must
find him; and blessed be God, there you may find him.  Seek and you shall
find, I testify for God.  But then you must seek aright, with your whole
heart, as men that seek for their lives, yea for their eternal lives:
diligently, humbly, patiently, as those that can taste no pleasure,
comfort, or satisfaction in any thing else, unless you find him whom your
souls want to know and love above all.  O it is a travail, a spiritual
travail! let the carnal, profane world, think and say as it will.  And
