roaring stream, and commended her to the Great and Good Shepherd.

Mr. Stoddard mentions the visit of Mr. Khanikoff, a Russian
scientific gentleman, in the summer of 1852, to obtain information
concerning the elevations and climates of these districts. Lake
Oroomiah was ascertained to be about four thousand one hundred feet
above the ocean, and the city four thousand five hundred feet, the
plain sloping down gently towards the lake. Mount Seir rises two
thousand eight hundred and thirty feet above the city, and seven
thousand three hundred and thirty feet above the ocean; differing
not greatly, in real height, from the White Mountains in New
Hampshire. The mission residence, on the mountain side, is a
thousand feet above the city. The mountains of Koordistan, some of
which are capped with snow through all the year, often rise to the
height of twelve thousand feet, and one peak is supposed to be
fourteen thousand feet above the sea. Mr. Khanikoff afterwards
became Russian Consul General at Tabriz, and proved himself a
sincere and valuable friend to the mission.

Failure of health constrained Mr. Stocking to return, with his
family, to the United States, and he was never able to resume his
missionary labors. Since his lamented decease, a son has taken his
place among the Nestorians.

It should be gratefully acknowledged, that violence towards
missionaries has almost everywhere been the exception, and not the
rule. It has been so even in Koordistan. But Mr. Cochran, while
travelling with several Nestorians through Nochea, was assailed by
five robbers in the employ of a Koordish chief, named Seyed Khan
Bey. As Moslems the assailants were of course reckless of the life
of Christians; and, for a time, the party were apprehensive of being
murdered. But at last, while the freebooters were intent on their
prey, the company fled up the steep mountain side, leaving their
effects. Their horses were afterwards recovered.

The year 1854 opened with a revival in both the seminaries. At the
commencement of it, scarcely half the students in either of the
institutions gave evidence of piety, which was an unusually small
proportion. The thought of this, and especially that several of the
senior class were about going forth into the world without Christ,
led to earnest prayer, and to efforts which were followed by an
immediate blessing. The special religious interest continued several
weeks, and extended to the large village of Geog Tapa, but the
results appear not to have been distinctly reported.

The eighteen young men who graduated in 1854, were of higher promise
than any previous class. Several of the performances at their
graduation were very gratifying, particularly the valedictory
addresses, pronounced by a young man of eighteen, which would not
suffer in matter or manner, Dr. Perkins thought, by the side of
similar addresses at any American college. Nearly all were hopefully
pious, and were returning to homes widely distant from each other.

In some parts of the field there was much enthusiasm. In Geog Tapa,
for example, about seventy adults had commenced learning to read.
The mode pursued there and elsewhere, was to induce teachers,
scholars in the village schools, and other readers to teach adults,
by the promise of a Bible, Testament, or other book, if they were
successful. At an examination, the forenoon was devoted to the
girls' school, taught by two graduates of the female seminary, and
the afternoon to the Sabbath-school. Such a crowd of Nestorians was
present, that it was necessary in the afternoon, to meet in a grove.
The first class examined in the Sabbath-school consisted of men from
twenty to seventy years of age, headed by the chief man of the
village. Then followed a class of women, fifty or sixty in number,
from forty to fifty years of age. These classes, not being able to
read, had been taught orally. Next came a class of men, about twenty
in number, and a class of twenty-three women, who had recently
learned to read. These had been taught individually by boys
connected with the village schools, each of whom received a copy
of the Old Testament as a reward. On the plain of Oroomiah
seventy-three free schools were reported, with more than a thousand
boys, and one hundred and fifty girls and women as pupils.

In Gawar, two schools embraced fourteen boarding and thirty-two day
scholars. Fourteen of these were from Jeloo, Bass, and Tekhoma
districts. Among them were four deacons, four from the family of the
bishop of Jeloo, and nearly all were from prominent families. They
were wild mountaineers, and in some thing's difficult to manage, but
they acquired knowledge rapidly and with delight; and the constant
study of the Bible wrought a perceptible change in them. In the
Bootan districts, hitherto inaccessible to missionary influence,
there was now a strong desire for schools, and for the labors of
evangelical teachers.

The New Testament in the modern language was beginning to be
circulated among the people; a much enlarged edition of the hymn
book had been issued, and a volume, entitled "Scripture Facts," had
a wide circulation. Mr. Perkins had completed a translation of
Doddridge's "Rise and Progress," and was engaged in translating
Barth's "Church History."

Mr. Crane died at Gawar on the 27th of August, 1854, at the
commencement of a career of bright promise. So ardently was he
beloved by the people there, that at the funeral service the whole
assembly repeatedly broke forth into weeping. The afflicted widow
was called, within a week of her husband's death, to mourn also the
loss of a beloved son, and removed to Mount Seir, where she was a
valued helper in the mission. She returned home in 1857. Mr. Rhea
and Miss Harris were united in marriage in October, and spent the
winter at Gawar.

The audacity of the papal missionaries, backed by the French
embassy, was marvelous. The American mission having been importuned
to open a school in the large village of Khosrova, in Salmas, where
popery predominated, two young men, graduates of the seminary, were
successively sent thither. The first was several times driven away,
through the instigation of the Lazarists, and those who were
friendly to the mission also became objects of persecution. The
second was assailed by the mob, headed, by the French chief of the
Lazarists, and by a bishop. These two men, with their own hands,
threw him into a canal, and called on the people to drown or kill
him. He was mercifully delivered, but narrowly escaped with his
life. The matter being reported to Mr. Abbott, the English Consul at
Tabriz, the chief of the Lazarists, with some fifteen of his
satellites, went thither, and apprehending a cool reception from the
Consul, whose protection the Lazarists enjoyed in common with the
American missionaries, he applied for assistance to the Russian
Consul, proposing to transfer his passports to his hands. Mr.
Khanikoff refused, and severely rebuked them for their conduct. Mr.
Abbott obtained an order from the Governor of Azerbijan to lay heavy
fines on the Mussulman deputies of Khosrova for withholding
protection, and on the principal papists for their acts of violence,
with the requirement of bonds for future good behavior.

Messrs. Abbott and Stevens, English consuls at Tabriz and Teheran,
kindly exerted their protecting influence, and Mr. Cochran
subsequently spent a week at Khosrova, and had his house thronged
every evening with from fifty to a hundred and fifty people, eager
to listen to the preaching of the Word. The ecclesiastics raged, and
stirred up the agent of the master of the village (who lives in
Tabriz) to endeavor to drive our brother away; but the attempt
failed. Sixty houses gave their names and seals, wishing to become
Protestants. They were exceedingly desirous of having a missionary,
and even threatened, good-naturedly, to take one by force to live
among them.

The reader may remember what Dr. Lobdell said of the course of this
mission in respect to the forming of distinct churches.[1] Dr.
Perkins, writing in May, 1855, gives the following account of the
progress of the reformation towards that result: "Our communion
occurred about two weeks ago, and nearly one hundred communicants
sat down to the table of the Lord, including our mission. It was a
solemn and delightful season. Among the native brethren present were
Mar Yohannan and Mar Elias; and most of the others, of both sexes,
were educated and quite intelligent; but, what is of far greater
importance, they were, as we trust, true Christians. It would be
easy at once to triple the number from those who, in the judgment of
charity, are the children of God; but we think it better to
introduce them somewhat gradually and cautiously to the ordinance;
while, at the same time, we would not too long allow any of the
sheep and lambs of Christ's flock to suffer for want of this
important means of grace. It is exerting a powerful influence on
those who participate in it, and on many others; and it cannot fail
ultimately to produce the effect either of redeeming the ordinance
from abuses, as administered in Nestorian churches, or drawing off
the pious part of the people to a separate observance of it. We are
quite willing that the scriptural administration of the ordinance to
the pious Nestorians should work out either of these results, in the
legitimate time and way, or both of them, as the Lord shall direct."

[1] Chapter xxvii.

Some months later, notice was given that, in the future, instead of
personal invitations, the door would be thrown open for all who
should consider themselves worthy candidates. Uniting with the
missionaries would thus seem more like a voluntary and public
profession of religion. None were to be received, however, to the
communion without a private examination. On one sacramental occasion
about one hundred united with the missionaries, and more than thirty
of them for the first time. A large number were also present as
spectators, many of them deeply interested.

Deacon Guwergis of Tergawer, the well known "Mountain Evangelist,"
died on the 12th of March, called suddenly from earnest and most
useful labors to his reward.

The course of the Persian government towards the mission and its
friends, at this time, was very unsatisfactory. Asker Khan, a
general in the Persian army, was appointed to investigate the truth
of certain charges brought by the papists against the American
missionaries, and early evinced a most unfriendly feeling towards
them, and a partiality for their accusers. Indeed, he took no pains
to conceal his hostility, and did all he could to stop the schools
and other evangelizing agencies. But the missionaries had the aid,
as far as aid could be rendered, of the Hon. C. A. Murray, the
English Ambassador, and of Mr. Abbott at Tabriz, and Mr. Stevens at
Teheran, and also of Mr. Khanikoff, the Russian Consul General at
Tabriz. The disturbed state of political relations, and especially
the want of harmony between the English and Persian governments,
made it impossible for these friends to accomplish what they desired
to do in their behalf. After withdrawing from Teheran, Mr. Murray
visited Oroomiah, and the correspondence which then passed between
him and the missionaries, showed his desire to aid both the
suffering Nestorians and the missionary work. In his absence, the
Russian Consul General became their protector,--"at first," as he
said, "unofficially, but with very good heart; and officially,
whenever he should have the right so to do." It is remarkable, and
reveals a protecting Providence, that no department of labor, with
the exception of village schools, very materially suffered at this
time.

In February, 1856, there began to be indications of the special
influences of the Holy Spirit in some of the villages occupied by
native helpers; and very soon there were marked indications of
another work of grace in the two seminaries. The feeling in both the
schools became very general. The voice of prayer was heard on every
side; and a large proportion of those who were not pious, appeared
to be seeking in earnest the way of life. On the 30th of March, Mr.
Cochran reported that, with the exception of those most recently
admitted, nearly all were hoping that they had passed from death
unto life. In the villages, also, there were cases of peculiar
interest.

Mr. and Mrs. Rhea were alone in Gawar. In the autumn it was deemed
advisable, in view of the insurrectionary state of Koordistan, that
they should withdraw for a time. They at first felt it their duty to
remain; but the progress of events soon made it plain that Gawar was
an unsuitable place for a lone lady, especially when winter should
render it impossible for her to remove. Mr. Rhea, while at Oroomiah,
continued, as far as possible, to superintend the labors of the
native helpers in Memikan, and he returned the next summer, with
Mrs. Rhea, to their mountain home. The Koordish chieftains, who had
proudly boasted, that they would put their heels upon the necks of
the poor Christians, were soon fleeing in dismay before the
advancing Ottomans.

Mr. Stoddard wrote, in September, 1856, that for six months, in
consequence of the withdrawal from Persia of the English Ambassador,
the missionaries had been without any political protection, and at
the mercy of a hostile government, yet there was perhaps never a
time when their work presented a more cheering aspect on the whole.
The seminaries, being on the mission premises, suffered less
annoyance than did the village schools, which were scattered widely
over the plain. The teachers in these schools had many of them been
educated in the seminaries, and were altogether superior as a class
to what they were a few years before; and thus the standard of
instruction was raised, and more religious influence was exerted
over the pupils. Nor was there ever a time when more people were
brought within the sound of the gospel, or when there were more
stated attendants on preaching. And much use was made of the Monthly
Concert on the first Monday of the month. The whole day was devoted
to the natives. "Early Monday morning," writes Mr. Stoddard, "some
of our friends arrive from the nearer villages, and others are
continually dropping in during the forenoon. At about the dinner
hour, nearly all are assembled. We occupy considerable time with
them in private, or in little companies, each one attending to the
helpers under his care, in hearing the monthly reports of their
labors and trials, their hopes and fears, and intermingling the
reports with religious conversation and prayer. At three in the
afternoon we assemble, and spend an hour or two in public religious
exercises. In the evening a similar meeting is held, when the
natives not only speak freely, but often occupy nearly the whole
time, leaving the brother who has charge of the meeting little to
do. It very often happens, also, that after the meeting has been
together two hours, there are several who feel that they want to be
heard, if but for a few moments." These monthly occasions Mr.
Stoddard enjoyed exceedingly, and came to look upon the "First
Monday" as the great day of the month.

In October, Messrs. Stoddard and Cochran and Miss Fiske made a tour
of three weeks in the mountains of Koordistan. At Gawar they were
joined by Mr. and Mrs. Rhea, and visited the districts of Ishtazin
and Bass. From that point Messrs. Cochran and Rhea extended their
journey to Amadiah, and returned to their party at Tekhoma, a week
later. Thence they passed through the districts of Tal, and up the
Zab to Gawar. The fact that American ladies traversed in safety the
gorges and precipices of central Koordistan, was an encouragement to
native helpers and their families to reside in those difficult
regions; but such tours were too fatiguing, probably, to be often
repeated.

The object of the visit to Amadiah was to make further explorations
with reference to the formation of a station on the western side of
the mountains. The mass of the people were on that side, and could
not be advantageously reached from Oroomiah. The eastern district
was fast becoming supplied with pious helpers, and it seemed very
desirable for that section of the country to share in this
initiatory work, before anything occurred to hinder it. The
convictions of the brethren as to the desirableness of commencing a
station there were much strengthened, and Mr. Cochran offered his
own services for that purpose.

November was ushered in by an event deeply interesting to the
mission families; a public profession of religion by the three
eldest children of the mission; and hope was entertained as to the
piety of some of the younger.

Asker Khan, agent of the Persian government at Oroomiah, now became
more troublesome than ever, resorting to every form of annoyance in
his power. At the instance of Mr. Khanikoff, Dr. Wright and Mr.
Stoddard visited him at Tabriz, to see what could be done to induce
the government to check the doings of its agent. But in this they
failed, though the Consul did all he could to assist them. Even the
Turkish Consul volunteered his aid, but almost in vain. Through Mr.
Khanikoff, they learned that the orders from Teheran to the Kaim
Makam required him to forbid the labors of the missionaries in the
province of Salmas; to see that no school was established save in
the two places where missionaries resided; and that the number of
the schools should not exceed thirty, nor the number of pupils one
hundred and fifty. He was to require that no girl receive
instruction, at all events, in the same school with boys. The
missionaries were not to induce any person to change his religion,
and were to enter into a written engagement not to send forth
preachers. Books conflicting with existing religions in Persia were
not to be printed, and native teachers and preachers were to be
approved by Mar Yoosuf and Mar Gabriel, two unprincipled and bitter
opposers of evangelical religion. Such were the orders issued, it is
believed at the instigation of the French, by the Prime Minister of
Persia, and Messrs. Stoddard and Wright, unable to secure even delay
in carrying them out, returned to Oroomiah. The mission now, at the
suggestion of the Consul, made a formal application for protection
to the Russian Ambassador at Teheran.

Asker Khan was assassinated six days after the return of the
brethren from Tabriz, by a Koordish chief at Mergawer. But his
coadjutor, Asker Aly Khan, governor of the Nestorians, pursued the
same persecuting course, urged on by the Kaim Makam at Tabriz. The
career of the Kaim Makam, however, was now short, for in January,
1857, the populace of that city, exasperated by his oppression, rose
in a body, broke into his palace, plundered it, and compelled him to
flee for his life. He was subsequently summoned to Teheran, and on
his approach to that city, was stripped of his honors, mounted on a
pack saddle, and thus led to prison, while a fine was imposed on him
of a hundred thousand tomans.






CHAPTER XXIX.

THE NESTORIANS.

1857-1863.


The sojourn of three weeks at Tabriz had been a source of constant
anxiety to Messrs. Stoddard and Wright, and the former had
premonitory symptoms of fever on his way home. But he was not
apprehensive on that account, and finding Mr. Cochran and two of the
native teachers disabled by sickness, he devoted much time and labor
to the Seminary, and to the correspondence which had accumulated in
his absence. Yet fever was threatening, and on the 22d of December,
ten days after his return, he became decidedly ill. On the 25th he
was confined to his bed, where he lay for two and thirty days, while
the fever ran its fatal course. He died in great peace January 26,
1857, in the thirty-ninth year of his age. The public funeral
services were in Syriac, and his remains were borne to their last
resting-place by graduates of the seminary, whose conversion dated
back to the first revival.

The mind of Mr. Stoddard was cast in a fine mould. The older members
of the Board remember him at the Annual Meeting in Pittsfield in
1849. My own thought at the time was, that were an angel present in
human form, his appearance and deportment would be much like those
of Mr. Stoddard. A calm, seraphic joy shone in his face, and all
that he said and did was just what all delighted to hear and see.
His presence did much to give a character to that meeting. Mr.
Stoddard had a frail body, and an almost feminine grace of person,
like the popular impression of that disciple who leaned on the bosom
of his Lord; but, like that disciple, he had strength of principle
and inflexibility of purpose. His consecration to the missionary
work was no sudden impulse. It was the result of repeated, and
sometimes unexpected, meetings and conferences with Dr. Perkins,
whose sagacious eye had marked him for a missionary. But the
question once settled, it was settled for life. He went whole-souled
into the work, and never doubted that his call to it was of God. His
talents, which were of a high order, and his learning, which excited
the admiration of Persian nobles and princes, were unreservedly
consecrated. "He goes among the churches," said the lamented
Professor B. B. Edwards, of the Andover Seminary, "burning like a
seraph. So heavenly a spirit has hardly ever been seen in this
country."

Mr. Stoddard's daughter Harriet followed him to the grave within two
months, at the age of thirteen, a victim to the same disease. She
was sustained by the same calm trust in Christ, which lighted up the
last hours of her excellent father.

Dr. Perkins wrote in 1857, that when the mission was commenced,
twenty-four years before, hardly a score of Nestorian men were able
to read intelligently, and but a single woman, the sister of the
Patriarch. The people had no printed books, and but few copies even
of portions of the Bible in manuscript, and these were all in the
ancient Syriac, and almost unintelligible. Their spoken language,
the modern Syriac, had not been reduced to writing. Their moral
degradation was extreme. Still there was a remarkable simplicity in
their conception of religious doctrines, and a remarkable absence of
bigotry in their feelings, as compared with other oriental sects,
and they were very accessible to the missionaries. The change had
been great. Of the fifty-six in the male seminary when he wrote,
thirty were hopefully pious; and so were ninety-one of the one
hundred and fifty who had been connected with it. These were the
fruits of seven revivals. Of the one hundred and three who had been
connected with the female seminary, sixty, or more than one-half,
gave good evidence of conversion; and the same might be said of
three fourths who were then in the school. A large portion of the
young men who had left the seminary, were either preachers of the
gospel, or very competent teachers in the village school; and the
greater part of the religious graduates of the other seminary were
married to those missionary helpers. This seminary had been blessed
with eight revivals. The instruction in both institutions had been
almost wholly in the native tongue.

The entire Bible had been translated into the spoken language, which
the mission had reduced to a written form; and two thousand
intelligent readers, the result of the schools, had been supplied
with the sacred volume. Indeed, the Scriptures had been printed and
given to the people in the ancient Peschito version, as well as in
the spoken tongue. To these were added valuable works on
experimental and practical religion, for the use of the schools, and
to meet the wants of a community in the early stages of a Christian
civilization.

Though separate churches had not been organized, none but pious
Nestorians, for the last two or three years, had been admitted to
communion with the mission church. The number who had thus communed
was about two hundred, and it was thought that from one hundred and
fifty to two hundred more were worthy of a place at the Lord's
table.

The French Jesuits and their emissaries had been a sore trial, but
their success had not been great; and they had probably been useful,
by stimulating the mission and the pious Nestorians in their
Master's service.

Mrs. Rhea had been two years a member of the mission as Miss Harris,
and three as Mrs. Rhea. Her active and useful life closed on the 7th
of December, 1857, at the age of twenty-nine years and five months.
"Her sick room," says Dr. Wright, "was a hallowed place, where the
Sun of Righteousness shone with wonderful brightness."

Another revival of religion occurred in both the seminaries, at the
opening of the year 1858, which was extended to Geog Tapa and other
villages. Miss Fiske, in charge of the female seminary, relates a
fact of much significance. She writes: "Some of the girls' pious
friends came to pray with them yesterday, and I was led to inquire
how many of them have a pious father or mother (or both), or older
brother or sister; and I was surprised to find, as I think you will
be to know, that about two thirds of them have such praying friends.
I contrast this with the facts respecting their friends in 1846, and
feel that we ought to be thankful and humble before our God, for
what he has done for them."

Mr. Rhea spent the winter of 1857 and 1858 on the western side of
the Koordish mountains, and everywhere found an open door for
preaching to the rude dwellers among the rocks. In Shermin, Usgan,
and Argin, Nestorian villages southwest of Amadiah, he was cordially
welcomed to their houses and churches, and had large congregations
that gave earnest attention to his preaching. Snow fell eleven out
of fifteen days, and when ready to return to Amadiah, he found the
way entirely blocked up. Mr. Marsh having joined him from Mosul,
they spent a number of days among large papal villages in that
region, where they found ample opportunity for preaching the Gospel;
and several individuals seemed earnest inquirers after the way of
salvation from the power of sin. With reference to Mosul and
vicinity, Mr. Rhea writes: "I am deeply impressed with the evidence,
that the labors of the mission here have not been in vain, and that
their results are not to be measured by the number of names on the
church roll. The Jacobite Church here is now shaken to its
foundations; and it cannot be doubted, that whatever of feeling
after something better exists among many of its members is owing to
the steady light of the Protestant church streaming in upon its
darkness." He was absent six months, and for one third of this time
was in Mosul. He regarded the proper field of the mountain branch of
