would look for even in men who could thus wantonly spoil fine music[25].

The form and size of the book were determined by the type, chosen because
it was the only one that I could find of any beauty; and I wished that my
book should in this respect give an example, and be worthy both of the
music and its sacred use[26]. Moreover a book from which two or three
singers can read is more convenient in the choir than a multiplicity of
small books; and the music being in full score, its intention cannot be
mistaken: for it must be understood that most of these tunes are set in
the manner proper for voices, but unsuitable for the piano or other keyed
instrument; and the book is intended to encourage unaccompanied singing.
A choir that cannot sing unaccompanied cannot sing at all; and this is
not an uncommon condition in our churches, where choirs with varying
success accompany the organ. A proper manner of sustained singing, and
the true artistic pleasure that should govern it, will never be obtained
until these conditions are reversed.

There is one novelty which I am responsible for introducing, namely the
four-part vocal settings of certain early plain-song melodies. The later
plain-song tunes, such as No. 44, are, I suppose[27], as fit for this
treatment as any other tunes of the same date; but in the case of the
earlier melodies, which were composed before the invention of any
complete system of harmony, it is generally agreed that they should be
sung in unison, in fact the more elaborate of them cannot be sung
otherwise. To give four-part settings of any of these early tunes calls
therefore for an explanation, which I will give as briefly as possible.

When these tunes are sung, they are usually accompanied, and this implies
a harmonic treatment. Now the best harmonic treatment which they can have
is the Palestrinal, because that was the earliest complete system, and
therefore the nearest to their time, and also because we may rely on the
truth of its interpretation of the modes for the reason that Palestrina
had never heard any music that was not modal. A modern musician, if he
attempts to go back beyond Palestrina, must draw on his imagination, and
while his aim must be to produce something artistically and technically
less perfect than Palestrina's system, his work, when it is done, will
carry neither authority nor conviction.

If then we take Palestrina's harmonic interpretation of the modes, it
seems to me that there can be no objection to giving vocal parts to the
simpler hymns. If it is preferred to sing them in unison, the modal
settings will be a guide to the accompanist. But it is my opinion that
such settings as I offer will really please, and they may possibly do
something to bring these tunes, which have a unique, unmatchable beauty,
into favour with choirs that dislike the effort and waste of unison
singing. These settings offer no difficulty of execution all; _that is
necessary is that the under voices should know the melody_: and though
this is not generally thought requisite in a modern hymn, it is asking
nothing extra of a choir that would sing the plain-song tunes; for even
if they are sung in unison, they must first be known by heart (otherwise
their rhythmical freedom, which defies notation, and is indispensable to
their beauty, cannot be approached), and when once a choir has got thus
far, the under parts, being phrased with the melody, will easily follow
it. An explanation of the notation of these settings is given in the note
to Hymn 29. Congregational singing of hymns is much to be desired; but,
though difficult to obtain, it is not permissible to provoke it by
undignified music. Its only sound musical basis is good melody: good
melodies should therefore be offered to the people, such as it has been
the object of this book to bring together; and they should have as much
freedom and variety of rhythm as possible. If some of the good melodies
are, owing to their wide compass or other difficulty, unfit for
congregational singing, this is an advantage; because neither are all
hymn-words equally suitable. Most of the words in this book are suitable
for congregational singing; some are not. A hymn-book which is intended
entirely for congregational use must be faulty in one of two ways; either
it will offer for congregational singing hymns whose sacred and intimate
character is profaned by such a treatment, or it will have to omit some
of the most beautiful hymns in the language: but congregations differ
much, not only with regard to the music in which they are capable of
joining, but also as to the sort of words which best express their
religious emotion.


In the following notes the left-hand side of the page is given to the
words, the right to the music of each hymn: in the latter column will be
found full information as to the text of the music, the source whence it
is derived, &c., together with a careful account of every departure that
has been made from the originals. It is hoped that this will not only be
of general interest, but that it may inspire confidence in the text of
the book, and ensure the reception which its authority demands. For the
text of the music, and all the statements in the notes, I am responsible;
excepting those portions of the notes which are therein assigned to their
proper authorities, and in these I am responsible for the correctness of
the quotations and references, in which I have done my best to secure
accuracy. I owe much to the kindness of Mr. W. Barclay Squire at the
British Museum; I have also to thank Mr. Godfrey Arkwright for the loan
of some rare books, and Dr. Chas. Wood of Cambridge for two settings and
occasional reading of music proofs; in which latter task I gratefully
record the help of Mr. J. S. Liddle and Dr. Percy Buck. To Mr. Miles
Birket Foster I owe the three trios by Jeremy Clark, and to the Revs. W.
H. Frere and G. H. Palmer the text of the plain-song melodies, and the
information concerning them which is given in the following notes: it is
due to the generosity with which they put their learning and judgement at
my disposal that I am able to offer these tunes with the same confidence
as the rest of the book. Professor Wooldridge, having co-operated with me
throughout, has allowed his name to appear on the title page.


[22]No. 28 is a good example of this. See also No. 98.

[23]No. 57 is a good example. The line _Du bist mein, und ich bin dein_,
  corresponds in stanza 2 with _Wenn die Welt in Truemmer fallt_, and in
  stanza 4 with _Elend, Noth, Kreuz, Schmach und Tod_. Again in No. 77
  the opening phrase, _Mon Dieu, mon Dieu_, of the twenty-second psalm
  needs music which conditions the other stanzas severely. Again the weak
  apologetic latter half of the German hymn _Herzliebster Jesu_, No. 42,
  is irreconcilably out of the key with the pathetic grief of the
  beginning. Cases in which caesuras and grammatical breaks are
  inconsistent are numberless.

[24]See note to Hymn 90. Other english hymns altered for practical
  purposes in this book are Nos. 19, 35, 51, last verse of 52, 66, 94,
  and 96.

[25]I give illustrations of these words in notes to Hymns 27, 54, 58, 63,
  68, 84, and 98.

[26]The cheapness is not the direct cause of the ugliness of our common
  hymn-books, nor is their ugliness the cause of their cheapness. If many
  copies of a book are sold, they can be sold cheaply; if only a few,
  then the initial expense, which is much the same whether the book be
  beautiful or ugly, must be shared between those few buyers and the
  author. But thus it comes about indirectly for cheapness to be the
  cause of meanness and ugliness, because in a larger market there is
  greater indifference to artistic excellence of all kinds, and from
  habit a preference for what is inferior. In a large edition this book
  could be sold as cheaply as another.

[27]I state here once for all that in musical matters I offer my opinion
  with becoming humility.



ADVERTISEMENT


THE YATTENDON HYMNAL.

Edited by Robert Bridges and Professor H. Ellis Wooldridge. Containing
  100 hymns and 4 voice-parts. Printed at the Oxford University Press,
  1899. May be obtained of Henry Frowde, Oxford Warehouse, Amen Corner,
  London, E.C., or through any bookseller. Price, 4to boards, 1. A few
  copies of the Folio, price 4, are still to be had.


THE WORD-BOOK OF THE
YATTENDON HYMNAL,

Which contains a full list of the music, and is called,

_THE SMALL HYMN-BOOK,_

may be had of B. H. Blackwell, Broad Street, Oxford, or through any
bookseller. Price 1_s._ 6_d._


Oxford: Horace Hart, Printer to the University






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Practical Discourse on Some
Principles of Hymn-Singing, by Robert Bridges

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SOME PRINCIPLES OF HYMN-SINGING ***

***** This file should be named 21722.txt or 21722.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/7/2/21722/

Produced by Stephen Hutcheson (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet
