they are done unconsciously by the person who does them. It is thus with
the mind of Christ in this degree, which continually develops, as the
soul is more transformed in Him, and becomes more thoroughly one with
Him.

But are there no crosses in this condition? As the soul is strong with
the strength of God Himself, God lays upon it more crosses and heavier
ones than before; but they are borne divinely. Formerly the cross
charmed it; it was loved and cherished; now it is not thought of, but is
suffered to go and come; and the cross itself becomes God, like all
other things. This does not involve the cessation of suffering, but of
the sorrow, the anxiety, the bitterness of suffering. It is true that
the crosses are no longer crosses, but God. In the former stages, the
cross is virtue, and is exalted more and more as the condition is more
advanced: here the soul feels it to be God, like the rest; all that
constitutes the life of this soul, all that it has, moment by moment,
being God to it.

The outward appearance of these persons is quite ordinary, and nothing
unusual is observed in them except by those who are capable of
understanding them.

All is seen in God, and in its true light; therefore this state is not
subject to deception. There are no visions, revelations, ecstasies,
ravishments, or translations. All these things do not belong to this
state, which is above them all. This way is simple, pure, and naked,
seeing nothing out of God; and thus seeing all as God sees it, and with
His eyes.




_PART II._




CHAPTER I.

MORE PARTICULAR DESCRIPTION OF SOME OF THE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE DIVINE
RESURRECTION LIFE--TRUE LIBERTY AND THE RISEN LIFE, IN DISTINCTION FROM
THAT WHICH IS NOT SO, OF WHICH JOB IS AN ILLUSTRATION--COMMENCEMENT OF
THE APOSTOLIC LIFE--ITS FUNCTIONS AND ITS FRUITS--ON THE PRACTICE OF
VIRTUE, PARTICULARLY OF HUMILITY--BLESSEDNESS OF BEING LOST IN
GOD--RARITY OF PERFECT ABANDONMENT--RAYS OF GLORY ESCAPED FROM WITHIN.


I omitted to say that this is where true liberty begins; not, as some
imagine, a liberty which necessitates idleness; that would be
imprisonment rather than liberty, fancying ourselves free because,
having an aversion to our own works, we no longer practise them. The
liberty of which I speak is of a different nature; it does all things
easily which God would have done, and the more easily in proportion to
the duration and the painfulness of the incapacity to do them which we
have previously experienced. I confess I do not understand the
resurrection state of certain Christians, who profess to have attained
it, and who yet remain all their lives powerless and destitute; for here
the soul takes up a true life. The actions of a raised man are the
actions of life; and if the soul remain lifeless, I say that it may be
dead or buried, but not risen. A risen soul should be able to perform
without difficulty all the actions which it has performed in the past,
only they would be done in God. Did not Lazarus, after his resurrection,
exercise all the functions of life as formerly, and Jesus Christ after
His resurrection was willing to eat and to converse with men. And so of
those who believe themselves to be risen with Christ, and who are
nevertheless stunted in their spiritual growth and incapable of
devotion,--I say, that they do not possess a resurrection life, for
there everything is restored to the soul a hundred-fold. There is a
beautiful illustration of this in the case of Job, whose history I
consider a mirror of the spiritual life. First God robbed him of his
wealth, which we may consider as setting forth gifts and graces; then of
his children; this signifies the destruction of natural sensibilities,
and of our own works, which are as our children and our most cherished
possessions: then God deprived him of his health, which symbolises the
loss of virtue; then He touched his person, rendering him an object of
horror and contempt. It even appears that this holy man was guilty of
sin, and failed in resignation; he was accused by his friends of being
justly punished for his crimes; there was no healthy part left in him.
But after he had been brought down to the dunghill, and reduced as it
were to a corpse, did not God restore everything to him, his wealth, his
children, his health, and his life?

It is the same with spiritual resurrection; everything is restored, with
a wonderful power to use it without being defiled by it, clinging to it
without appropriating it as before. All is done in God, and things are
used as though they were not used. It is here that true liberty and true
life are found. "If we have been planted in the likeness of Christ's
death, we shall be also in the likeness of His resurrection" (Rom. vi.
5). Can there be freedom where there are powerlessness and restrictions?
No; "If the Son shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed," but with
His liberty.

This is where true liberty begins. Nothing that God desires is difficult
to us, or costs us anything; and if a person is called to preach, to
instruct, &c., he does it with a marvellous facility, without the
necessity of preparing a discourse, being well able to practise what
Jesus commanded His disciples, "Take no thought how or what ye shall
speak: for I will give you a mouth and wisdom, which all your
adversaries shall not be able to gainsay nor resist" (Matt. x. 19; Luke
xxi. 15). This is not given till after an experience of powerlessness;
and the deeper that experience has been, the greater is the liberty. But
it is useless to endeavour to force ourselves into this condition; for
as God would not be the source, we should not realise the desired
results. It may well be said of this risen life, that all good things
are given with it. In this state, the soul cannot practise the virtues
as virtues; it is not even conscious of them; but all the virtues have
become so habitual to it, that it practises them naturally, almost
instinctively. When it hears others speak of deep humiliation, it is
surprised to find that it experiences nothing of the kind; and if it
sought to humble itself, it would be astonished, as though it were
guilty of unfaithfulness, and would even find it impossible, because the
state of annihilation through which it has passed has placed it below
all humiliation; for in order to be humbled, we must _be something_, and
nothingness cannot be brought lower; its present state has placed it
above all humility and all virtue by its transformation into God, so
that its powerlessness arises both from its annihilation and its
elevation. Those persons have nothing outwardly to distinguish them from
others, unless it be that they do no harm to any one; for, so far as the
exterior is concerned, they are very ordinary, and therefore do not
attract observation, but live in a state of quiet rest, free from all
care and anxiety. They experience a deep joy, arising from the absence
of all fear, or desire, or longing, so that nothing can disturb their
repose or diminish their joy. David possessed this experience when he
said, "The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? The
Lord is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid" (Ps. xxvii.
1).

A heart ravished with joy no longer looks at itself, nor thinks of
itself; and its joy, though great, is not an object of contemplation.
The soul is in a state of ravishment and ecstasy which cause no
uneasiness, because God has enlarged its capacity almost to infinitude.
Those ecstasies which cause the loss of consciousness are the effect of
human imperfection, and are nevertheless the admiration of men. God is,
as it were, drawing the soul out of itself that it may be lost in Him;
but as it has neither sufficient purity nor strength to bear the
process, it becomes necessary, either that God should cease thus to draw
it, which involves the cessation of the ecstasy, or that nature should
succumb and die, which not unfrequently happens. But in this
resurrection life, the ecstasy lasts, not for a few hours only, but for
ever, without either violence or variation, God having purified and
strengthened the subject of it to the extent necessary to enable it to
bear this glorious ravishment. It seems to me that when God goes out of
Himself, He creates an ecstasy,--but I dare not say this for fear of
teaching an error. What I say then is, that the soul drawn out of itself
experiences an inward ecstasy; but a happy one, because it is only drawn
out of itself in order that it may be drowned and lost in God, quitting
its own imperfections and its own limited thoughts to participate in
those of God.

O happy nothingness! where does its blessedness end? O poverty-stricken,
weary ones! how well ye are recompensed! O unutterable happiness! O
soul! what a gain thou hast made in exchange for all thy losses! Couldst
thou have believed, when thou wast lying in the dust, that what caused
thee so much horror could have procured thee so great a happiness as
that which thou now possessest? If it had been told thee, thou couldst
not have credited it. Learn now by thine own experience how good it is
to trust in God, and that those who put their confidence in Him shall
never be confounded.

O abandonment! what gladness canst thou impart to the soul, and what
progress it might have made if it had found thee at first; from how
much weariness it might have been delivered if it had known how to let
God work! But, alas! men are not willing to abandon themselves, and to
trust only in God. Even those who appear to do it, and who think
themselves well established in it, are only abandoned in imagination,
and not in reality. They are willing to abandon themselves in one thing
and not in another; they wish to compromise with God, and to place a
limit to what they will permit Him to do. They want to give themselves
up, but on such and such conditions. No; this is not abandonment. An
entire and total abandonment excepts nothing, keeps back nothing,
neither death, nor life, nor perfection, nor salvation, nor heaven, nor
hell. O poor souls! give yourselves up utterly in this abandonment; you
will get only happiness and blessing from it. Walk boldly on this stormy
sea, relying on the word of Jesus, who has promised to take upon Himself
the care of all those who will lose their own life, and abandon
themselves to Him. But if you sink like Peter, ascribe it to the
weakness of your faith. If we had the faith calmly, and without
hesitation, to face all dangers, what good should we not receive! What
do you fear, trembling heart? You fear to lose yourself? Alas! for all
that you are worth, what would that matter? Yes, you will lose yourself
if you have strength to abandon yourself to God, but you will be lost in
Him. O happy loss! I do not know how sufficiently to repeat it. Why can
I not persuade every one to make this abandonment? and why do men preach
anything less? Alas! men are so blind that they regard all this as
folly, as something fit for women and weak minds; but for great minds it
is too mean; they must guide themselves by their own meagre share of
wisdom. This path is unknown to them, because they are wise and prudent
in themselves; but it is revealed to babes, who can suffer self to be
annihilated, and who are willing to be moved by God at His pleasure,
leaving Him to do with them as He will, without resistance, without
considering what others will say. Oh, how difficult it is to this proper
prudence to become nothing both in its own eyes and in the sight of
others! Men say that their one object in life is to glorify God, while
it is really their own glorification. But to be willing to be nothing in
the sight of God, to live in an entire abandonment, in utter
self-despair, to give themselves to Him when they are the most
discouraged, to leave themselves in His hands, and not to look at self
when they are on the very edge of the abyss; it is this that is so rare,
and it is this which constitutes perfect abandonment. There sometimes
occur in this life wonderful manifestations to the natural senses, but
this is not usual; it is like Christ on the Mount of Transfiguration.




CHAPTER II.

STABILITY, EXPERIENCES, ELEVATION, EXTREME PURITY, AND PEACE OF THE SOUL
IN THE CONDITION OF ABANDONMENT--ALL IS PURELY GOD TO IT--FOR ITS LOST
LIBERTY IT FINDS THAT OF GOD--STATE IN WHICH ALL IS DIVINELY SURE,
EQUAL, AND INDIFFERENT.


The soul having attained a divine state, is, as I have already said, an
immovable rock, proof against all blows or shocks, unless it be when the
Lord desires it to do something contrary to custom; then, if it does not
yield to His first promptings, it has to suffer the pain of a constraint
to which it can offer no resistance, and is compelled by a violence,
which cannot be explained, to obey His will.

It is impossible to tell the strange proofs to which God subjects the
hearts which are perfectly abandoned, and which offer no resistance to
Him in anything; neither, if I could speak of them, should I be
understood. All that I can say is, that He does not leave them the
shadow of anything that could be named, either in God or out of God. And
He so raises them above all by the loss of all, that nothing less than
God Himself, either in earth or heaven, can stop them. Nothing can harm
them, because there is no longer anything hurtful for them, by reason of
their union with God, which, in associating with sinners, contracts no
defilement, because of its essential purity.

This is more real than I can express: the soul participates in the
purity of God; or rather, all natural purity having been annihilated,
the purity of God alone exists in its nothingness; but so truly, that
the heart is in perfect ignorance of evil, and powerless to commit it,
which does not however prevent the possibility of its falling; but this
seldom happens here, because the profound nothingness of the soul does
not leave anything that can be appropriated to itself; and it is
appropriation alone which can cause sin, for that which no longer exists
cannot sin.

The peace of those in this condition is so invariable and so profound,
that nothing either in earth or hell can disturb it for a moment. The
senses are still susceptible to suffering; but when they are
overpowered by it, and cry out with the anguish, if they are questioned,
or if they examine themselves, they will find nothing in themselves that
suffers: in the midst of the greatest pain, they say that they suffer
nothing, being unable to admit that they are suffering, because of the
divine state of blessedness which reigns in the centre or supreme part.

And then there is such an entire and complete separation of the two
parts, the inferior and the superior, that they live together like
strangers; and the most extraordinary trouble does not interrupt the
perfect peace, tranquillity; joy, and rest of the superior part; as the
joy of the divine life does not prevent the suffering of the inferior.

If you wish to attribute any goodness to those who are thus transformed
in God, they will object to it, not being able to find anything in
themselves that can be named, affirmed, or heard. They are in a complete
_negation_. It is this which causes the difference of terms and
expressions employed by writers on this subject, who find a difficulty
in making themselves understood, except by those whose experience
accords with their own. Another effect of this negation is, that the
soul having lost all that was its own, God having substituted Himself,
it can attribute nothing either to itself or to God; because it knows
God only, of whom it can say nothing. Here all is God to the soul,
because it is no longer a question of seeing all _in_ God; for to see
things in God is to distinguish them in Him. For instance, if I enter a
room, I see all that is there in addition to the room itself, though it
be placed within it; but if all could be transformed into the room
itself, or else were taken out of it, I should see nothing but the room
alone. All creatures, _celestial_, _terrestrial_ or _pure
intelligences_, disappear and fade away, and there remains only God
Himself, as He was before the creation. The soul sees only God
everywhere; and all is God; not by thought, sight, or light, but by an
identity of condition and a consummation of unity, which rendering it
God by participation, without its being able to see itself, prevents it
seeing anything anywhere; it can see no created being out of the
Uncreated, the only uncreated One being all and in all.

Men would condemn such a state, saying it makes us something less than
the meanest insect; and so it does, not by obstinacy and firmness of
purpose, but by powerlessness to interfere with ourselves. You may ask
one in this condition, "Who leads you to do such and such a thing? Is it
God who has told you to do it, or has made known to you His will
concerning it?" He will reply, "I know nothing, and I do not think of
knowing anything: all is God and His will; and I no longer know what is
meant by the will of God, because that will has become natural to me."
"But why should you do this rather than that?" "I do not know: I let
myself be guided by Him who draws me." "Why so?" "He draws me because I,
being no longer anything, am carried along with God, and am drawn by Him
_alone_. _He_ goes hither and thither: _He_ acts; and I am but an
instrument, which I neither see nor regard. I have no longer a separate
interest, because by the loss of myself I have lost all self-interest.
Neither am I capable of giving any reason for my conduct, for I no
longer have a conduct: yet I act infallibly so long as I have no other
principle than that of the Infallible One."

And this blind abandonment is the permanent condition of the soul of
which I speak; because having become one with God, it can see nothing
but God; for having lost all separateness, self-possession, and
distinction, it can no longer be abandoning itself, because, in order to
abandon ourselves, we must do something, and have the power of disposing
of ourselves.

The soul is in this condition "hidden _with Christ_ in God" (Col. iii.
3); _mingled_ with Him, as the river of which we have spoken is mingled
with the sea, so that it can be separated no more. It has the ebb and
flow of the sea, no longer by choice, will, and liberty, but by nature:
the immense sea having absorbed its shallow limited waters, it
participates in all the movements of the sea. It is the sea which bears
it, and yet it is not borne, since it has lost its own being; and having
no other motion than that of the sea, it acts as the sea acts: not
because it naturally possesses the same qualities, but because, having
lost all its natural qualities, it has no others but those of the sea,
without having the power of ever being anything but sea. It is not, as
I have said, that it does not so retain its own nature, that, if God so
willed it, in a moment it could be separated from the sea; but He does
not do this. Neither does it lose the nature of the creature; and God
could, if He pleased, cast it off from His divine bosom: but He does not
do it, and the creature acts as it were divinely.

But it will be said that by this theory I deprive man of his liberty.
Not so; he is no longer free except by an excess of liberty, because he
has lost freely all created liberty. He participates in the uncreated
freedom, which is not contracted, bounded, limited by anything; and the
soul's liberty is so great, so broad, that the whole earth appears to it
as a speck, to which it is not confined. It is free to do all and to do
nothing. There is no state or condition to which it cannot accommodate
itself; it can do all things, and yet takes no part in them. O glorious
state! who can describe thee, and what hast thou to fear or to
apprehend? O Paul! thou couldst say, "who shall separate us from the
love of Christ?" "I am persuaded," says the great apostle, "that
neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord" (Rom. viii. 35, 38, 39). Now these words, "I am
