
IX. Of Excommunication.

The greater excommunication, as the Pope calls it, we regard
only as a civil penalty, and it does not concern us ministers
of the Church. But the lesser, that is, the true Christian
excommunication, consists in this, that manifest and obstinate
sinners are not admitted to the Sacrament and other communion
of the Church until they amend their lives and avoid sin. And
ministers ought not to mingle secular punishments with this
ecclesiastical punishment, or excommunication.

X. Of Ordination and the Call.

If the bishops would be true bishops [would rightly discharge
their office], and would devote themselves to the Church and
the Gospel, it might be granted to them for the sake of love
and unity, but not from necessity, to ordain and confirm us
and our preachers; omitting, however, all comedies and
spectacular display [deceptions, absurdities, and appearances]
of unchristian [heathenish] parade and pomp. But because they
neither are, nor wish to be, true bishops, but worldly lords
and princes, who will neither preach, nor teach, nor baptize,
nor administer the Lord's Supper, nor perform any work or
office of the Church, and, moreover, persecute and condemn
those who discharge these functions, having been called to do
so, the Church ought not on their account to remain without
ministers [to be forsaken by or deprived of ministers].

Therefore, as the ancient examples of the Church and the
Fathers teach us, we ourselves will and ought to ordain
suitable persons to this office; and, even according to their
own laws, they have not the right to forbid or prevent us. For
their laws say that those ordained even by heretics should be
declared [truly] ordained and stay ordained [and that such
ordination must not be changed], as St. Jerome writes of the
Church at Alexandria, that at first it was governed in common
by priests and preachers, without bishops.

XI. Of the Marriage of Priests.

To prohibit marriage, and to burden the divine order of
priests with perpetual celibacy, they have had neither
authority nor right [they have done out of malice, without any
honest reason], but have acted like antichristian, tyrannical,
desperate scoundrels [have performed the work of antichrist,
of tyrants and the worst knaves], and have thereby caused all
kinds of horrible, abominable, innumerable sins of unchastity
[depraved lusts], in which they still wallow. Now, as little
as we or they have been given the power to make a woman out of
a man or a man out of a woman, or to nullify either sex, so
little have they had the power to [sunder and] separate such
creatures of God, or to forbid them from living [and
cohabiting] honestly in marriage with one another. Therefore
we are unwilling to assent to their abominable celibacy, nor
will we [even] tolerate it, but we wish to have marriage free
as God has instituted [and ordained] it, and we wish neither
to rescind nor hinder His work; for Paul says, 1 Tim. 4, 1
ff., that this [prohibition of marriage] is a doctrine of
devils.

XII. Of the Church.

We do not concede to them that they are the Church, and [in
truth] they are not [the Church]; nor will we listen to those
things which, under the name of Church, they enjoin or forbid.
For, thank God, [to-day] a child seven years old knows what
the Church is, namely, the holy believers and lambs who hear
the voice of their Shepherd. For the children pray thus: I
believe in one holy [catholic or] Christian Church. This
holiness does not consist in albs, tonsures, long gowns, and
other of their ceremonies devised by them beyond Holy
Scripture, but in the Word of God and true faith.

XIII. How One is Justified before God, and of Good Works.

What I have hitherto and constantly taught concerning this I
know not how to change in the least, namely, that by faith, as
St. Peter says, we acquire a new and clean heart, and God will
and does account us entirely righteous and holy for the sake
of Christ, our Mediator. And although sin in the flesh has not
yet been altogether removed or become dead, yet He will not
punish or remember it.

And such faith, renewal, and forgiveness of sins is followed
by good works. And what there is still sinful or imperfect
also in them shall not be accounted as sin or defect, even
[and that, too] for Christ's sake; but the entire man, both as
to his person and his works, is to be called and to be
righteous and holy from pure grace and mercy, shed upon us
[unfolded] and spread over us in Christ. Therefore we cannot
boast of many merits and works, if they are viewed apart from
grace and mercy, but as it is written, 1 Cor. 1, 31: He that
glorieth, let him glory in the Lord, namely, that he has a
gracious God. For thus all is well. We say, besides, that if
good works do not follow, faith is false and not true.

XIV. Of Monastic Vows.

As monastic vows directly conflict with the first chief
article, they must be absolutely abolished. For it is of them
that Christ says, Matt. 24, 5. 23 ff.: I am Christ, etc. For
he who makes a vow to live as a monk believes that he will
enter upon a mode of life holier than ordinary Christians
lead, and wishes to earn heaven by his own works not only for
himself, but also for others; this is to deny Christ. And they
boast from their St. Thomas that a monastic vow is equal to
Baptism. This is blasphemy [against God].

XV. Of Human Traditions.

The declaration of the Papists that human traditions serve for
the remission of sins, or merit salvation, is [altogether]
unchristian and condemned, as Christ says Matt. 15, 9: In vain
they do worship Me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of
men. Again, Titus 1, 14: That turn from the truth. Again, when
they declare that it is a mortal sin if one breaks these
ordinances [does not keep these statutes], this, too, is not
right.

These are the articles on which I must stand, and, God
willing, shall stand even to my death; and I do not know how
to change or to yield anything in them. If any one wishes to
yield anything, let him do it at the peril of his conscience.

Lastly, there still remains the Pope's bag of impostures
concerning foolish and childish articles, as, the dedication
of churches, the baptism of bells, the baptism of the
altarstone, and the inviting of sponsors to these rites, who
would make donations towards them. Such baptizing is a
reproach and mockery of Holy Baptism, hence should not be
tolerated. Furthermore, concerning the consecration of
wax-tapers, palm-branches, cakes, oats, [herbs,] spices, etc.,
which indeed, cannot be called consecrations, but are sheer
mockery and fraud. And such deceptions there are without
number, which we commend for adoration to their god and to
themselves, until they weary of it. We will [ought to] have
nothing to do with them.


     Dr. Martin Luther subscribed.

     Dr. Justus Jonas, Rector, subscribed with his own hand.

     Dr. John Bugenhagen, Pomeranus, subscribed.

     Dr. Caspar Creutziger subscribed.

     Nicholas Amsdorf of Magdeburg subscribed.

     George Spalatin of Altenburg subscribed.

     I, Philip Melanchthon, also regard [approve] the above
     articles as right and Christian. But regarding the Pope I hold
     that, if he would allow the Gospel, his superiority over the
     bishops which he has otherwise, is conceded to him by human
     right also by us, for the sake of the peace and general unity
     of those Christians who are also under him, and may be under
     him hereafter.

     John Agricola of Eisleben subscribed.
     Gabriel Didymus subscribed.

     I, Dr. Urban Rhegius, Superintendent of the churches in the
     Duchy of Lueneburg, subscribe in my own name and in the name
     of my brethren, and of the Church of Hanover.

     I, Stephen Agricola, Minister at Hof, subscribe.

     Also I, John Draconites, Professor and Minister at Marburg,
     subscribe.

     I, Conrad Figenbotz, for the glory of God subscribe that I
     have thus believed, and am still preaching and firmly
     believing as above.

     I, Andrew Osiander of Nuernberg, subscribe.
     I, Magister Veit Dieterich, Minister at Nuernberg, subscribe.
     I, Erhard Schnepf, Preacher at Stuttgart, subscribe.
     Conrad Oettinger, Preacher of Duke Ulrich at Pforzheim.
     Simon Schneeweiss, Pastor of the Church at Crailsheim.

     I, John Schlagenhaufen, Pastor of the Church at Koethen,
     subscribe.

     The Reverend Magister George Helt of Forchheim.
     The Reverend Magister Adam of Fulda, Preacher in Hesse.
     The Reverend Magister Anthony Corvinus, Preacher in Hesse.

     I, Doctor John Bugenhagen, Pomeranus, again subscribe in the
     name of Magister John Brentz, as on departing from Smalcald he
     directed me orally and by a letter, which I have shown to
     these brethren who have subscribed.

     I, Dionysius Melander, subscribe to the Confession, the
     Apology, and the Concordia on the subject of the Eucharist.
