When this spirit departs, the outward tabernacle is said to be dead,
that is, the individual who quickened and imparted voluntary motion to
the said tabernacle is no longer there. This individual, on departing
from its earthly house, repasses the dark vale of forgetfulness, and
awakes in the spirit world.

The spirit world is not the heaven where Jesus Christ, his Father, and
other beings dwell, who have, by resurrection or translation, ascended
to eternal mansions, and been crowned and seated on thrones of power;
but it is an intermediate state, a probation, a place of preparation,
improvement, instruction, or education, where spirits are chastened
and improved, and where, if found worthy, they may be taught a
knowledge of the Gospel. In short, it is a place where the Gospel is
preached, and where faith, repentance, hope and charity may be
exercised; a place of waiting for the resurrection or redemption of
the body; while, to those who deserve it, it is a place of punishment,
a purgatory or hell, where spirits are buffetted till the day of
redemption.

As to its location, it is here on the very planet where we were born;
or, in other words, the earth and other planets of a like sphere, have
their inward or spiritual spheres, as well as their outward, or
temporal. The one is peopled by temporal tabernacles, and the other by
spirits. A vail is drawn between the one sphere and the other, whereby
all the objects in the spiritual sphere are rendered invisible to
those in the temporal.

To discern beings or things in the spirit world, a person in the flesh
must be quickened by spiritual element, the vail must be withdrawn, or
the organs of sight, or of hearing, must be transformed, so as to be
adapted to the spiritual sphere. This state is called vision, trance,
second sight, clairvoyance, &c.

The elements and beings in the spirit world are as real and tangible
to spiritual organs, as things and beings of the temporal world are to
beings of a temporal state.

In this spirit world there are all the varieties and grades of
intellectual being, which exist in the present world. For instance,
Jesus Christ and the thief on the cross, both went to the same place,
and found themselves associated in the spirit world.

But the one was there in all the intelligence, happiness, benevolence,
and charity, which characterized a teacher, a messenger, anointed to
preach glad tidings to the meek, to bind up the broken-hearted, to
comfort those who mourned, to preach deliverance to the captive, and
open the prison to those who were bound; or, in other words, _To
preach the Gospel to the spirits in prison, that they might he judged
according to men in the flesh_; while the other was there as a thief,
who had expired on the cross for crime, and who was guilty, ignorant,
uncultivated, and unprepared for resurrection, having need of
remission of sins, and to be instructed in the science of salvation.

The former bid farewell to the world of spirits on the third day, and
returned to his tabernacle of flesh, in which he ascended to thrones,
principalities, and powers, while the latter is, no doubt, improving
in the spirit world, and waiting, believing, hoping for the redemption
of the body.

In the world of spirits there are Apostles, Prophets, Elders, and
members of the Church of the Saints, holding keys of Priesthood, and
power to teach, comfort, instruct, and proclaim the Gospel to, their
fellow-spirits, after the pattern of Jesus Christ.

In the same world there are also the spirits of Catholics, and
Protestants of every sect, who have all need to be taught, and to come
to the knowledge of the true, unchangeable Gospel, in its fulness and
simplicity, that they may be judged the same as if they had been
privileged with the same in the flesh.

There is also the Jew, the Mahometan, the infidel, who did not believe
in Christ while in the flesh. All these must be taught, must come to
the knowledge of the crucified and risen Redeemer, and hear the glad
tidings of the Gospel.

There are also all the varieties of the heathen spirits; the noble and
refined philosopher, poet, patriot, or statesman of Rome or Greece;
the enlightened Socrates, Plato, and their like; together with every
grade of spirits, down to the most uncultivated of the savage world.

All these must be taught, enlightened, and must bow the knee to the
eternal king, for the decree hath gone forth, that unto him every knee
shall bow and every tongue confess.

O what a field of labour, of benevolence, of missionary enterprise now
opens to the Apostles and Elders of the Church of the Saints! As this
field opens they will begin to realize more fully the extent of their
divine mission, and the meaning of the great command to "_Preach the
Gospel to every creature_."

In this vast field of labour, the Priesthood are, in a great measure,
occupied, during their sojourn in the world of spirits while awaiting
the resurrection of the body; and at the same time they themselves are
edified, improved, and greatly advanced and matured in the science of
divine Theology.

In the use of the keys of this science, by them administered, and in
connexion with the ministration of certain ordinances, by the
Priesthood in this mortal life, for, and in behalf of, those who are
dead, the doors of the prisons of the spirit world are opened, and
their gloomy dungeons made radiant with light. Hope then springs
afresh. Joy and gladness swell the bosom accustomed to anguish, and
smiles assume the place of tears, while songs of triumph, and the
voice of melody and thanksgiving occupy the hearts, and flow from the
lips, of those who have long dwelt in darkness, and in the region and
shadow of death.

The times of sojourn of a spirit in the world of spirits, and also its
privileges and degrees of enjoyment, or of suffering, while there,
depend much on its preparations while in the flesh.

For instance, the people swept off by the flood of Noah, were
imprisoned in the world of spirits, in a kind of hell; without
justification, without Priesthood or Gospel, without the true
knowledge of God, or a hope of resurrection, during those long ages
which intervened between the flood and the death of Christ. It was
only by the personal ministry of the spirit of Jesus Christ, during
his sojourn in the spirit world, that they were at length privileged
to hear the Gospel, and to act upon their own agency, the same as men
in the flesh; whereas, if they had repented at the preaching of Noah,
they might have been justified, and filled with the hope and knowledge
of the resurrection while in the flesh.

When Jesus Christ had returned from his mission in the spirit world,
had triumphed over the grave, and re-entered his fleshly tabernacle,
then the Saints who had obeyed the Gospel while in the flesh, and had
slept in death, or finished their sojourn in the spirit world, were
called forth to re-enter their bodies, and to ascend with him to
mansions and thrones of eternal power, while the residue of the
spirits remained in the world of spirits to await another call.

Those who obeyed the Gospel on the earth, after this first
resurrection, will also be called from their sojourn in the spirit
world, and re-united with their tabernacles of flesh, at the sounding
of the next trump, and will reign on the earth in the flesh, one
thousand years, while those who rejected the Gospel will remain in the
spirit world without a resurrection, till after the thousand years.

Again, those who obey the Gospel in the present age will rise from the
spirit world, and from the grave, and reign on the earth during the
great thousand years; while those who reject it will remain in
condemnation in the spirit world, without a resurrection, till the
last trump shall sound, and death and hell deliver up their dead.




CHAPTER XV.

RESURRECTION, ITS TIMES AND DEGREES--FIRST, SECOND AND THIRD HEAVENS,
OR THE TELESTIAL, TERRESTRIAL AND CELESTIAL KINGDOMS.


    The grave and death and hell no more retain
    Their lawful captives. Earth yields its slain.
    The raging ocean, from its lowly bed,
    At Michael's call, delivers up its dead.
    Then comes the judgment, and the final doom
    Of man--his destiny beyond the tomb.

There are three general resurrections revealed to man on the earth;
one of these is past, and the other two are future.

The first general resurrection took place in connexion with the
resurrection of Jesus Christ. This included the Saints and Prophets of
both hemispheres, from Adam down to John the Baptist; or, in other
words, all those who died in Christ before his resurrection.

The second will take place in a few years from the present time, and
will be immediately succeeded by the coming of Jesus Christ, in power
and great glory, with all his Saints and Angels. This resurrection
will include the Former and Latter-day Saints--all those who have
received the Gospel since the former resurrection.

The third and last resurrection will take place more than a thousand
years afterwards, and will embrace all the human family not included
in the former resurrections or translations.

After man is raised from the dead he will be judged according to his
works, and will receive the reward, and be consigned to the sphere,
exactly corresponding to his former deeds, and the preparations or
qualifications which he possesses.

In the former resurrection, those raised left the earth and ascended,
or, were transplanted far on high, with the risen Jesus, to the
glorified mansions of his Father, or to some planetary system already
redeemed and glorified. The reasons for thus leaving the earth are
obvious. Our planet was still in its rudimental state, and therefore
subject to the rule of sin and death. It was necessary that it should
continue thus, until the full time of redemption should arrive; it
was, therefore, entirely unfitted for the residence of immortal man.

But in the resurrection which now approaches, and in connexion with
the glorious coming of Jesus Christ, the earth will undergo a change
in its physical features, climate, soil, productions; and in its
political, moral, and spiritual government.

Its mountains will be levelled, its valleys exalted, its swamps and
sickly places will be drained and become healthy, while its burning
deserts, and its frigid polar regions, will be redeemed and become
temperate and fruitful.

Kingcraft and priestcraft, tyranny, oppression and idolatry will be at
an end, darkness and ignorance will pass away, war will cease, and the
rule of sin, and sorrow, and death will give place to the reign of
peace, and truth, and righteousness.

For this reason, and to fulfil certain promises made to the Fathers,
the Former and Latter-day Saints included in the two resurrections,
and all those translated, will then receive an inheritance on the
earth, and will build upon and improve the same for a thousand years.

The heathen nations, also, will then be redeemed, and will be exalted
to the privilege of serving the Saints of the Most High. They will be
the ploughmen, the vine-dressers, the gardeners, builders, etc. But
the Saints will be the owners of the soil, the proprietors of all real
estate, and other precious things; and the kings, governors, and
judges of the earth.

As the children of man multiply in those peaceful times, a careful and
wise system of agriculture will be rapidly developed, and extended
over the face of the whole earth; its entire surface will at length
become like the garden of Eden, the trees of life being cultivated,
and their fruits enjoyed.

Science, and the useful and ornamental arts, will also be greatly
extended and cultivated. The fine toned instrument of many strings,
the melodious organs of the human voice, will then be tuned to poetry
and sentiments equally pure and refined, and will pour forth melodies
and strains of holy joy, calculated to purify and melt every heart in
love, and fill every soul with mutual sympathy and extasy of heavenly
union.

Geographical knowledge, history, astronomy, mathematics and
navigation, will be greatly extended and matured. Railroads and
telegraphic lines of communication, will be universally extended, and
the powers of steam, or other means of locomotion brought to the
highest state of perfection.

Thus all nations will be associated in one great brotherhood. A
universal Theocracy will cement the whole body politic. One king will
rule. One holy city will compose the capitol. One temple will be the
centre of worship. In short, there will be one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, and one Spirit.

One equable, just and useful commercial interest, founded on the
necessity and convenience of mutual exchange of products, will also
form another important bond of union.

Mineralogy will also be greatly improved, and its knowledge extended.
Its hidden treasures will be developed, and gold, silver and the most
precious and beautiful stones will be the building materials in most
common use, and will compose the utensils and furniture of the
habitations of man.

The earth and man thus restored and exalted, will not yet be perfect
in the celestial sense of the word, but will be considered, in the
light of eternity, as occupying an intermediate and still progressive
position amid the varieties of nature.

The flesh, bones, sinews, nerves--all the organs--all the particles of
the celestial body, must be quickened, filled, surrounded with that
divine and holy element, which is purer, more intelligent, more
refined and active, fuller of light and life, than any other substance
in the universe.

Every organ must be restored, and adapted to its natural and perfect
use in the celestial body.

    The Greek Philosopher's immortal mind,
    Again with flesh and bone and nerve combined;
    Immortal brain and heart--immortal whole,
    Will make, as at the first, a living soul.

Man, thus adapted to all the enjoyments of life and love, will possess
the means of gratifying his organs of sight, hearing, taste, &c., and
will possess, improve and enjoy the riches of the eternal elements.
The palace, the city, the garden, the vineyard, the fruits of the
earth, the gold, the silver, the precious stones, the servants, the
chariots, horses and horsemen are for his use; also thrones and
dominions, principalities and powers, might, majesty, and an eternal
increase of riches, honours, immortality and eternal life are his. He
is, in a subordinate sense, a god; or, in other words, one of the sons
of God. All things are his, and he is Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Such is the great Millennium.

And such is _celestial_ man, in his progress towards perfection.

Besides the peculiar glory of the _celestial_, there are in the
resurrection and final reward of man, many subordinate spheres, many
degrees of reward adapted to an almost infinite variety of
circumstances, conditions, degrees of improvement, knowledge,
accountability and conduct.

The final state of man, though varying in almost infinite gradations
and rewards, adapted to his qualifications and deserts, and meted out
in the scale of exact justice and mercy, may be conceived or expressed
under three grand heads, or principal spheres, viz.--

First. The Telestial, or least heaven, typified by the stars of the
firmament.

Secondly. The Terrestrial, or intermediate heaven, typified by the
moon.

Thirdly. The Celestial, or third heaven, of which the sun of the
firmament is typical.

The qualifications which fit and prepare intelligences, for these
different spheres or rewards, are an all important consideration, and
well worthy of the sincere attention of all people.

These several kingdoms or degrees, and their comparative happiness,
and what characters are candidates for each degree, are revealed in a
most concise, clear, lucid and beautiful manner, in one of the visions
of our great Prophet and founder. We will therefore complete this
chapter by the insertion of said

                            "VISION.

"Hear, O ye heavens, and give ear, O earth, and rejoice, ye
inhabitants thereof, for the Lord is God, and beside him there is no
Saviour: great is His wisdom, marvellous are His ways, and the extent
of His doings none can find out; His purposes fail not, neither are
there any who can stay His hand; from eternity to eternity He is the
same, and His years never fail.

"For thus saith the Lord, I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto
those who fear me, and delight to honour those who serve me in
righteousness and in truth unto the end. Great shall be their reward
and eternal shall be their glory; and to them will I reveal all
mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of
old, and for ages to come will I make known unto them the good
pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom;
yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come
will I show them, even the things of many generations; and their
wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven: and
before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding
of the prudent shall come to naught, for by my Spirit will I enlighten
them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my
will; yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
nor yet entered into the heart of man.

"We, Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon, being in the Spirit on the
sixteenth of February, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight
hundred and thirty-two, by the power of the Spirit our eyes were
opened and our understandings were enlightened, so as to see and
understand the things of God--even those things which were from the
beginning, before the world was, which were ordained of the Father,
through His only begotten Son, who was in the bosom of the Father,
even from the beginning, of whom we bear record, and the record which
we bear is the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Son,
whom we saw and with whom we conversed in the heavenly vision; for
while we were doing the work of translation, which the Lord had
appointed unto us, we came to the twenty-ninth verse of the fifth
chapter of John, which was given unto us as follows. Speaking of the
resurrection of the dead, concerning those who shall hear the voice of
the Son of man, and shall come forth; they who have done good in the
resurrection of the just, and they who have done evil in the
resurrection of the unjust. Now this caused us to marvel, for it was
given unto us of the Spirit; and while we meditated upon these things,
the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened,
and the glory of the Lord shone round about; and we beheld the glory
of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his
fulness; and saw the holy angels, and they who are sanctified before
His throne, worshipping God and the Lamb, who worship Him for ever and
ever. And now, after the many testimonies which have been given of
him, this is the testimony last of all, which we give of him, that he
lives; for we saw him, even on the right hand of God, and we heard the
voice bearing record that he is the only begotten of the Father--that
by him and through him, and of him the worlds are and were created,
and the inhabitants thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God.
And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in
authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the only
begotten Son, whom the Father loved, and who was in the bosom of the
Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son, and was
called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him--he was Lucifer, a son
of the morning. And we beheld, and lo, he is fallen! is fallen! even a
son of the morning. And while we were yet in the Spirit, the Lord
commanded us that we should write the vision, for we beheld Satan,
that old serpent--even the devil, who rebelled against God, and sought
to take the kingdom of our God, and His Christ, wherefore he maketh
war with the Saints of God, and encompasses them round about. And we
saw a vision of the sufferings of those with whom he made war and
overcame, for thus came the voice of the Lord unto us.

"Thus saith the Lord, concerning all those who know my power, and have
been made partakers thereof, and suffered themselves, through the
power of the devil, to be overcome, and to deny the truth and defy my
power--they are they who are the sons of perdition, of whom I say that
it had been better for them never to have been born, for they are
vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of God, with the devil
and his angels in eternity; concerning whom I have said there is no
forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come, having denied the
Holy Spirit after having received it, and having denied the only
begotten Son of the Father--having crucified him unto themselves, and
put him to an open shame. These are they who shall go away into the
lake of fire and brimstone, with the devil and his angels, and the
only ones on whom the second death shall have any power; yea, verily,
the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord,
after the sufferings of his wrath; for all the rest shall be brought
forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and the
glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the bosom of the Father
before the worlds were made. And this is the Gospel, the glad tidings
which the voice out of the heavens bore record unto us, that he came
into the world, even Jesus, to be crucified for the world, and to bear
the sins of the world, and to sanctify the world, and to cleanse it
from all unrighteousness; that through him all might be saved whom the
Father had put into his power and made by him, who glorifies the
Father, and saves all the works of his hands, except those sons of
perdition, who deny the Son after the Father has revealed him;
wherefore, he saves all except them; they shall go away into
everlasting punishment, which is endless punishment, which is eternal
punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels in eternity, where
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched, which is their
torment; and the end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their
torment, no man knows, neither was it revealed, neither is, neither
will be revealed unto man, except to them who are made partakers
thereof: nevertheless I, the Lord, show it by vision unto many, but
straightway shut it up again; wherefore the end, the width, the
height, the depth, and the misery thereof, they understand not,
neither any man except them who are ordained unto this condemnation.
And we heard the voice, saying, Write the vision, for lo! this is the
end of the vision of the sufferings of the ungodly!

"And again we bear record, for we saw and heard, and this is the
testimony of the Gospel of Christ, concerning them who come forth in
the resurrection of the just; they are they who received the testimony
of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner
of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this
according to the commandment, which he has given, that by keeping the
commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins,
and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who
is ordained and sealed unto this power, and who overcome by faith, and
are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth
upon all those who are just and true. They are they who are the Church
of the first born. They are they into whose hands the Father has given
all things. They are they who are priests and kings, who have received
of His fulness, and of His glory, and are priests of the Most High,
after the order of Melchisedek, which was after the order of Enoch,
which was after the order of the only begotten Son; wherefore, as it
is written, they are gods, even the sons of God; wherefore all things
are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to
come, all are theirs and they are Christ's and Christ is God's; and
they shall overcome all things; wherefore let no man glory in man, but
rather let him glory in God, who shall subdue all enemies under His
feet--these shall dwell in the presence of God and His Christ for ever
and ever. These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall
come in the clouds of heaven, to reign on the earth over his people.
These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection. These
are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just. These
are they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living
God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all. These are they who have
come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and
Church of Enoch, and of the first born. These are they whose names are
written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all. These
are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of
the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the
shedding of his own blood. These are they whose bodies are celestial
whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of
all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being
typical.

"And again, we saw the terrestrial world, and behold and lo, these are
they who are of the terrestrial, whose glory differs from that of the
Church of the first-born, who have received the fulness of the Father,
even as that of the moon differs from the sun in the firmament--
behold, these are they who died without law, and also they who are the
spirits of men kept in prison, whom the Son visited, and preached the
Gospel unto, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh,
who received not the testimony of Jesus in the flesh, but afterwards
received it. These are they who are honourable men of the earth, who
were blinded by the craftiness of men. These are they who receive of
his glory, but not of his fulness. These are they who receive of the
presence of the Son, but not of the fulness of the Father; wherefore,
they are bodies terrestrial, and not bodies celestial, and differ in
glory as the moon differs from the sun. These are they who are not
valiant in the testimony of Jesus; wherefore they obtained not the
crown over the kingdom of our God. And now this is the end of the
vision which we saw of the terrestrial, that the Lord commanded us to
write while we were yet in the Spirit.

"And again, we saw the glory of the telestial, which glory is that of
the lesser, even as the glory of the stars differs from that of the
moon in the firmament. These are they who received not the Gospel of
Christ, neither the testimony of Jesus. These are they who deny not
the Holy Spirit. These are they who are thrust down to hell. These are
they who shall not be redeemed from the devil, until the last
resurrection, until the Lord, even Christ the Lamb, shall have
finished his work. These are they who receive not of his fulness in
the eternal world, but of the Holy Spirit, through the ministration of
the terrestrial; and the terrestrial through the ministration of the
celestial; and also the telestial receive it of the administering of
angels who are appointed to minister for them, or who are appointed to
be ministering spirits for them, for they shall be heirs of salvation.
And thus we saw in the heavenly vision, the glory of the telestial,
which surpasses all understanding, and no man knows it except him to
whom God has revealed it. And thus we saw the glory of the
terrestrial, which excels in all things the glory of the telestial,
even in glory, and in power, and in might, and in dominion. And thus
we saw the glory of the celestial which excels in all things--where
God, even the Father, reigns upon His throne for ever and ever; before
whose throne all things bow in humble reverence and give Him glory for
ever and ever. They who dwell in His presence are the Church of the
first-born, and they see as they are seen, and know as they are known,
having received of His fulness and of His grace; and He makes them
equal in power, and in might, and in dominion. And the glory of the
celestial is one, even as the glory of the sun is one. And the glory
of the terrestrial is one, even as the glory of the moon is one. And
the glory of the telestial is one, even as the glory of the stars is
one, for as one star differs from another star in glory, even so
differs one from another in glory in the telestial world; for these
are they who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas. These are
they who say they are some of one and some of another--some of Christ,
and some of John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of
Esaias, and some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch; but received not the
Gospel, neither the testimony of Jesus, neither the Prophets, neither
the Everlasting Covenant. Last of all, these all are they who will not
be gathered with the Saints, to be caught up unto the Church of the
firstborn, and received into the cloud. These are they who are liars,
and sorcerers, and adulterers, and whoremongers, and whosoever loves
and makes a lie. These are they who suffer the wrath of God on the
