by rendering vice agreeable to her in their own person; oh, you
cannot treat them with too great severity. Your language, your looks,
your attitude, should repel them from or command a respectful fear in
your presence. Do not fear to wound their feelings, or to be
impolite, or indecorous in their regard. An obstinate reserve, a
severe demeanor, is all that you owe them. Treating them with that
courtesy due to gentlemen would prove noxious to you, as they would
not fail to make of it a plausible reason to justify their insolent
conduct and rash judgments; be not deceived, the slightest mark of
benevolence that they would receive from you would be immediately
interpreted by them in the most perfidious manner. They detest virtue
as much as you detest vice. They have a sovereign contempt for every
woman, for they believe that she is unable to resist the allurements
of pleasure.

They are mutual confidentials, and tell each other, with deplorable
levity, all that young ladies innocently say to them; wickedly
misconstruing their intentions, exaggerating what was true, and
treating with sneering contempt those who were simple enough to
believe in the sincerity of their hypocritical compliments. Most
assuredly you have not the slightest desire of becoming the subject
of the scandalous conversation of those men; you have but one means,
however, of guarding yourself against their venomous tongue; that is,
to exact from them a respectful deference by the gravity of your
demeanor, and the severity of your relations with them.

If, on the contrary, you meet with young men who, with a lively
faith, have conserved the purity of their hearts, and as a
consequence of these virtues, all due respect for woman, you can show
them greater confidence, and let them feel that you highly esteem
them for their virtues, without, however, renouncing the precautions
advised by prudence while in their company. It is in such encounters
that your conversation should reveal a serious turn of mind,
carefully avoiding every thing that would intimate undue confidence
or intimacy; for the heart of a young lady should never be on her
lips; except with regard to her mother, she should keep it buried in
the depths of her soul to converse familiarly only with God and His
angels.




CHAPTER XVII.


CURIOSITY.

CURIOSITY is a defect that seems to be particularly inherent to the
heart of woman, and which, when not properly governed, never fails to
entail the most disastrous consequences. Through it they have
frequently acquired a knowledge of evil and a disgust for virtue. You
are well aware that curiosity was the door through which sin and
death enter the world; that when the devil sought our destruction he
made use of woman's curiosity. Now, it is well not to lose sight of
the fact that woman is always the daughter of Eve. She feels a
pressing desire to see what pleases the mind, flatters the senses,
and enlivens the imagination. Eager for vivid emotions, she seeks
them with an insatiable avidity; and, rather than feel nothing, she
prefers painful emotions, finding a certain secret charm even in the
fits of sorrow and pains of her imagination. Her great desire to see
and hear whatever tends to excite or create emotion is in a great
measure the source of her curiosity. The education that women for the
most part receive develops this disposition of the heart: an
education which, instead of elevating the mind and giving it a taste
for serious things, narrows it, and accustoms it to feed upon
aliments that are trivial and void of consistency. The mind requires
to he kept in constant activity, and since thoughts alone can do this
they should be such as to amply furnish it with solid and wholesome
food, for all kinds of thoughts are not equally good for it, no more
than all kinds of food are equally good for the body. In some kinds
of food the quantity and quality of nutriment are much inferior to
what they are found to be in other kinds. Hence greater moderation is
required in the use of the latter than in that of the former,
otherwise the stomach, overcharged, would soon become disgusted with
it.

On the other hand, no quantity of food void of nutritious qualities
will ever appease hunger. The same thing may be said of the kind of
thoughts with which the mind is fed; some are used less for their
sound and wholesome nutriment than for their efficiency to flatter
sensuality, inflame the passions, create new wants in the heart, and
excite a depraved curiosity. Under this regime the mind is starved
and tortured by an incessant hunger. It sadly languishes and pines in
the grip of famine; and all this in the midst of full and plenty, but
this abundance contains no nutriment, it is made up of news, whether
true or false, which amuses without satiating; still the mind enlists
the service of the senses to gather it up from all sides. The eyes,
continually gaping and watching what passes before them, present the
mind with numberless images to amuse it in its weary or lonesome
moments.

Hence that insatiable thirst to see and observe every thing, that
inconstancy and want of changing from one place to another, that
desire to read useless and frivolous books, novels, weeklies and
magazines, which for the most part enervate the mind by their
futilities, trouble and darken it by a multitude of incoherent images
and contradictory thoughts, and poison the heart by foul and filthy
images that will constantly torment the soul.

The ears are on the alert to catch every report, every murmur, all
kinds of news, detractions and calumnies, stories and scandals. I say
all kinds of news, no--I make a mistake, it is only such news as is
of an exciting or startling nature to break up the monotony of life.
Hence those indiscreet questions which provoke answers more
indiscreet still; those rash revelations made by thoughtless young
ladies, those prying efforts to discover things which only exist
perhaps in their own imagination, and of which they should live in
holy ignorance.

Hence those long conversations, discussing the vices and evil doings
of others, in which justice and charity are discarded, and iniquity
drank like water. Few forego the criminal satisfaction of
participating in those detestable conversations, and fewer still,
alas! reproach themselves at night for the detractions and calumnies
committed, permitted, or provoked during the day, and by a monstrous
union they couple with those deeds the external practices of piety.

This is but a feeble picture of the frightful condition of a mind
starved for want of solid and wholesome food, and poisoned by the
empty frothings of vanity and passion. Curiosity is the constant
companion of this mediocrity of the mind and poverty of the heart. In
order to avoid this fatal rock, no pains should be spared, and if,
unfortunately, you have already drank at its poisoned sources, hasten
to use every available means to arrest its ravages. To insure
success, do not amuse yourself with lopping off the branches of the
evil, allowing the root to remain, do at once what is essential: feed
your mind and heart with a genuine love for the true and beautiful.

A frivolous woman is invariably curious, and a curious woman always
finishes by becoming the dupe and victim of her curiosity. To
overcome an inordinate love for sights and news you must accustom the
mind's eye to feast on the panoramic beauties of nature, and confine
yourself to the company of persons of your own age, in whom you
remark an elevated mind and heart,--lovers of what is truly good and
grand.

Curiosity has its source, also, in another defect which becomes
daily more and more prevalent--it is a want of forethought and
reflection, arising from a volatile and frivolous mind. Few, indeed,
are lovers of the interior life; all seem to be bent on parading the
mind and heart, the imagination and senses. Now, when man has not
learned the art of living and conversing with himself, he becomes
wearisome and sometimes dangerous to himself when alone; because the
mind, not knowing how to occupy itself, and not finding in its own
resources the thoughts that elevate and nourish it, is obliged, in
order to avoid lonesomeness, to dwell upon images which at least
distract and weaken it, and not unfrequently disturb the peace of the
heart.

Religion, always inspired by God in the choice and formation of the
terms which it employs to convey the ideas that it wishes to impress
upon the heart, has invented two words, which admirably express the
meaning of the concentration of the faculties of the soul,--in other
words, that society or cohabitation of man with himself--they are
_self-composure and recollection._

These words express that state or power of the will by which it
holds complete control over all the faculties of the soul; so that
sensibility can have no command over any of their operations. Thus
shielded from this turbulent disturber they are enabled to labor
peacefully and efficiently in their interior province or the soul.

The advantages secured by interior recollection are so great and the
consequence of its absence so prejudicial that the Holy Ghost
distinctly declares its absence to be the cause of all the evils that
desolate the earth. _"With desolation is the earth laid desolate
because there is no one who thinketh in his heart."_ This is a
terrible truth, but it is not the less real on that account. To be
convinced of this you need only descend into your own heart, and you
will soon discover that the want of interior recollection has been
the cause of the most of your faults. It is during the interior
composure of the soul's faculties that we understand what the Lord
says. _I will hear what the Lord God will speak in me, for he will
speak peace unto them that are converted to the heart._ (Psalm 84.)

But if we find nothing in the heart but trouble and obscurity we
must naturally find many pretexts to justify our preoccupation with
external things; and like a man, finding his house the abode of pain
and displeasure, remains away from it as long as possible, we, too,
will shun as far as possible the scene of our misery. It is,
therefore, of most vital importance for you to form in your own heart
an agreeable and useful society with which you can always converse.
This society you carry with you wherever you go, for you are with
yourself at all times; and since you have not always the satisfaction
to enjoy the company of others you should learn how to turn to good
account this privation by making it an incentive to cultivate with
industry an agreeable society in your own heart; and the best way to
insure the success of this work is to accustom yourself to converse
with God who is always present in your heart, except when you expel
him by mortal sin.

The work itself must be made up of pious readings, meditation and
prayer, which will furnish you with such thoughts and affections as
will prove to be constant friends in pain as in joy; hasten to amass
these honeyed treasures during the noon-tide of life; for the winter
will soon come upon you, the flowers of life shall lose their perfume
and their withered corolla shall be strewn on the ground. Then you
will not have time to enrich the soul with the longed-for booty when
you will be reduced to the miserable condition of those women who
endeavor to conceal the poverty of their mind and heart by a foolish
and puerile deception.




CHAPTER XVIII.


MEDITATION AND REFLECTION.

Meditation and reflection are two words that express two shades of
difference of the same idea. In meditation we consider supernatural
things pertaining to our eternal salvation. The soul maintains
herself with difficulty in the love and practice of virtue without
the help derived from meditation; for when she gives it up, her
fervor in piety grows lax, temptations became more frequent and
obstinate, often followed by humiliating falls.

You are well aware that the real object of the Christian's life upon
earth is to establish God's kingdom in our heart; and this is what
forms the object of the second petition that we address to God every
day in the Lord's prayer; and since the kingdom of God is entirely
interior, as Jesus Christ himself tells us, when He says: _the
kingdom of God is within us,_ we should acquire the habit of
looking for God in our own heart; but in order to find Him there we
must give Him a place in it by meditation and prayer.

The advantages derived from meditation are so numerous and so great,
that it is a matter of surprise why it is not more universally
practised; for the effects that it produces in the souls of those who
are faithful to its practice are so striking that it is easy to
discern a man given to this habit from those who are entire strangers
to its holy influence. Meditation teaches us to know God and ourself;
it lays open to us our faults and vices, their source and fatal
consequences and the arms we should employ to combat them. Finally,
meditation contributes most efficiently to form our minds and purify
our hearts, to fortify the will and develop in us the habit of
reflecting.

The knowledge of God and ourself is such an important factor in the
work of our spiritual perfection that St. Augustin constantly prayed
for it, saying: _"Lord grant that I may know Thee and myself."_
The pagans themselves well understood the advantage of this most
important science, even for the securing of the happiness of this
life; since they had the following words inscribed, as a summary of
all human science, upon the frontispiece of the most celebrated
temple of Greece, _know thou thyself_. But, alas! this knowledge
is as rare as it is necessary; with a mind absorbed by distractions,
and a heart harassed by passions, we flee, so to speak, from God and
from ourselves.

Where is the Christian that knows God? Do you presume that you know
full well what He is, what He has done for you, and what He still
does for you every day? Every moment you receive His gifts: your life
is due to His beneficence and His love, you are carried in the bosom
of His providence as in the arms of your mother, He is continually
preoccupied with your welfare, He has done all, created all things
for your comfort and happiness; for your sake he has become man, to
participate in all the infirmities, weakness and miseries of our
humanity, in order to heal them and console us. Every thing speaks of
Him, and proclaims His holy name to you. All that you see, all that
you hear and feel must recall to your mind some gift of His love, or
some effect of His mercy. All creatures in heaven and on earth are
like so many voices which, mingling in a harmonious concert, sing to
you His praises and publish His mercies.

Do you listen to them? Do they not pass you unperceived like the
flitting zephyrs' leaving no trace to mark their passage. Did you
ever seriously try to render an account of the attributes of God, and
particularly of His goodness and justice? of His goodness to endear
Him to all, and of His justice to make Him be feared by all. Have you
considered well that to know God is to know all, because He is the
Author of all creation possessing in Himself to an infinite degree
all the perfections of His creation?

He who does not labor to obtain a knowledge of God can scarcely
obtain any knowledge of himself. How is it possible for us to know
what we are while we ignore what God is for us and what we owe Him?
Oh, how few there are who know themselves! The first condition
necessary to secure this knowledge, so important and so precious, is
profound humility, which unsparingly reveals the real motive of all
our actions, the uncompromising antagonist of our pride and self-love.

Now it is quite evident that he who does not know God does not
possess this virtue; for how can a man humble himself before a being
that he ignores? At first sight it may seem that there is nothing so
easy as to know one's self,--that this knowledge may be obtained by a
close consideration of the heart's operations; but when we give the
matter sufficient thought the work does not appear to be so easy. And
the number of those who have acquired this knowledge to any noted
degree is so limited that we are forced to infer that a knowledge so
rare must offer great difficulties.

However, there is one thing certain, namely: that this knowledge is
not obtained in the midst of tumult and pleasures, from the
seductions of the world or the distractions of life. It is not by
fleeing one's-self as we would fly an enemy; by concealing with a
complaisant but perfidious veil our defects, to avoid being troubled
by their appearance--always painful to pride; it is not by living a
dreamy life of fiction to which the slaves of the world condemn
themselves with a deplorable obsequiousness; it is not by continually
trying to deceive ourselves and others that we may learn how to know
ourselves; and, just as our knowledge of material things increases by
the frequency of our relations with them--for instance we know
persons better with whom we are intimately acquainted than those with
whom we are comparatively strangers--so, likewise, in order to know
ourselves well, we must live intimately with ourselves, observe
closely and impartially all the movements of our mind and heart,
frequently descending into the depth of our soul, scrupulously
examining our thoughts, desires and actions, sparing no pains to
discern well their source and motives; this latter portion of the
work is, without doubt, the most difficult, since it is the point at
which all the passions unite to deceive us by the most subtle
illusions. The best actions are despoiled of their merit by certain
motives of vanity, often concealed from our own notice.

The motives by which we are actuated are, relative to our actions,
what the eye is relative to our body,--it is the motive that gives
light and brilliancy to our actions. This is the sense in which we
should understand our Lord when He says if our eye be simple our
whole body will be luminous. Now the great light by which we can
clearly see the motives for which we act is meditation.

In the peaceful calm of solitude, and in the silent slumber of the
passions, meditation puts us in presence of ourselves, before our own
eyes, by which we see ourselves as in a true mirror. Meditation
teaches us to judge without prejudice what we have done and to
determine with propriety what we should do, by making the experience
of the past our lamp for the future, and by converting past mistakes
into practical lessons for the present.

The meditative and recollected soul will turn even her shortcomings
to good account; seeing her delinquencies, she clothes herself with
the mantle of humility, she rises with renewed confidence, and shuns
with greater care the occasion of those evils from which she has
suffered; she is rarely taken by surprise, a few moments' reflection
will suffice for her to determine what is to be done under the
circumstances; she is rarely taken in the snare of deception, for she
knows that human nature is weak, vacillating and unreliable, and,
consequently, she keeps herself on her guard.

Considered from this point of view; meditation is particularly
necessary to woman, because, being endowed with a very lively
imagination and a tender heart, she is more exposed to illusions
which, for the most part, spring from those two sources. Moreover,
surrounded as she is, by the seductions of the world; breathing
incessantly the poisoned atmosphere of flattery and adulation; waited
on by men who seek to deceive her; distracted by a multitude of cares
which absorb her soul; lost in a painful detail of trifles; how will
she be able to resist the united action of those trials; if she has
not contracted the salutary habit of frequently conversing with her
own heart by holy meditation and recollection?

The precious habit of meditation makes its influence felt by all the
faculties of the soul. It imparts to the mind the love of solitude,
assurance and confidence to the judgment, consistency to all the
thoughts. It is by reflecting on what we interiorly feel, as well as
on what we exteriorly see, that we enrich our intelligence and
acquire that cheerful alacrity and firmness of purpose so necessary
and precious in the most trying and delicate circumstances of life.

A woman of an irreflective mind becomes an easy prey to her own
impressions; rarely ever seeing things in their true light she is
balloted from one illusion to another, from one error to another; she
believes in every thing, hopes for all that she desires, and desires
all that flatters her. Unable to render an exact account either of
the thoughts of her mind or the movements of her heart, she acts
without aim or motive, governed solely by the caprice of her
imagination or the impulse of whimsical humor; equanimity is
impossible in the midst of such confusion. All this will have a fatal
effect upon her spiritual welfare; for what shocked her some time ago
will now fail to make the slightest impression. The bloom of youth
will soon fade away, leaving to her only confused souvenirs of those
days when, to be happy, it sufficed for her to descend into her own
soul, where she always found peace and consolation.

If you wish to preserve in all their integrity the faculties of your
soul; if you would not have your life ruled by the caprice of the
imagination; contract at an early age the salutary and happy custom
of making your meditation. Set apart a special time for it every day,
let it be practical, having for its object the spiritual progress of
your soul, the sanctification of your life. Lay out in God's presence
what you have to do every day, recall to mind the places, persons and
things that have been to you an occasion of sin, or a help in the
exercise of virtue, in order to avoid the evil accruing from the one
source, and increase the influence arising from the other. Never
recline your head upon your pillow before having rendered an exact
account of the day you have just finished, like the merchant who,
every night, tots up his loss and gain, to see what has been the
result of the day's transactions. The next day, with the double
armour of experience and resolve, you will be better able to avoid
what proved noxious before, as well as to do the good that you had
omitted. By thus acting you will give to your life a sure direction,
a powerful impetus in the accomplishment of all that is worthy of
your glorious destiny.




CHAPTER XIX.


OBEDIENCE TO PARENTS.

In the natural order of things, man, after having obeyed his parents
in his youth, becomes in turn the head of another family which he
must govern by the authority of his word and example. God has given
to woman another vocation. She obeys from her childhood, and
obedience becomes more necessary to her as she advances in years; for
when she quits the paternal roof for the one of her choice, it is
still to obey and be directed by the will of another. But in this
second moiety of her life she often finds the practice of obedience
more difficult and painful than it was when she lived with her
parents. More than once has the young woman, allured by the deceitful
charms of a false liberty, left with a secret joy the paternal roof,
hoping thereby to be delivered from the duty of obedience which
weighed so heavily on her heart. But, alas! she has often been
obliged to regret those days as the happiest of her life, when the
tender solicitude of a mother rendered submission sweet and easy.

God, whose Providence is infinitely wise, has disposed all things in
such a way that each epoch of life is a preparation to that which
follows; strengthened by the labors of the past, we are fitted for
those of the future, and prepared for the accomplishment of the
duties of to-day by our fidelity to obligations less difficult of
yesterday; we are thus imperceptibly and safely conducted by this
graded scale to the end for which we were created.

Hence you may consider the present as your noviciate to the future;
the family circle at home is the image of that with which you must
live at a later time; and while your duties and trials will vary with
your position, there is one obligation that always remains
invariable; that is obedience. If you have learned well how to obey
your parents whom God has given you, you will find it easier in after
life to bend your will when obliged in submission to that of another.

At present holy obedience is not painful to you; on the contrary, it
is a pleasure, as it is a means by which you can please your dear
parents whom you love; and by force of habit it is now so deeply
engraved in your heart as to be an act of second nature. But other
times and other circumstances will present new difficulties, when
perhaps you will be obliged to obey a man of your own age, possessed
of none of those qualities that give authority and prestige to command.

The familiarity that exists between the married couple which, when
truly Christian, is one of the greatest charms of their life, not
unfrequently becomes for woman an obstacle to the observance of
obedience; but she has reason to rejoice when her delinquency does
not diminish the sacred authority of her husband's commands. The lady
who has been docile to the orders of her parents will be docile to
those of her husband; for as we are assured by Holy Writ, our
accomplishment of the duties that God has imposed on us relative to
our parents is rewarded even in this life; as likewise our
delinquencies on this point will incur heaven's displeasure.

The paternal home should be for you a school of respect, obedience,
gratitude, and love; and these virtues should be constantly
manifested in your conduct; for, mark it well, you will be in the
position destined for you later by God what you are presently in that
which you now occupy. There is a logical succession in all our
actions, whether good or bad. In each one of your actions may be
found the germ of another which, being developed in due time, will
produce others. The same is also true of that happy or unfortunate
succession of thoughts and affections which is developed into habit;
and which is engrafted in our very souls, forming, as it were, an
integral part of our nature. From our infancy, God, in His infinite
goodness, has given us a facility to do good, which in the course of
time can be strengthened by habit; it will enable us to surmount
obstacles and dangers that increase with age, but which are ignored
in childhood.

The individual practice of respect, obedience, confidence; and
gratitude is necessary for the preservation of society; and in order
to render this practice easy for us, God, in loving goodness has
removed from those beautiful flowers of virtue, whose perfume should
embalm our whole life, the thorns that might pierce us. He has
confided their care to those to whom, after God, we owe our life, and
towards whom we are drawn by an invincible inclination of the heart.
When we merge into the noon-tide of life we find these virtues
already engrafted in our souls, with little trouble to us, for they
were planted there by the hands of good and pious parents; and, as a
reward for our fidelity to their instructions, those cherished
virtues take deep root in the heart and grow imperceptibly as we
advance in years.

But if, instead of being docile to their orders, we have stubbornly
