kinds of forces. Thence, surrounded by the kings and the peoples he had
subjugated, the hero marched against king Viswagaswa--that bull of
Puru's race. Having vanquished in battle the brave mountaineers, who
were all great warriors, the son of Pandu, O king, then occupied with
the help of his troops, the town protected by the Puru king. Having
vanquished in battle the Puru king, as also the robber tribes of the
mountains, the son of Pandu brought under his sway the seven tribes
called Utsava-sanketa. That bull of the Kshatriya race then defeated
the brave Kshatriyas of Kashmira and also king Lohita along with ten
minor chiefs. Then the Trigartas, the Daravas, the Kokonadas, and
various other Kshatriyas, O king, advanced against the son of Pandu.
That Prince of the Kuru race then took the delightful town of Avisari,
and then brought under his sway Rochamana ruling in Uraga. Then the son
of Indra (Arjuna), putting forth his might, pressed the delightful town
of Singhapura that was well-protected with various weapons. Then
Arjuna, that bull amongst the son of Pandu, at the head of all his
troops, fiercely attacked the regions called Suhma and Sumala. Then the
son of Indra, endued with great prowess, after pressing them with great
force, brought the Valhikas always difficult of being vanquished, under
his sway. Then Falguna, the son of Pandu, taking with him a select
force, defeated the Daradas along with the Kambojas. Then the exalted
son of Indra vanquished the robber tribes that dwelt in the
north-eastern frontier and those also that dwelt in the woods. And, O
great king, the son of Indra also subjugated the allied tribes of the
Lohas, the eastern Kambojas, and northern Rishikas. And the battle with
the Rishikas was fierce in the extreme. Indeed, the fight that took
place between them and the son of Pritha was equal to that between the
gods and the Asuras in which Taraka (the wife of Vrihaspati) had become
the cause of so much slaughter. And defeating, O king, the Rishikas in
the field of battle, Arjuna took from them as tribute eight horses that
were of the colour of the parrot's breast, as also other horses of the
hues of the peacock, born in northern and other climes and endued with
high speed. At last having conquered all the Himalayas and the Nishkuta
mountains, that bull among men, arriving at the White mountains,
encamped on its breast."


SECTION XXVII

Vaisampayana said,--"that heroic and foremost of the Pandavas endued
with great energy, crossing the White mountains, subjugated the country
of the Limpurushas ruled by Durmaputra, after a collision involving a
great slaughter of Kshatriyas, and brought the region under his
complete sway. Having reduced that country, the son of Indra (Arjuna)
with a collected mind marched at the head of his troops to the country
called Harataka, ruled by the Guhakas. Subjugating them by a policy of
conciliation, the Kuru prince beheld (in that region) that excellent of
lakes called Manasa and various other lakes and tanks sacred to the
Rishis. And the exalted prince having arrived at the lake Manasa
conquered the regions ruled by the Gandharvas that lay around the
Harataka territories. Here the conqueror took, as tribute from the
country, numerous excellent horses called Tittiri, Kalmasha, Manduka.
At last the son of the slayer of Paka, arriving in the country of North
Harivarsha desired to conquer it. Thereupon certain frontier-guards of
huge bodies and endued with great strength and energy, coming to him
with gallant hearts, said, 'O son of Pritha, this country can be never
conquered by thee. If thou seekest thy good, return hence. He that
entereth this region, if human, is sure to perish. We have been
gratified with thee; O hero, thy conquests have been enough. Nor is
anything to be seen here, O Arjuna, that may be conquered by thee. The
Northern Kurus live here. There cannot be war here. Even if thou
enterest it, thou will not be able to behold anything, for with human
eyes nothing can be seen here. If, however thou seekest anything else,
O Bharata tell us, O tiger among men, so that we may do thy bidding.'
Thus addressed by them, Arjuna smilingly addressing them, said,--'I
desire the acquisition of the imperial dignity by Yudhishthira the
just, of great intelligence. If your land is shut against human beings,
I shall not enter it. Let something be paid unto Yudhishthira by ye as
tribute.' Hearing these words of Arjuna, they gave him as tribute many
cloths and ornaments of celestial make, silks of celestial texture and
skins of celestial origin.

"It was thus that tiger among men subjugated the countries that lay to
the North, having fought numberless battles with both Kshatriya and
robber tribes. And having vanquished the chiefs and brought them under
his sway he exacted from them much wealth, various gems and jewels, the
horses of the species called Tittiri and Kalmasha, as also those of the
colour of the parrot's wings and those that were like the peacocks in
hue and all endued with the speed of the wind. And surrounded, O king,
by a large army consisting of the four kinds of forces, the hero came
back to the excellent city of Sakraprastha. And Partha offered the
whole of that wealth, together with the animals he had brought, unto
Yudhishthira the just. And commanded by the monarch, the hero retired
to a chamber of the palace for rest."


SECTION XXVIII

Vaisampayana said,--"in the meantime, Bhimasena also endued with great
energy, having obtained the assent of Yudhishthira the just marched
towards the eastern direction. And the tiger among the Bharatas,
possessed of great valour and ever increasing the sorrows of his foes,
was accompanied by a mighty host with the full complement of elephants
and horses and cars, well-armed and capable of crushing all hostile
kingdoms. That tiger among men, the son of Pandu, going first into the
great country of the Panchalas, began by various means to conciliate
that tribe. Then that hero, that bull of the Bharata race, within a
short time, vanquished the Gandakas and the Videhas. That exalted one
then subjugated the Dasarnas. There in the country of the Dasarnas, the
king called Sudharman with his bare arms fought a fierce battle with
Bhimasena. And Bhimasena, beholding that feat of the illustrious king,
appointed the mighty Sudharman as the first in command of his forces.
Then Bhima of terrible prowess marched towards the east, causing the
earth itself to tremble with the tread of the mighty host that followed
him. Then that hero who in strength was the foremost of all strong men
defeated in battle Rochamana, the king of Aswamedha, at the head of all
his troops. And the son of Kunti, having vanquished that monarch by
performing feats that excelled in fierceness, subjugated the eastern
region. Then that prince of the Kuru race, endued with great prowess
going into the country of Pulinda in the south, brought Sukumara and
the king Sumitra under his sway. Then, O Janamejaya, that bull in the
Bharata race, at the command of Yudhishthira the just marched against
Sisupala of great energy. The king of Chedi, hearing of the intentions
of the son of Pandu, came out of his city. And that chastiser of all
foes then received the son of Pritha with respect. Then, O king, those
bulls of the Chedi and the Kuru lines, thus met together, enquired
after each other's welfare. Then, O monarch, the king of Chedi offered
his kingdom unto Bhima and said smilingly,--'O sinless one, upon what
art thou bent?' And Bhima thereupon represented unto him the intentions
of king Yudhishthira. And Bhima dwelt there, O king, for thirty nights,
duly entertained by Sisupala. And after this he set out from Chedi with
his troops and vehicles."


SECTION XXIX

Vaisampayana said,--"that chastiser of all foes then vanquished king
Srenimat of the country of Kumara, and then Vrihadvala, the king of
Kosala. Then the foremost of the sons of Pandu, by performing feats
excelling in fierceness, defeated the virtuous and mighty king
Dirghayaghna of Ayodhya. And the exalted one then subjugated the
country of Gopalakaksha and the northern Kosalas and also the king of
Mallas. And the mighty one, arriving then in the moist region at the
foot of the Himalayas soon brought the whole country under his sway.
And that bull of Bharata race brought under control in this way diverse
countries. And endued with great energy and in strength the foremost of
all strong men, the son of Pandu next conquered the country of
Bhallata, as also the mountain of Suktimanta that was by the side of
Bhallata. Then Bhima of terrible prowess and long arms, vanquishing in
battle the unretreating Suvahu the king of Kasi, brought him under
complete sway. Then that bull among the sons of Pandu overcame in
battle, by sheer force, the great king Kratha reigning in the region
lying about Suparsa. Then the hero of great energy vanquished the
Matsya and the powerful Maladas and the country called Pasubhumi that
was without fear or oppression of any kind. And the long-armed hero
then, coming from that land, conquered Madahara, Mahidara, and the
Somadheyas, and turned his steps towards the north. And the mighty son
of Kunti then subjugated, by sheer force, the country called
Vatsabhumi, and the king of the Bhargas, as also the ruler of the
Nishadas and Manimat and numerous other kings. Then Bhima, with
scarcely any degree of exertion and very soon, vanquished the southern
Mallas and the Bhagauanta mountains. And the hero next vanquished, by
policy alone, the Sarmakas and the Varmakas. And that tiger among men
then defeated with comparative ease that lord of earth, Janaka the king
of the Videhas. And the hero then subjugated strategically the Sakas
and the barbarians living in that part of the country. And the son of
Pandu, sending forth expeditions from Videha, conquered the seven kings
of the Kiratas living about the Indra mountain. The mighty hero then,
endued with abundant energy, vanquished in battle the Submas and the
Prasuhmas. And winning them over to his side, the son of Kunti,
possessed of great strength, marched against Magadha. On his way he
subjugated the monarchs known by the names of Danda and Dandadhara. And
accompanied by those monarchs, the son of Pandu marched against
Girivraja. After bringing the son of Jarasandha under his sway by
conciliation and making him pay tribute, the hero then accompanied by
the monarchs he had vanquished, marched against Kansa. And making the
earth tremble by means of his troops consisting of the four kinds of
forces, the foremost of the Pandavas then encountered Karna that slayer
of foes. And, O Bharata, having subjugated Karna and brought him under
his sway, the mighty hero then vanquished the powerful king of the
mountainous regions. And the son of Pandu then slew in a fierce
encounter, by the strength of his arms, the mighty king who dwelt in
Madagiri. And the Pandava then, O king, subjugated in battle those
strong and brave heroes of fierce prowess, viz., the heroic and mighty
Vasudeva, the king of Pundra and king Mahaujah who reigned in
Kausika-kachchha, and then attacked the king of Vanga. And having
vanquished Samudrasena and king Chandrasena and Tamralipta, and also
the king of the Karvatas and the ruler of the Suhmas, as also the kings
that dwelt on the sea-shore, that bull among the Bharatas then
conquered all Mlechchha tribes. The mighty son of the wind-god having
thus conquered various countries, and exacting tributes from them all
advanced towards Lohity. And the son of Pandu then made all the
Mlechchha kings dwelling in the marshy regions on the sea-coast, pay
tributes and various kinds of wealth, and sandal wood and aloes, and
clothes and gems, and pearls and blankets and gold and silver and
valuable corals. The Mlechchha kings showered upon the illustrious son
of Kunti a thick downpour of wealth consisting of coins and gems
counted by hundreds of millions. Then returning to Indraprastha, Bhima
of terrible prowess offered the whole of that wealth unto king
Yudhisthira the just."


SECTION XXX

Vaisampayana said,--"thus also Sahadeva, dismissed with affection by
king Yudhisthira the just, marched towards the southern direction
accompanied by a mighty host. Strong in strength, that mighty prince of
the Kuru race, vanquishing completely at the outset the Surasenas,
brought the king of Matsya under his sway. And the hero then, defeating
Dantavakra, the mighty king of the Adhirajas and making him pay
tribute, re-established him on his throne. The prince then brought
under his sway Sukumara and then king Sumitra, and he next vanquished
the other Matsyas and then the Patacharas. Endued with great
intelligence, the Kuru warrior then conquered soon enough the country
of the Nishadas and also the high hill called Gosringa, and that lord
of earth called Srenimat. And subjugating next the country called
Navarashtra, the hero marched against Kuntibhoja, who with great
willingness accepted the sway of the conquering hero. And marching
thence to the banks of the Charmanwati, the Kuru warrior met the son of
king Jamvaka, who had, on account of old hostilities, been defeated
before by Vasudeva. O Bharata, the son of Jamvaka gave battle to
Sahadeva. And Sahadeva defeating the prince marched towards the south.
The mighty warrior then vanquished the Sekas and others, and exacted
tributes from them and also various kinds of gems and wealth. Allying
himself with the vanquished tribes the prince then marched towards the
countries that lay on the banks of the Narmada. And defeating there in
battle the two heroic kings of Avanti, called Vinda and Anuvinda,
supported by a mighty host, the mighty son of the twin gods exacted
much wealth from them. After this the hero marched towards the town of
Bhojakata, and there, O king of unfading glory, a fierce encounter took
place between him and the king of that city for two whole days. But the
son of Madri, vanquishing the invincible Bhismaka, then defeated in
battle the king of Kosala and the ruler of the territories lying on the
banks of the Venwa, as also the Kantarakas and the kings of the eastern
Kosalas. The hero then defeating both the Natakeyas and the Heramvaks
in battle, and subjugating the country of Marudha, reduced Munjagrama
by sheer strength. And the son of Pandu then vanquished the mighty
monarchs of the Nachinas and the Arvukas and the various forest king of
that part of the country. Endued with great strength the hero then
reduced to subjection king Vatadhipa. And defeating in battle the
Pulindas, the hero then marched southward. And the younger brother of
Nakula then fought for one whole day with the king of Pandrya. The
long-armed hero having vanquished that monarch marched further to the
south. And then he beheld the celebrated caves of Kishkindhya and in
that region fought for seven days with the monkey-kings Mainda and
Dwivida. Those illustrious kings however, without being tired in the
encounter, were gratified with Sahadeva. And joyfully addressing the
Kuru prince, they said,--'O tiger among the sons of Pandu, go hence,
taking with the tribute from us all. Let the mission of the king
Yudhishthira the just possessed of great intelligence, be accomplished
without hindrance.' And taking jewels and gems from them all, the hero
marched towards the city of Mahishmati, and there that bull of men did
battle with king Nila. The battle that took place between king Nila and
the mighty Sahadeva the son of Pandu, that slayer of hostile heroes,
was fierce and terrible. And the encounter was an exceedingly bloody
one, and the life of the hero himself was exposed to great risk, for
the god Agni himself assisted king Nila in that fight. Then the cars,
heroes, elephants, and the soldiers in their coats of mail of
Sahadeva's army all appeared to be on fire. And beholding this the
prince of the Kuru race became exceedingly anxious. And, O Janamejaya,
at sight of this the hero could not resolve upon what he should do."

Janamejaya said,--"O regenerate one, why was it that the god Agni
become hostile in battle unto Sahadeva, who was fighting simply for the
accomplishment of a sacrifice (and therefore, for the gratification of
Agni himself)?"

Vaisampayana said,--"It is said, O Janamejaya, that the god Agni while
residing in Mahishmati, earned the reputation of a lover. King Nila had
a daughter who was exceedingly beautiful. She used always to stay near
the sacred fire of her father, causing it to blaze up with vigour. And
it so happened that king Nila's fire, even if fanned, would not blaze
up till agitated by the gentle breath of that girl's fair lips. And it
was said in King Nila's palace and in the house of all his subjects
that the god Agni desired that beautiful girl for his bride. And it so
happened that he was accepted by the girl herself. One day the deity
assuming the form of a Brahmana, was happily enjoying the society of
the fair one, when he was discovered by the king. And the virtuous king
thereupon ordered the Brahmana to be punished according to law. At this
the illustrious deity flamed up in wrath. And beholding this, the king
wondered much and bent his head low on the ground. And after some time
the king bowing low bestowed the daughter of his upon the god Agni,
disguised as a Brahmana. And the god Vibhabasu (Agni) accepting that
fair-browed daughter of king Nila, became gracious unto that monarch.
And Agni, the illustrious gratifier of all desires also asked the
monarch to beg a boon of him. And the king begged that his troops might
never be struck with panic while engaged in battle. And from that time,
O king, those monarchs who from ignorance of this, desire to subjugate
king Nila's city, are consumed by Hutasana (Agni). And from that time,
O perpetuator of the Kuru race, the girls of the city of Mahishmati
became rather unacceptable to others (as wives). And Agni by his boon
granted them sexual liberty, so that the women of that town always roam
about at will, each unbound to a particular husband. And, O bull of the
Bharata race, from that time the monarchs (of other countries) forsake
this city for fear of Agni. And the virtuous Sahadeva, beholding his
troops afflicted with fear and surrounded by flames of fire, himself
stood there immovable as a mountain. And purifying himself and touching
water, the hero (Sahadeva) then addressed Agni, the god that
sanctifieth everything, in these words,--

"'I bow unto thee, O thou whose track is always marked with smoke.
These my exertions are all for thee. O thou sanctifier of all, thou art
the mouth of the gods and thou art Sacrifice personified. Thou art
called Pavaka because thou sanctifiest everything, and thou art
Havyavahana, because thou carriest the clarified butter that is poured
on thee. The Veda have sprung for ministering unto thee, and,
therefore, thou art called Jataveda. Chief of the gods as thou art,
thou art called Chitrabhanu, Anala, Vibhavasu, Hutasana, Jvalana,
Sikhi, Vaiswanara, Pingesa, Plavanga, Bhuritejah. Thou art he from whom
Kumara (Kartikeya) had his origin; thou art holy; thou art called
Rudragarva and Hiranyakrit. Let thee, O Agni, grant me energy, let Vayu
grant me life, let Earth grant me nourishment and strength, and let
Water grant me prosperity. O Agni, thou who art the first cause of the
waters, thou who art of great purity, thou for ministering unto whom
the Vedas have sprung, thou who art the foremost of the deities, thou
who art their mouth, O purify me by thy truth. Rishis and Brahmanas,
Deities and Asuras pour clarified butter every day, according to the
ordinance into thee during sacrifices. Let the rays of truth emanating
from thee, while thou exhibitest thyself in those sacrifices, purify
me. Smoke-bannered as thou art and possessed of flames, thou great
purifier from all sins born of Vayu and ever present as thou art in all
creatures, O purify me by the rays of thy truth. Having cleansed myself
thus cheerfully, O exalted one, do I pray unto thee. O Agni, grant me
now contentment and prosperity, and knowledge and gladness.'"

Vaisampayana continued.--"He that will pour clarified butter into Agni
reciting these mantras, will ever be blessed with prosperity, and
having his soul under complete control will also be cleansed from all
his sins.

"Sahadeva, addressing Agni again, said,--'O carrier of the sacrificial
libations, it behoveth thee not to obstruct a sacrifice!' Having said
this, that tiger among men--the son of Madri--spreading some kusa grass
on earth sat down in expectation of the (approaching) fire and in front
of those terrified and anxious troops of his. And Agni, too, like the
ocean that never transgresseth its continents, did not pass over his
head. On the other hand approaching Sahadeva quietly and addressing
that prince of the Kuru race, Agni that god of men gave him every
assurance and said,--'O thou of the Kuru race, rise up from this
posture. O rise up, I was only trying thee. I know all thy purpose, as
also those of the son of Dharma (Yudhisthira). But, O best of the
Bharata race, as long as there is a descendant of king Nila's line, so
long should this town be protected by me. I will, however O son of
Pandu, gratify the desires of thy heart.' And at these words of Agni, O
bull of the Bharata race, the son of Madri rose up with a cheerful
heart, and joining his hands and bending his head worshipped that god
of fire, sanctifier of all beings. And at last, after Agni had
disappeared, king Nila came there, and at the command of that deity,
worshipped with due rites Sahadeva, that tiger among men--that master
of battle. And Sahadeva accepted that worship and made him pay tribute.
And having brought king Nila under his sway thus, the victorious son of
Madri then went further towards the south. The long-armed hero then
brought the king of Tripura of immeasurable energy under his sway. And
next turning his forces against the Paurava kingdom, he vanquished and
reduced to subjection the monarch thereof. And the prince, after this,
with great efforts brought Akriti, the king of Saurashtra and preceptor
of the Kausikas under his sway. The virtuous prince, while staying in
the kingdom of Saurashtra sent an ambassador unto king Rukmin of
Bhishmaka within the territories of Bhojakata, who, rich in possessions
and intelligence, was the friend of Indra himself. And the monarch
along with his son, remembering their relationship with Krishna,
cheerfully accepted, O king, the sway of the son of Pandu. And the
master of battle then, having exacted jewels and wealth from king
Rukmin, marched further to the south. And, endued with great energy and
great strength, the hero then reduced to subjection, Surparaka and
Talakata, and the Dandakas also. The Kuru warrior then vanquished and
brought under his subjection numberless kings of the Mlechchha tribe
living on the sea coast, and the Nishadas and the cannibals and even
the Karnapravarnas, and those tribes also called the Kalamukhas who
were a cross between human beings and Rakshasas, and the whole of the
Cole mountains, and also Surabhipatna, and the island called the Copper
island, and the mountain called Ramaka. The high-souled warrior, having
brought under subjection king Timingila, conquered a wild tribe known
by the name of the Kerakas who were men with one leg. The son of Pandu
also conquered the town of Sanjayanti and the country of the Pashandas
and the Karahatakas by means of his messengers alone, and made all of
them pay tributes to him. The hero brought under his subjection and
exacted tributes from the Paundrayas and the Dravidas along with the
Udrakeralas and the Andhras and the Talavanas, the Kalingas and the
Ushtrakarnikas, and also the delightful city of Atavi and that of the
Yavanas. And, O king of kings, that slayer of all foes, the virtuous
and intelligent son of Madri having arrived at the sea-shore, then
despatched with great assurance messengers unto the illustrious
Vibhishana, the grandson of Pulastya. And the monarch willingly
accepted the sway of the son of Pandu, for that intelligent and exalted
king regarded it all as the act of Time. And he sent unto the son of
Pandu diverse kinds of jewels and gems, and sandal and also wood, and
many celestial ornaments, and much costly apparel, and many valuable
pearls. And the intelligent Sahadeva, accepting them all, returned to
