The people are the rulers; the power of the future is in their hands.
Limit their horizon to this life, let penury, sickness, and sorrow
change the man to a wolf, let him know no God and Father Who hears his
cry, no Saviour to help, no brother to bind up his wounds, let there be
on the one side wealth and luxury and wanton waste, and on the other
side poverty, misery, and despair, and there will be, as there has been,
a cry for blood.  We wonder why men pass by the Church to found clubs
and brotherhoods and orders.  They will have them, and they ought to
have them, until the Church is in its Divine love what its Founder
designed it to be--the brotherhood in Christ of the children of our God
and Father.  What the world needs to-day is not alms, not hospitals, not
homes of mercy alone.  It needs the spirit and the power of the love of
Christ.  It needs the voice, the ear, the hand, and the heart of Christ
seen in and working in His children.  No powers of government, no
_prestige_ of social position, no prerogatives of Churchly authority can
meet the issues of this hour; we have waited already too long.
Brotherhood men will have, and it will be the brotherhood of the
commune, or brotherhood in Christ as the children of our God and Father.
Infidelity answers no questions, heals no wounds, fulfils no hopes.  The
Gospel will do, is doing, to-day what it has done through all the ages:
leading men out of sin and darkness and despair to the liberty of sons
of God.


In a day of division and unrest there will be many questions which
perplex earnest souls.  Some will dwell on the subjective side of the
faith, others will think most of its manifestations in the life.  These
questions will affect organization for Christian work, public worship,
and find expression in the ritual of the Church.  There is no room for
differences if Christ be first, Christ be last, and Christ in
everything.  The ritual of the Church must be the expression of her
life.  It must symbolize her faith; it must be subject to her authority.
As the years go by worship will be more beautiful.  The "garments of the
king's daughter may be of wrought gold," and she "clothed in raiment of
needlework," but "she will have a name that she liveth and is dead,"
unless her "fine linen is the righteousness of the saints."  Lastly, to
none is this council so dear as to those whose lives are spent in the
darkness of heathenism, or who have gone out to new lands to lay
foundations for the work of the Church of God.  In loneliness, with
deferred hope, neglected by brethren, your only refuge to cry as a child
to God, it is a joy for you to feel the beating of a brother's heart,
and hear the music of a brother's voice, and kneel with brothers at the
dear old trysting-place, the table of our Lord.  Let us consecrate all
we have and are to Him, let us remember loved ones far away, let us
gather all the work we have so long garnered in our hearts and lay it at
his feet.  We shall not have met in vain if out of the love learned of
Him we give each to the other, and to all fellow-laborers for Him, a
brother's love, a brother's sympathy, and a brother's prayers.  I do not
know how to clothe in words the thronging memories which cluster around
us in this holy place, what searchings of heart, what cries to God, what
communions with Christ, what consolations of the Holy Spirit have been
witnessed in this sacred place.  I cannot call over the long roll of
saints, confessors, and martyrs, whose "name are written in the Lamb's
Book of Life."  Two names will be remembered to-day by us all.  One,
that gentle Archbishop Longley, who in the greatness of his love saw
with a prophet's eye the Mission of the Church and planned these
conferences that our hearts might beat as one in the battle of the last
time.  The other, the wisest of counsellors and the most loving of
brethren, the great-hearted Archbishop Tait, whose dying legacy to his
brethren was "love one another."  They have finished their course and
entered into rest.  A little more work, a few more trials, and we, too,
shall finish our course.  We are not two companies, the militant and
triumphant are one.  We are the advance and rear of one host travelling
to the Canaan of God's rest.  God grant that we, too, may so follow
Christ that we may have an abundant entrance to His eternal kingdom.





V. _SERMON AT THE FOURTH ANNUAL CONVENTION OF THE BROTHERHOOD OF
ST. ANDREW IN CLEVELAND, OHIO, SEPT. 29, 1889_.


"_God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life_."--ST. JOHN, iii. 16.


SIN, sorrow and death have not been invented by Christian priests.  They
are world facts, they belong to every home, and are hid in every man's
heart.  There can be no design without a designer, no law without a
lawgiver, no creation without a creator.  So I say, with the leading
scientist of England, "God is a necessity of human thought."  Is this
God an inexorable ruler, whose right is His infinite might? or is He an
eternal Father, whose might is His infinite right?  And so the question
comes home to the heart:  Does God care for us?  The body is cared for.
Every invention of man ministers to the life that is between the cradle
and the grave.  Man has created nothing.  The lightning would run its
circuit in the Garden of Eden as well as when Morse made it man's
messenger.  The veil has been lifted so that man can look into God's
storehouse and read laws as old as creation.  But the body is not the
man.  You ask me how do I know I have a soul?  I know it as I know I
have a body--by self-consciousness.  There is no place in this world
where men are not compelled by absolute necessity to recognize the act
and the will of a soul within, which directs the act.  I ask again, does
God care for me?  I say it reverently, brother, you cannot conceive of a
God who could create a world like this, if He can feel one throb of pity
for His children, unless you believe He has provided a remedy for sin,
sorrow, and death.  The coming of God into the family of man is an
absolute necessity of the very being of God.  The incarnation is the
outcome of the possibility that God can love.  I turn then to this
record and I ask, is this Jesus the friend that the world has waited for
and looked for?  No one that has walked this earth could use the words
which every day rested upon His lips: "I and the God you worship are
one."  "I am the bread that is come down from heaven, and the bread I
shall give you is My flesh, and I give it for the life of the world."
"I am the resurrection and the life; if any man shall believe in Me, if
he were dead he shall live"--unless he were God incarnate.   The miracles
of Jesus were not violations of the laws of nature; they were the divine
proofs that that God whose hand is behind every law of nature had come
into the world to help those who needed help.  When He multiplied bread
in His hands, He did of His own will that which God does when He
multiplies the wheat in the harvest.  When He created the wine of Cana,
He did that of His own will which He does when He distills the dewdrop
in the clusters of the vine.  But that which unseals my heart, is the
divine compassion, is the tender pity, is the love that never turns from
the weary.  If man had invented this Gospel, the story of Mary Magdalene
would never have been in the record.  It is not in the wrecks strewn
along the path of life that men would find those they would lift to the
bosom of God.  It is the Divine eye that pities, it is the Divine hand
that is reached out to save.  I follow Him to the cross, I follow Him to
the grave, where we are going, where our loved ones are sleeping.  The
third day He came back from the darkness; He showed men, by the marks of
the nails in His hands and by the print of the spear in His side, that
He was the very Jesus they parted with at the foot of the cross; and He
ascended to heaven to be the friend of any aching heart that needs a
friend at the right hand of God.  The Gospel of Jesus Christ is not a
philosophy, it is not a dogma; it is the story of a Person, a real hand
to grasp, a real Saviour to love, a real God to save. Marvelous as is
this story that never can grow old and will be the burden of the songs
of the redeemed, more wonderful is the Christ of history.  Men ask for
proof.  You do not ask for proof of a sun when the world is bending low
with golden harvests   The other day there was a gathering of great men,
scholars, philosophers.  It so happened that one man who had lost his
faith, congratulated his fellows that superstition was dying out, that
the day was at hand when Christianity would be an effete thing of the
past.  James Russell Lowell rose, the blood rushing to his cheeks, and
quietly said: "Show me twelve miles square in the world in which I live
where childhood is cared for, where womanhood is reverenced, where old
age is protected, where life and property are absolutely safe, where it
is possible for a decent man to live decently--where the Gospel of Jesus
Christ has not gone before and made that life possible; and then I will
listen to your revilings of my Master."  Can I go nearer your heart?
There is a wide difference between men, but there is one side of human
nature that is the same; it is that we call the heart--that which loves,
that which fears, that which suffers, that which is the same in the
poorest laborer that ever handled the spade as in the greatest scholar
that ever graced a university.  If we can get the rubbish from the
heart, the good news of God sounds the same to all.


When Sir Walter Scott was dying, in suffering and agony he turned to
Lockhart and said, "Read to me; I am in such agony."  He said, "What
book, Sir Walter?"  "What book?  There is but one book for a dying man;
it is the story of the One that passed this way before me, of Jesus the
Saviour."  I stood the other day by the death-bed of one who, when I
first met him was a savage warrior.  He looked up in my face and said,
"The Great Spirit has called me.  I am going on the last journey.  I am
not afraid, for Jesus is going with me and I shan't be lonesome on the
road."  Brothers, it is to tell this story that you have banded
yourselves together in the service of Him who redeemed you with His
precious blood.  Your motto must be the words of that sainted apostle
whose honored name you bear:  "We have found Christ."  For it is only
when we have reached out our hand to grasp the hand of Jesus, that,
because we cannot help it, we reach out the other hand to help some one
else.  We cannot from the heart say, "Our Father," and not remember
wandering brothers whom we may lead to the Lamb of God that taketh away
the sins of the world.  The story is not for wage-workers alone, not for
the poor in the attic and the cellar alone; it is for the man who lives
in the marble house, it is for the trafficker in the market, it is for
every one away from home and heaven and God.  We must find the way to
speak as one tempted man has the right to speak to a brother that is
battling with temptation.  It is not done by assailing sinners as you
would besiege a city.  We have tried hard words and the have answered us
with a curse.  It does no good to tell the poor wretch in the ditch, "It
is your fault."  We have led men to Mount Sinai, and their hearts would
break if we led them to Mount Calvary.  It is this that makes the life
of an earnest minister of Christ the happiest life that God ever gave to
man.  I am not here to-day to tell you what to do, but to tell you your
Master's secret, "If you give Him the will, He will find for you the
way."  Although you might be the veriest stammerer, if Christ speaks out
in all your life, you will be the best talker in the world.  We must
believe in our work; we cannot make others believe until we first
believe ourselves.  Our feet must be upon the rock; there is no question
of success or failure there.  It may be Athanasius against the world,
but the Athanasius and the faith of Christ will conquer.

And lastly, brothers, never since man has lived on the earth has there
been an hour when a Christian man might be so thankful to God that he
can live and that he can work.  In all the ages of this world's history
there never have been such marvels before man's eyes as we see to-day.
I speak not only of the wondrous secrets of God's storehouse, that, for
some end in the councils of eternity, have been reserved for the last
days.  You are living at a time when impenetrable barriers have been
broken down; when God is fusing the nations of the earth into a common
brotherhood; when there is not a place in the wide world, where, if you
will, you may not carry the Gospel of Jesus Christ.  Nay, more; you are
part of a race that God in His Providence seems to have placed in the
forefront of the nations of the earth.  I am not speaking of
Anglo-Saxons, but I am speaking of the race that God has been fusing
out of every tongue, and tie, and kin of the earth; and they having one
language, are, I believe, to do God's work in the last days.  One
hundred years ago English speaking people numbered less than many of the
Latin races of Europe; to-day there are one hundred and fifty millions.
And when I remember how God ordered that the Greek tongue should become
the tongue of the whole civilized world to prepare for the first
