83. He fixed a station for it ...

[Of the remaining 57 lines of this tablet only fragments of 17 lines
are preserved, and these yield no connected sense.]



SIXTH TABLET.

1. On hearing the words of the gods, the heart of Marduk moved him to
carry out the works of a craftsman.

2. He opened his mouth, he spake to Ea that which he had planned in
his heart, he gave counsel [saying]:

3. "I will solidify blood, I will form bone.

4. "I will set up man, 'Man' [shall be] his name.

5. "I will create the man 'Man.'

6. "The service of the gods shall be established, and I will set them
(i.e., the gods) free.

7. "I will make twofold the ways of the gods, and I will beautify
[them].

8. "They are [now] grouped together in one place, but they shall be
partitioned in two."[1]

[Footnote 1: Reading, _ishtenish lu kuppudu-ma ana shina lu
uzizu_.]

9. Ea answered and spake a word unto him

10. For the consolation of the gods[1] he repeated unto him a word of
counsel [saying]:

[Footnote 1: _I.e._, "to cause the gods to be content,"]

11. "Let one brother [god of their number] be given, let him suffer
destruction that men may be fashioned.

12. "Let the great gods be assembled, let this [chosen] one be given
in order that they (i.e., the other gods) may be established."

13. Marduk assembled the great gods, [he came near] graciously, he
issued a decree,

14. He opened his mouth, he addressed the gods; the King spake a word
unto the Anunnaki [saying]:

15. "Verily, that which I spake unto you aforetime was true.

16. "[This time also] I speak truth. [Some there were who] opposed
me.[1]

[Footnote 1: Literally "they (indefinite) opposed me."]

17. "Who was it that created the strife,

18. "Who caused Tiamat to revolt, to join battle with me?

19. "Let him who created the strife be given [as sacrifice],

20. "I will cause the axe in the act of sinking to do away his sin."

21. The great gods, the Igigi, answered him,

22. Unto the King of the gods of heaven and of earth, the Prince of
the gods, their lord [they said]:

23. "[It was] Kingu who created the strife,

24. "Who made Tiamat to revolt, to join battle [with thee]."

25. They bound him in fetters [they brought] him before Ea, they
inflicted punishment on him, they let his blood,

26. From his blood he (i.e., Ea) fashioned mankind for the
service of the gods, and he set the gods free.

27. After Ea had fashioned man he ... laid service upon him.

28. [For] that work, which pleased him not, man was chosen: Marduk ...

29. Marduk, the King of the gods, divided ... he set the Anunnaki up
on high.

30. He laid down for Anu a decree that protected [his] heart ... as a
guard.

31. He made twofold the ways on the earth [and in the heavens?]

32. By decrees ...

33. The Anunnaki who ...

34. The Anunnaki ...

35. They spake unto Marduk, their lord, [saying]:

36. "O thou Moon-god[1] (Nannaru), who hast established our splendour,

[Footnote 1: See _Cuneiform Texts_, Part XXIV, Plate 50, where it
is said that the god Sin is "Marduk, who maketh bright the night."]

37. "What benefit have we conferred upon thee?

38. "Come, let us make a shrine, whose name shall be renowned;

39. "Come [at] night, our time of festival, let us take our ease
therein,

40. "Come, the staff shall rule ...

41. "On the day that we reach [thereto] we will take our ease
therein."

42. On hearing this Marduk ...

43. The features of his face [shone like] the day exceedingly.

44. [He said],[1] "Like unto ... Babylon, the construction whereof ye
desire

[Footnote 1: Lines 44 and 45 announce Marduk's determination to build
Babylon.]

45. "I will make ... a city, I will fashion a splendid shrine."

46. The Anunnaki worked the mould [for making bricks], their bricks
were ...

47. In the second year [the shrine was as high as] a hill, and the
summit of E-Sagila reached the [celestial] Ocean.

48. They made the ziggurat[1] [to reach] the celestial Ocean; unto
Marduk, Enlil, Ea [shrines] they appointed,

[Footnote 1: This is the word commonly used for "temple-tower." The
famous ziggurat of E-Sagila here mentioned was built in Seven Stages
or Steps, each probably having its own distinctive colour. It was
destroyed probably soon after the capture of Babylon by Cyrus (539
B.C.) and when Alexander the Great reached Babylon he found it ruins.]

49. It (i.e., the ziggurat) stood before them majestically: at the
bottom and [at the top] they observed its two horns.[1]

[Footnote 1: This is the first known mention of the "horns" of a
ziggurat, and the exact meaning of the word is doubtful.]

50. After the Anunnaki had finished the construction of E-Sagila, and
had completed the making of their shrines,

51. They gathered together from the ... of the Ocean (Apsu). In
BAR-MAH, the abode which they had made,

52. He (i.e., Marduk) made the gods his fathers to take their
seats ... [saying]: "This Babylon shall be your abode.

53. "No mighty one [shall destroy] his house, the great gods shall
dwell therein.

[After line 53 the middle portions of several lines of text are
obliterated, but from what remains of it it is clear that the gods
partook of a meal of consecration of the shrine of E-Sagila, and then
proceeded to issue decrees. Next Marduk assigns seats to the Seven
Gods of Fate and to Enlil and Anu, and then he lays up in E-Sagila the
famous bow which he bore during his fight against Tiamat. When the
text again becomes connected we find the gods singing a hymn of praise
to Marduk.]

94. "Whatever is ... those gods and goddesses shall bear(?)

95. "They shall never forget, they shall cleave to the god (?)

96. "... they shall make bright, they shall make shrines.

97. "Verily, the decision (concerning) the Black-headed [belongeth to]
the gods

98. "... all our names have they called, he (Marduk) is most holy
(_elli_)

99. "... they proclaimed and venerated (?) his names.

100. "His ... is exceedingly bright, his work is ...

101. "Marduk, whose father Anu proclaimed [his name] from his birth,

102. "Who hath set the day at his door ... his going,

103. "By whose help the storm wind was bound ...

104. "Delivered the gods his fathers in the time of trouble.

105. "Verily, the gods have proclaimed his sonship.

106. "In his bright light let them walk for ever.

107. "[On] men whom he hath formed, the created things fashioned by
his fingers

108. "He hath imposed the service of the gods, and them he hath set
free

109. "...

110. "... they looked at him,

111. "[He is] the far-seeing _(maruku)_ god, verily ...

112. "Who hath made glad the hearts of the Anunnaki, who hath made
them to ...

113. "The god Marudukku--verily, he is the object of trust of his
country ...

114. "Let men praise him ...

115. "The 'King of the Protecting Heart,' (?), hath arisen and hath
[bound] the Serpent ...

116. "Broad is his heart, mighty [his] belly.

117. "King of the gods of heaven and of earth, whose name our company
hath proclaimed,

118. "We will fulfil (?) the utterance of his mouth. Over his fathers
the gods,

119. "Yea, [over] the gods of heaven and earth, all of them,

120. "His kingship [we will exalt].

121. "[We] will look unto the King of all the heaven and the earth at
night when the place of all the gods is darkness (literally sadness).

122. "He hath assigned our dwelling in heaven and in earth in the time
of trouble,

123. "He hath allotted stations to the Igigi and the Anunnaki.

124. "The gods themselves are magnified by his name; may he direct
their sanctuaries.

125. "ASAR-LU-DUG, is his name by which his father Anu hath named him.

126. "Verily, he is the light of the gods, the mighty ...

127. "Who ... all the parts of heaven and of the land

128. "By a mighty combat he saved our dwelling in the time of trouble.

129. "ASAR-LU-DUG, the god who made him (i.e. man) to live, did
the god ... call him in the second place

130. "[And] the gods who had been formed, whom he fashioned as though
[they were] his offspring.

131. "He is the Lord who hath made all the gods to live by his holy
mouth."

[Lines 132-139 are too fragmentary to translate, but it is clear from
the text that remains that Lakhmu, and Lakhamu, and Anshar all
proclaimed the names of Marduk. When the text again becomes connected
Marduk has just been addressing the gods.]

140. In Up-shukkinaku[1] he appointed their council for them.

[Footnote 1: From this text it seems clear that Up-shukkinaku was the
name of a chamber in the temple of E-Sagila. This name probably means
the "chamber of the shakkanaku," i.e., the chamber in which the
governor of the city (_shakkanaku_) went annually to embrace the
hands of the god Bel-Marduk, from whom he thereby received the right
of sovereignty over the country.]

141. [They said]:--"Of [our] son, the Hero, our Avenger,

142. "We will exalt the name by our speech."

143. They sat down and in their assembly they proclaimed his rank.

144. Every one of them pronounced his name in the sanctuary.



SEVENTH TABLET.

1. O ASARI,--giver of plantations, appointer of sowing time,

2. Who dost make grain and fibrous plants, who makest garden herbs to
spring up.

3. O ASARU-ALIM--who art weighty in the council-chamber, who art
fertile in counsel,

4. To whom the gods pay worship (?) reverent ...

5. O ASARU-ALIM-NUNA--the adored light of the Father who begat him,

6. Who makest straight the direction of Anu, Bel, [and Ea].[1]

[Footnote 1: This line seems to imply that Marduk was regarded as the
instructor of the "old" gods; the allusion is, probably, to the "ways"
of Anu, Bel and Ea, which are treated as technical terms in
astrology.]

7. He is their patron who fixed [their] ...

8. Whose drink is abundance, who goeth forth ...

9. O TUTU--creator of their new life,

10. Supplier of their wants, that they may be satisfied [or, glad],

11. Let but [Tutu] recite an incantation, the gods shall be at rest;

12. Let but [the gods] attack him (i.e., Tutu) in wrath, he
shall resist them successfully;
