must look now to their daughters to overcome our own allied armies of
evil and to save us from ourselves. She must and will succeed, for as
David sang--"God shall help her and that right early." When we try to
praise her later works it is as if we would pour incense upon the rose.
It is the proudest boast of many of us that we are "bound to her by
bonds dearer than freedom," and that we live in the reflected royalty
which shines from her brow. We rejoice with her that at last we begin to
know what John on Patmos meant--"And there appeared a great wonder in
Heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars." She brought to warring men the
Prince of Peace, and He, departing, left His scepter not in her hand,
but in her soul. "The time of times" is near when "the new woman" shall
subdue the whole earth with the weapons of peace. Then shall wrong be
robbed of her bitterness and ingratitude of her sting; revenge shall
clasp hands with pity, and love shall dwell in the tents of hate, while
side by side, equal partners in all that is worth living for, shall
stand the new man with the new woman.




(_Christian Science Journal_, January, 1895.)

EXTRACT.

THE MOTHER CHURCH.


The Mother Church edifice--The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in
Boston, is erected. The close of the year Anno Domini, 1894, witnessed
the completion of "our Prayer in Stone," all predictions and
prognostications to the contrary notwithstanding.

Of the significance of this achievement we shall not undertake to speak
in this article. It can be better felt than expressed. All who are awake
thereto have some measure of understanding of what it means. But only
the future will tell the story of its mighty meaning or unfold it to the
comprehension of mankind. It is enough for us now to know that all
obstacles to its completion have been met and overcome, and that our
temple is completed as God intended it should be.

This achievement is the result of long years of untiring, unselfish, and
zealous effort on the part of our beloved Teacher and Leader, the
Reverend Mary Baker Eddy, the Discoverer and Founder of Christian
Science, who nearly thirty years ago began to lay the foundation of this
temple, and whose devotion and consecration to God and humanity during
the intervening years have made its erection possible.

Those who now, in part, understand her mission, turn their hearts in
gratitude to her for her great work, and those who do not understand it
will, in the fulness of time, see and acknowledge it. In the measure in
which she has unfolded and demonstrated Divine Love and built up in
human consciousness a better and higher conception of God as Life,
Truth, and Love,--as the Divine Principle of all things which really
exist,--and in the degree in which she has demonstrated the system of
healing of Jesus and the Apostles, surely she, as the one chosen of God
to this end, is entitled to the gratitude and love of all who desire a
better and grander humanity, and who believe it to be possible to
establish the Kingdom of Heaven upon earth in accordance with the prayer
and teachings of Jesus Christ.




(_Concord Evening Monitor_, March 23, 1895.)

TESTIMONIAL AND GIFT.

To Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, from The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in
Boston.


Rev. Mary Baker Eddy received Friday, from the Christian Science board
of directors, Boston, a beautiful and unique testimonial of the
appreciation of her labors and loving generosity in the cause of their
common faith. It was a facsimile of the corner-stone of the new church
of the Christian Scientists, just completed, being of granite, about six
inches in each dimension, and contains a solid gold box, upon the cover
of which is this inscription:

"To our Beloved Teacher, the Reverend Mary Baker Eddy, Discoverer and
Founder of Christian Science, from her affectionate Students, the
Christian Science Board of Directors." On the under side of the cover
are the facsimile signatures of the directors, Ira O. Knapp, William B.
Johnson, Joseph Armstrong, and Stephen A. Chase, with the date, "1895."
The beautiful souvenir is encased in an elegant plush box.

Accompanying the stone testimonial was the following address from the
board of directors:

BOSTON, March 20, 1895.

To the Reverend Mary Baker Eddy, our beloved teacher and leader:

We are happy to announce to you the completion of The First Church of
Christ, Scientist, in Boston.

In behalf of your loving students and all contributors wherever they may
be, we hereby present this church to you as a testimonial of love and
gratitude for your labors and loving sacrifice, as the discoverer and
founder of Christian Science, and the author of its text-book, "SCIENCE
AND HEALTH WITH KEY To THE SCRIPTURES."

We therefore respectfully extend to you the invitation to become the
permanent pastor of this church, in connection with the Bible, and the
Book alluded to above, which you have already ordained as our pastor.
And we most cordially invite you to be present and take charge of any
services that may be held therein. We especially desire you to be
present on the twenty-fourth day of March, eighteen hundred and
ninety-five, to accept this offering, with our humble benediction.

Lovingly yours,

  IRA O. KNAPP,
  WILLIAM B. JOHNSON,
  JOSEPH ARMSTRONG,
  STEPHEN A. CHASE,
  _The Christian Science Board of Directors_.


REV. MRS. EDDY'S REPLY.

BELOVED DIRECTORS AND BRETHREN:--

For your costly offering, and kind call to the pastorate of "The First
Church of Christ, Scientist," in Boston--accept my profound thanks. But
permit me, respectfully, to decline their acceptance, while I fully
appreciate your kind intentions.-If it will comfort you in the least,
make me your Pastor _Emeritus_, nominally. Through my book, your
text-book, I already speak to you each Sunday. You ask too much when
asking me to accept your grand Church edifice. I have more of earth now,
than I desire, and less of heaven; so pardon my refusal of that as a
material offering. More effectual than the forum are our states of mind,
to bless mankind. This wish stops not with my pen--God give you grace.
As our Church's tall tower detains the sun, so, may luminous lines from
your lives, linger, a legacy to our race.

MARY BAKER EDDY.

March 25, 1895.




From Canada to New Orleans, and from the Atlantic to the Pacific ocean,
the author has received leading newspapers with uniformly kind and
interesting articles on the dedication of the Mother church. They were,
however, too voluminous for these pages. Those were copied, and she
could append only a few of the names of other prominent newspapers whose
articles were reluctantly omitted.

LIST OF LEADING NEWSPAPERS WHOSE ARTICLES ARE OMITTED.

EASTERN STATES.

  _Advertiser_, Calais, Me.
  _Advertiser_, Boston, Mass.
  _Farmer_, Bridgeport, Conn.
  _Independent_, Rockland, Mass.
  _Kennebec Journal_, Augusta, Me.
  _News_, New Haven, Conn.
  _News_, Newport, R.I.
  _Post_, Boston, Mass.
  _Post_, Hartford, Conn.
  _Republican_, Springfield, Mass.
  _Sentinel_, Eastport, Me.
  _Sun_, Attleboro, Mass.

MIDDLE STATES.

  _Advertiser_, New York City.
  _Bulletin_, Auburn, N.Y.
  _Daily_, York, Pa.
  _Enquirer_, Philadelphia, Pa.
  _Evening Reporter_, Lebanon, Pa.
  _Farmer_, Bridgeport, N.Y.
  _Herald_, Rochester, N.Y.
  _Independent_, Harrisburg, Pa.
  _Independent_, New York City.
  _Journal_, Lockport, N.Y.
  _Knickerbocker_, Albany, N.Y.
  _News_, Buffalo, N.Y.
  _News_, Newark, N.J.
  _Once A Week_, New York City.
  _Post_, Pittsburg, Pa.
  _Press_, Albany, N.Y.
  _Press_, New York City.
  _Press_, Philadelphia, Pa.
  _Saratogian_, Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
  _Sun_, New York City.
  _Telegram_, Philadelphia, Pa.
  _Telegram_, Troy, N.Y.
  _Times_, Trenton, N.J.

SOUTHERN STATES.

  _Commercial_, Louisville, Ky.
  _Journal_, Atlanta, Ga.
  _Post_, Washington, D.C.
  _Telegram_, New Orleans, La.
  _Times_, New Orleans, La.
  _Times-Herald,_ Dallas, Tex.

WESTERN STATES.

  _Bee_, Omaha, Neb.
  _Bulletin_, San Francisco, Cal.
  _Chronicle_, San Francisco, Cal.
  _Mite_, Chicago, Ill.
  _Enquirer_, Oakland, Cal.
  _Free Press_, Detroit, Mich.
  _Gazette_, Burlington, Iowa.
  _Herald_, Grand Rapids, Mich.
  _Herald_, St. Joseph, Mo.
  _Journal_, Columbus, Ohio.
  _Journal_, Topeka, Kans.
  _Leader_, Bloomington, Ill.
  _Leader_, Cleveland, Ohio.
  _News_, St. Joseph, Mo.
  _News-Tribune,_ Duluth, Minn.
  _Pioneer-Press,_ St. Paul, Minn.
  _Post-Intelligencer,_ Seattle, Wash.
  _Salt Lake Herald_, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  _Sentinel_, Indianapolis, Ind.
  _Sentinel_, Milwaukee, Wis.
  _Star_, Kansas City, Mo.
  _Telegram_, Portland, Ore.
  _Times_, Chicago, Ill.
  _Times_, Minneapolis, Minn.
  _Tribune_, Minneapolis, Minn.
  _Tribune_, Salt Lake City, Utah.
  _Free Press_, London, Can.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PULPIT AND PRESS (6TH EDITION)***


******* This file should be named 10437.txt or 10437.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/4/3/10437


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
