And Markandeya said, 'Listen, O monarch, to all that hath been seen and
heard by me, and to all, O king of kings, that hath been known to me by
intuition from the grace of the God of gods! O bull of the Bharata race,
listen to me as I narrate the future history of the world during the
sinful age. O bull of the Bharata race, in the _Krita_ age, everything
was free from deceit and guile and avarice and covetousness; and
morality like a bull was among men, with all the four legs complete. In
the _Treta_ age sin took away one of these legs and morality had three
legs. In the _Dwapara_, sin and morality are mixed half and half; and
accordingly morality is said to have two legs only. In the dark age (_of
Kali_), O thou best of the Bharata race, morality mixed with three parts
of sin liveth by the side of men. Accordingly morality then is said to
wait on men, with only a fourth part of itself remaining. Know, O
Yudhishthira, that the period of life, the energy, intellect and the
physical strength of men decrease in every _Yuga_! O Pandava, the
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras, (in the _Kali_ age)
will practise morality and virtue deceitfully and men in general will
deceive their fellows by spreading the net of virtue. And men with false
reputation of learning will, by their acts, cause Truth to be contracted
and concealed. And in consequence of the shortness of their lives they
will not be able to acquire much knowledge. And in consequence of the
littleness of their knowledge, they will have no wisdom. And for this,
covetousness and avarice will overwhelm them all. And wedded to avarice
and wrath and ignorance and lust men will entertain animosities towards
one another, desiring to take one another's lives. And Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas with their virtue contracted and divested of
asceticism and truth will all be reduced to an equality with the Sudras.
And the lowest orders of men will rise to the position of the
intermediate ones, and those in intermediate stations will, without
doubt, descend to the level of the lowest ones. Even such, O
Yudhishthira, will become the state of the world at the end of the
_Yuga_. Of robes those will be regarded the best that are made of flax,
and of grain the _Paspalum frumentacea_[5] will be regarded the best.
Towards this period men will regard their wives as their (only) friends.
And men will live on fish and milk, goats and sheep, for cows will be
extinct. And towards that period, even they that are always observant of
vows, will become covetous. And opposed to one another, men will, at
such a time, seek one another's lives; and divested of _Yuga_, people
will become atheists and thieves. And they will even dig the banks of
streams with their spades and sow grains thereon. And even those places
will prove barren for them at such a time. And those men who are devoted
to ceremonial rites in honour of the deceased and of the gods, will be
avaricious and will also appropriate and enjoy what belongs to others.
The father will enjoy what belongs to the son; and the son, what belongs
to the father. And those things will also be enjoyed by men in such
times, the enjoyment of which hath been forbidden in the scriptures. And
the Brahmanas, speaking disrespectfully of the Vedas, will not practise
vows, and their understanding clouded by the science of disputation,
they will no longer perform sacrifices and the _Homa_. And deceived by
the false science of reasons, they will direct their hearts towards
everything mean and low. And men will till low lands for cultivation and
employ cows and calves that are one year old, in drawing the plough and
carrying burthens. And sons having slain their sires, and sires having
slain their sons will incur no opprobrium. And they will frequently save
themselves from anxiety by such deeds, and even glory in them. And the
whole world will be filled with _mleccha_ behaviour and notions and
ceremonies, and sacrifices will cease and joy will be nowhere and
general rejoicing will disappear. And men will rob the possession of
helpless persons, of those that are friendless and of wisdoms also. And,
possessed of small energy and strength, without knowledge and given to
avarice and folly and sinful practices men will accept with joy the
gifts made by wicked people with words of contempt. And, O son of Kunti,
the kings of the earth, with hearts wedded to sin without knowledge and
always boastful of their wisdom, will challenge one another from desire
of taking one another's life. And the Kshatriyas also towards the end of
such a period will become the thorns of the earth. And filled with
avarice and swelling with pride and vanity and, unable and unwilling to
protect (their subjects), they will take pleasure in inflicting
punishments only. And attacking and repeating their attacks upon the
good and the honest, and feeling no pity for the latter, even when they
will cry in grief, the Kshatriyas will, O Bharata, rob these of their
wives and wealth. And no one will ask for a girl (for purposes of
marriage) and no one will give away a girl (for such purposes), but the
girls will themselves choose their lords, when the end of the _Yuga_
comes. And the kings of the earth with souls steeped in ignorance, and
discontented with what they have, will at such a time, rob their
subjects by every means in their power. And without doubt the whole
world will be _mlecchified_.[6] And when the end of the _Yuga_ comes,
the right hand will deceive the left; and the left, the right. And men
with false reputation of learning will contract Truth and the old will
betray the senselessness of the young, and the young will betray the
dotage of the old. And cowards will have the reputation of bravery and
the brave will be cheerless like cowards. And towards the end of the
_Yuga_ men will cease to trust one another. And full of avarice and
folly the whole world will have but one kind of food. And sin will
increase and prosper, while virtue will fade and cease to flourish. And
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas will disappear, leaving, O king, no
remnants of their orders. And all men towards the end of the Yuga will
become members of one common order, without distinction of any kind. And
sires will not forgive sons, and sons will not forgive sires. And when
the end approaches, wives will not wait upon and serve their husbands.
And at such a time men will seek those countries where wheat and barley
form the staple food. And, O monarch, both men and women will become
perfectly free in their behaviour and will not tolerate one another's
acts. And, O Yudhishthira, the whole world will be _mlecchified_. And
men will cease to gratify the gods by offerings of _Sraddhas_. And no
one will listen to the words of others and no one will be regarded as a
preceptor by another. And, O ruler of men, intellectual darkness will
envelop the whole earth, and the life of man will then be measured by
sixteen years, on attaining to which age death will ensue. And girls of
five or six years of age will bring forth children and boys of seven or
eight years of age will become fathers. And, O tiger among kings, when
the end of the _Yuga_ will come, the wife will never be content with her
husband, nor the husband with his wife. And the possessions of men will
never be much, and people will falsely bear the marks of religion, and
jealousy and malice will fill the world. And no one will, at that time,
be a giver (of wealth or anything else) in respect to any one else. And
the inhabited regions of the earth will be afflicted with dearth and
famine, and the highways will be filled with lustful men and women of
evil repute. And, at such a time, the women will also entertain an
aversion towards their husbands. And without doubt all men will adopt
the behaviour of the _mlecchas_, become omnivorous without distinction,
and cruel in all their acts, when the end of the _Yuga_ will come. And,
O thou foremost of the Bharatas, urged by avarice, men will, at that
time, deceive one another when they sell and purchase. And without a
knowledge of the ordinance, men will perform ceremonies and rites, and,
indeed, behave as listeth them, when the end of the _Yuga_ comes. And
when the end of the _Yuga_ comes, urged by their very dispositions, men
will act cruelly, and speak ill of one another. And people will, without
compunction, destroy trees and gardens. And men will be filled with
anxiety as regards the means of living. And, O king, overwhelmed with
covetousness, men will kill Brahmanas and appropriate and enjoy the
possessions of their victims. And the regenerate ones, oppressed by
Sudras, and afflicted with fear, and crying _Oh_ and _Alas_, will wander
over the earth without anybody to protect them. And when men will begin
to slay one another, and become wicked and fierce and without any
respect for animal life, then will the _Yuga_ come to an end. And, O
king, even the foremost of the regenerate ones, afflicted by robbers,
will, like crows, fly in terror and with speed, and seek refuge, O
perpetuator of the Kuru race, in rivers and mountains and inaccessible
regions. And always oppressed by bad rulers with burthens of taxes, the
foremost of the regenerate classes, O lord of the earth, will, in those
terrible times, take leave of all patience and do improper acts by
becoming even the servants of the Sudras. And Sudras will expound the
scriptures, and Brahmanas will wait upon and listen to them, and settle
their course of duty accepting such interpretations as their guides. And
the low will become the high, and the course of things will look
contrary. And renouncing the gods, men will worship bones and other
relics deposited within walls. And, at the end of the _Yuga_, the Sudras
will cease to wait upon and serve the Brahmanas. And in the asylums of
great _Rishis_, and the teaching institutions of Brahmanas, and in
places sacred to the gods and sacrificial compounds, and in sacred
tanks, the earth will be disfigured with tombs and pillars containing
bony relics and not graced with temples dedicated to the gods. All this
will take place at the end of the _Yuga_, and know that these are the
signs of the end of the _Yuga_. And when men become fierce and destitute
of virtue and carnivorous and addicted to intoxicating drinks, then doth
the _Yuga_ come to an end. And, O monarch, when flowers will be begot
within flowers, and fruits within fruits, then will the _Yuga_ come to
an end. And the clouds will pour rain unseasonably when the end of the
_Yuga_ approaches. And, at that time, ceremonial rites of men will not
follow one another in due order, and the Sudras will quarrel with the
Brahmanas. And the earth will soon be full of _mlecchas_, and the
Brahmanas will fly in all directions for fear of the burthen of taxes.
And all distinctions between men will cease as regards conduct and
behaviour, and afflicted with honorary tasks and offices, people will
fly to woody retreats, subsisting on fruits and roots. And the world
will be so afflicted, that rectitude of conduct will cease to be
exhibited anywhere. And disciples will set at naught the instructions of
preceptors, and seek even to injure them. And preceptors impoverished
will be disregarded by men. And friends and relatives and kinsmen will
perform friendly offices for the sake of the wealth only that is
possessed by a person. And when the end of the _Yuga_ comes, everybody
will be in want. And all the points of the horizon will be ablaze, and
the stars and stellar groups will be destitute of brilliancy, and the
planets and planetary conjunctions will be inauspicious. And the course
of the winds will be confused and agitated, and innumerable meteors will
flash through the sky, foreboding evil. And the Sun will appear with six
others of the same kind. And all around there will be din and uproar,
and everywhere there will be conflagrations. And the Sun, from the hour
of his rising to that of setting, will be enveloped by Rahu. And the
deity of a thousand eyes will shower rain unseasonably. And when the end
of the _Yuga_ comes, crops will not grow in abundance. And the women
will always be sharp in speech and pitiless and fond of weeping. And
they will never abide by the commands of their husbands. And when the
end of the _Yuga_ comes, sons will slay fathers and mothers. And women,
living uncontrolled, will slay their husbands and sons. And, O king,
when the end of the _Yuga_ comes, _Rahu_ will swallow the Sun
unseasonably. And fires will blaze up on all sides. And travellers
unable to obtain food and drink and shelter even when they ask for
these, will lie down on the wayside refraining from urging their
solicitations. And when the end of the _Yuga_ comes, crows and snakes
and vultures and kites and other animals and birds will utter frightful
and dissonant cries. And when the end of the _Yuga_ comes, men will cast
away and neglect their friends and relatives and attendants. And, O
monarch, when the end of the _Yuga_ comes, men abandoning the countries
and directions and towns and cities of their occupation, will seek for
new ones, one after another. And people will wander over the earth,
uttering, "_O father, O son_", and such other frightful and rending
cries.

    [5] The word in the text is _Kora-dushakas_, supposed by Wilson
    to be the _Paspalum frumentacea_ (_vide_ Dict.).

    [6] The word in the text is _mlecchibhutam_. The Sanskrit
    grammar affords a great facility for the formation of verbs from
    substantives. _Mlecchify_ may be hybrid, but it correctly and
    shortly signifies the Sanskrit word.

"'And when those terrible times will be over, the creation will begin
anew. And men will again be created and distributed into the four orders
beginning with Brahmanas. And about that time, in order that men may
increase, Providence, according to its pleasure, will once more become
propitious. And then when the Sun, the Moon, and Vrihaspati will, with
the constellation _Pushya_[7], enter the same sign, the _Krita_ age will
begin again. And the clouds will commence to shower seasonably, and the
stars and stellar conjunctions will become auspicious. And the planets,
duly revolving in their orbits, will become exceedingly propitious. And
all around, there will be prosperity and abundance and health and peace.
And commissioned by Time, a Brahmana of the name of _Kalki_ will take
his birth. And he will glorify Vishnu and possess great energy, great
intelligence, and great prowess. And he will take his birth in a town of
the name of _Sambhala_ in an auspicious Brahmana family. And vehicles
and weapons, and warriors and arms, and coats of mail will be at his
disposal as soon as he will think of them. And he will be the king of
kings, and ever victorious with the strength of virtue. And he will
restore order and peace in this world crowded with creatures and
contradictory in its course. And that blazing Brahmana of mighty
intellect, having appeared, will destroy all things. And he will be the
Destroyer of all, and will inaugurate a new _Yuga_. And surrounded by
the Brahmanas, that Brahmana will exterminate all the _mlecchas_
wherever those low and despicable persons may take refuge.'"

    [7] _Pushya_ is the eighth lunar asterism consisting of three
    stars, of which one is, the Cancer. (Vide Wilson's Diet.).


SECTION CLXL

"Markandeya continued, 'Having exterminated the thieves and robbers,
_Kalki_ will, at a great Horse-sacrifice, duly give away this earth to
the Brahmanas, and having established anew the blessed rectitude
ordained by the Self-create, _Kalki_, of sacred deeds and illustrious
reputation, will enter a delightful forest, and the people of this earth
will imitate his conduct, and when the Brahmanas will have exterminated
the thieves and robbers, there will be prosperity everywhere (on earth).
And as the countries of the earth will one after another be subjugated,
that tiger among Brahmanas, _Kalki_, having placed deer skins and lances
and tridents there, will roam over the earth, adored by foremost
Brahmanas and showing his regard for them and engaged all the while in
slaughtering thieves and robbers. And he will exterminate the thieves
and robbers amid heart-rending cries of "_Oh, father--Oh, mother!--O
son!_" and the like, and O Bharata, when sin will thus have been rooted
out and virtue will flourish on arrival of the _Krita_ age, men will
once more betake themselves to the practice of religious rites. And in
the age that will set in, viz., the _Krita_, well-planted gardens and
sacrificial compounds and large tanks and educational centres for the
cultivation of Brahmanic lore and ponds and temples will re-appear
everywhere. And the ceremonies and rites of sacrifices will also begin
to be performed. And the Brahmanas will become good and honest, and the
regenerate ones, devoted to ascetic austerities, will become _Munis_ and
the asylums of ascetics, which had before been filled with wretches will
once more be homes of men devoted to truth, and men in general will
begin to honour and practise truth. And all seeds, sown on earth, will
grow, and, O monarch, every kind of crop will grow in every season. And
men will devotedly practise charity and vows and observances, and the
Brahmanas devoted to meditation and sacrifices will be of virtuous soul
and always cheerful, and the rulers of the earth will govern their
kingdoms virtuously, and in the _Krita_ age, the Vaisyas will be devoted
to the practices of their order. And the Brahmanas will be devoted to
their six-fold duties (of study, teaching, performance of sacrifices on
their own account, officiating at sacrifices performed by others,
charity and acceptance of gifts), and the Kshatriyas will be devoted to
feats of prowess. And Sudras will be devoted to service of the three
(high) orders.

"'These, O Yudhishthira, are the courses of the _Krita_, the _Treta_,
the _Dwapara_ and the succeeding age. I have now narrated to thee
everything. I have also told thee, O son of Pandu, the periods embraced
by the several _Yugas_ as generally known. I have now told thee
everything appertaining to both the past and the future as narrated by
_Vayu_ in the _Parana_ (which goes by his name and) which is adored by
the _Rishis_. Being immortal I have many a time beheld and otherwise
ascertained the courses of the world. Indeed, all I have seen and felt I
have now told thee. And, O thou of unfading glory, listen now with thy
brothers to something else I will presently tell thee for clearing thy
doubts about religion! O thou foremost of virtuous men, thou shouldst
always fix thy soul on virtue, for, O monarch, a person of virtuous soul
obtaineth bliss both here and hereafter. And, O sinless one, listen to
the auspicious words that I will now speak to thee. _Never do thou
humiliate a Brahmana, for a Brahmana, if angry, may by his vow destroy
the three worlds._'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Markandeya, the royal
head of the Kurus, endued with intelligence and possessed of great
lustre, spoke these words of great wisdom, 'O _muni_, if I am to protect
my subjects, to what course of conduct should I adhere? And how should I
behave so that I may not fall away from the duties of my order?'

"Markandeya, hearing this, answered, 'Be merciful to all creatures, and
devoted to their good. Love all creatures, scorning none. Be truthful in
speech, humble, with passions under complete control, and always devoted
to the protection of thy people. Practise virtue and renounce sin, and
worship thou the manes and the god and whatever thou mayst have done
from ignorance or carelessness, wash them off and expiate them by
charity. Renouncing pride and vanity, be thou possessed to humility and
good behaviour. And subjugating the whole earth, rejoice thou and let
happiness be thine. This is the course of conduct that accords with
virtue. I have recited to thee all that was and all that will be
regarded as virtuous. There is nothing appertaining to the past or the
future that is unknown to thee. Therefore, O son, take not to heart this
present calamity of thine. They that are wise are never overwhelmed when
they are persecuted by _Time_. O thou of mighty arms, the very dwellers
of heaven cannot rise superior to Time. Time afflicts all creatures. O
sinless one, let not doubt cross thy mind regarding the truth of what I
have told thee, for, if thou sufferest doubt to enter thy heart, thy
virtue will suffer diminution! O bull of the Bharata race, thou art born
in the celebrated family of the Kurus. Thou shouldst practise that which
I have told thee, in thought, word and deed.'

"Yudhishthira answered, 'O thou foremost of the regenerate ones, at thy
command I will certainly act according to all the instructions thou hast
given me, and which, O lord, are all so sweet to the ear. O foremost of
Brahmanas, avarice and lust I have none, and neither fear nor pride nor
vanity. I shall, therefore, O lord, follow all that thou hast told me.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having listened to the words of the intelligent
Markandeya, the sons of Pandu, O king, along with the wielder of the bow
called _Saranga_, and all those bulls among Brahmanas, and all others
that were there, became filled with joy. And having heard those blessed
words appertaining to olden time, from Markandeya gifted with wisdom,
their hearts were filled with wonder."


SECTION CLXLI

Janamejaya said, "It behoveth thee to narrate to me in full the
greatness of the Brahmanas even as the mighty ascetic Markandeya had
expounded it to the sons of Pandu."

Vaisampayana said, "The eldest son of Pandu had asked Markandeya saying,
'It behoveth thee to expound to me the greatness of Brahmanas.'
Markandeya answered him saying, 'Hear, O king, about the behaviour of
Brahmanas in days of old.'

"And Markandeya continued, 'There was a king, by name Parikshit in
Ayodhya and belonging to the race of Ikshvaku. And once upon a time
Parikshit went a-hunting. And as he was riding alone on a horse chasing
deer, the animal led him to a great distance (from the habitations of
men). And fatigued by the distance he had ridden and afflicted with
hunger and thirst he beheld in that part of the country whither he had
been led, a dark and dense forest, and the king, beholding that forest,
entered it and seeing a delightful tank within the forest, both the
rider and the horse bathed in it, and refreshed by the bath and placing
before his horse some stalks and fibres of the lotus, the king sat by
the side of the tank. And while he was lying by the side of the tank, he
heard certain sweet strains of music, and hearing those strains, he
reflected, "I do not see here the foot-prints of men. Whose and whence
then these strains?" And the king soon beheld a maiden of great beauty
gathering flowers singing all the while, and the maiden soon came before
the king, and the king thereupon asked her, "Blessed one, who art thou
and whose?" And she replied, "I am a maiden." And the king said, "I ask
thee to be mine." And the maiden answered, "Give me a pledge, for then
only I can be thine, else not." And the king then asked about the pledge
and the girl answered, "Thou wilt never make me cast my eyes on water",
and the king saying, "So be it," married her, and king Parikshit having
married her sported (with her) in great joy, and sat with her in
silence, and while the king was staying there, his troops reached the
spot, and those troops beholding the monarch stood surrounding him, and
cheered by the presence of troops, the king entered a handsome vehicle
accompanied by his (newly) wedded wife. And having arrived at his
capital he began to live with her in privacy. And persons that were even
near enough to the king could not obtain any interview with him and the
minister-in-chief enquired of those females that waited upon the king,
asking, "What do ye do here?" And those women replied, "We behold here a
female of unrivalled beauty. And the king sporteth with her, having
married her with a pledge that he would never show her water." And
hearing those words, the minister-in-chief caused an artificial forest
to be created, consisting of many trees with abundant flowers and
fruits, and he caused to be excavated within that forest and towards one
of its sides a large tank, placed in a secluded spot and full of water
that was sweet as _Amrita_. The tank was well covered with a net of
pearls. Approaching the king one day in private, he addressed the king
saying, "This is a fine forest without water. Sport thou here joyfully!"
And the king at those words of his minister entered that forest with
that adorable wife of his, and the king sported with her in that
delightful forest, and afflicted with hunger and thirst and fatigued and
spent, the king beheld a bower of Madhavi creepers[8] and entering that
bower with his dear one, the king beheld a tank full of water that was
transparent and bright as nectar, and beholding that tank, the king sat
on its bank with her and the king told his adorable wife, "Cheerfully do
thou plunge into this water!" And she, hearing those words plunged into
the tank. But having plunged into the water she appeared not above the
surface, and as the king searched, he failed to discover any trace of
her. And the king ordered the waters of the tank to be baled out, and
thereupon he beheld a frog sitting at the mouth of a hole, and the king
was enraged at this and promulgated an order saying, "Let frogs be
slaughtered everywhere in my dominions! Whoever wishes to have an
interview with me must come before me with a tribute of dead frogs." And
accordingly when frogs began to be terribly slaughtered, the affrighted
frogs represented all that had happened unto their king, and the king of
the frogs assuming the garb of an ascetic came before the king
Parikshit, and having approached the monarch, he said, "O king, give not
thyself up to wrath! Be inclined to grace. It behoveth thee not to slay
the innocent frogs." Here occurs a couple of _Slokas_. (They are
these):--"O thou of unfading glory, slay not the frogs! Pacify thy
wrath! The prosperity and ascetic merits of those that have their souls
steeped in ignorance suffer diminution! Pledge thyself not to be angry
with the frogs! What need hast thou to commit such sin! What purpose
will be served by slaying the frogs!" Then king Parikshit whose soul was
filled with woe on account of the death of her that was dear to him,
answered the chief of the frogs who had spoken to him thus, "I will not
forgive the frogs. On the other hand, I will slay them. By these wicked
wretches hath my dear one been swallowed up. The frogs, therefore,
always deserve to be killed by me. It behoveth thee not, O learned one,
to intercede on their behalf." And hearing these words of Parikshit, the
king of the frogs with his senses and mind much pained said, "Be
inclined to grace, O king! I am the king of the frogs by name Ayu. She
who was thy wife is my daughter of the name of Susobhana. This, indeed,
is an instance of her bad conduct. Before this, many kings were deceived
by her." The king thereupon said to him, "I desire to have her. Let her
be granted to me by thee!" The king of the frogs thereupon bestowed his
daughter upon Parikshit, and addressing her said, "Wait upon and serve
the king." And having spoken these words to his daughter, he also
addressed her in wrath saying, "Since thou hast deceived many Kings for
this untruthful behaviour of thine, thy offspring will prove
disrespectful to Brahmanas!" But having obtained her, the king became
deeply enamoured of her in consequence of her companionable virtues, and
feeling that he had, as it were, obtained the sovereignty of the three
worlds, he bowed down to the king of the frogs and reverenced him in due
form and then with utterance choked in joy and tears said, "I have been
favoured indeed!" And the king of the frogs obtaining the leave of his
daughter, returned to the place from which he had come and some time
after the king begot three sons upon her and those sons were named Sala
and Dala and Vala, and some time after, their father, installing the
eldest of them of all on the throne and setting his heart on asceticism,
retired into the forest. One day Sala while out a-hunting, beheld a deer
and pursued it, on his car, and the prince said to his charioteer,
"Drive thou fast." And the charioteer, thus addressed, replied unto the
king, saying, "Do not entertain such a purpose. This deer is incapable
of being caught by thee. If indeed _Vami_ horses had been yoked to thy
car, then couldst thou have taken it." Thereupon the king addressed his
charioteer, saying, "Tell me all about _Vami_ horses, otherwise I will
slay thee." Thus addressed the charioteer became dreadfully alarmed and
he was afraid of the king and also of Vamadeva's curse and told not the
king anything and the king then lifting up his scimitar said to him,
"Tell me soon, else I will slay thee." At last afraid of the king, the
charioteer said, "The _Vami_ horses are those belonging to Vamadeva;
they are fleet as the mind." And unto his charioteer who had said so,
the king said, "Repair thou to the asylum of Vamadeva." And reaching the
asylum of Vamadeva the king said unto that _Rishi_, "O holy one, a deer
struck by me is flying away. It behoveth thee to make it capable of
being seized by me by granting me thy pair of _Vami_ horses." The
_Rishi_ then answered him saying, "I give thee my pair of _Vami_ horses.
But after accomplishing thy object, my _Vami_ pair you should soon
return." The king then taking those steeds and obtaining the leave of
the _Rishi_ pursued the deer, having yoked the _Vami_ pair unto his car,
and after he had left the asylum he spoke unto his charioteer saying,
"These jewels of steeds the Brahmanas do not deserve to possess. These
should not be returned to Vamadeva." Having said this and seized the
deer he returned to his capital and placed those steeds within the inner
apartments of the palace.

    [8] An Indian creeper of the order of _Goertnera racemosa_. It
    bears large white flowers of much fragrance.

"'Meanwhile the _Rishi_ reflected, "The prince is young. Having obtained
an excellent pair of animals, he is sporting with it in joy without
returning it to me. Alas, what a pity it is!" And reflecting in this
strain, the _Rishi_ said unto a disciple of his, after the expiration of
a month, "Go, O Atreya, and say to the king that if he has done with the
_Vami_ steeds, he should return them unto thy preceptor." And the
disciple Atreya, thereupon, repairing to the king, spoke unto him as
instructed, and the king replied saying, "This pair of steeds deserves
to be owned by kings. The Brahmanas do not deserve to possess jewels of
such value. What business have Brahmanas with horses? Return thou
contentedly!" And Atreya, thus addressed by the king, returned and told
his preceptor all that had happened, and hearing this sad intelligence,
Vamadeva's heart was filled with wrath, and repairing in person to the
king he asked him for his steeds, and the king refused to give the
_Rishi_ what the latter asked, and Vamadeva said, "O lord of earth, give
me thou my _Vami_ horses. By them hast thou accomplished a task which
was almost incapable of being accomplished by thee. By transgressing the
practices of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, subject not thyself, O king, to
death by means of the terrible noose of Varuna." And hearing this, the
king answered, "O Vamadeva, this couple of excellent well-trained, and
docile bulls are fit animals for Brahmanas. O great _Rishi_, (take them
and) go with them wherever thou likest. Indeed, the very _Vedas_ carry
persons like thee." Then Vamadeva said, "O king, the _Vedas_ do, indeed,
carry persons like us. But that is in the world hereafter. In this
world, however, O king, animals like these carry me and persons like me
as also all others." At this the king answered, "Let four asses carry
thee, or four mules of the best kind, or even four steeds endued with
the speed of the wind. Go thou with these. This pair of _Vami_ horses,
however, deserves to be owned by Kshatriyas. Know thou, therefore, that
these are not thine." At this, Vamadeva said, "O king, terrible vows
have been ordained for the Brahmanas. If I have lived in their
observance, let four fierce and mighty Rakshasas of terrible mien and
iron bodies, commanded by me, pursue thee with desire of slaying, and
carry thee on their sharp lances, having cut up thy body into four
parts." Hearing this, the king said, "Let those, O Vamadeva, that know
thee as a Brahmana that in thought, word, and deed, is desirous of
taking life, at my command, armed with bright lances and swords
prostrate thee with thy disciples before me." Then Vamadeva answered, "O
king, having obtained these my _Vami_ steeds, thou hadst said, '_I will
return them_.' Therefore, give me back my _Vami_ steeds, so thou mayst
be able to protect thy life." Hearing this, the king said, "Pursuit of
deer hath not been ordained for the Brahmanas. I do punish thee,
however, for thy untruthfulness. From this day, too, obeying all thy
commands I will, O Brahmana, attain to regions of bliss." Vamadeva then
said, "A Brahmana cannot be punished in thought, word or deed. That
learned person who by ascetic austerities succeedeth in knowing a
Brahmana to be so, faileth not to attain to prominence in this world."'

"Markandeya continued, 'After Vamadeva had said this, there arose, O
king, (four) _Rakshasas_ of terrible mien, and as they, with lances in
their hands, approached the king for slaying him, the latter cried
aloud, saying, "If, O Brahmana, all the descendants of Ikshvaku's race,
if (my brother) Dala, if all these Vaisyas acknowledge my sway, then I
will not yield up the _Vami_ steeds to Vamadeva, for these men can never
be virtuous." And while he was uttering those words, those _Rakshasas_
slew him, and the lord of earth was soon prostrated on the ground. And
the Ikshvakus, learning that their king had been slain, installed Dala
on the throne, and the Brahmana Vamadeva thereupon going to the kingdom
(of the Ikshvakus), addressed the new monarch, saying, "O king, it hath
been declared in all the sacred books that persons should give away unto
Brahmanas. If thou fearest sin, O king, give me now the _Vami_ steeds
without delay." And hearing these words of Vamadeva, the king in anger
spoke unto his charioteer, saying, "Bring me an arrow from those I have
kept, which is handsome to behold and tempered with poison, so that
pierced by it Vamadeva may lie prostrate in pain, torn by the dogs."
Hearing this, Vamadeva answered, "I know, O king, that thou hast a son
of ten years of age, called Senajita, begotten upon thy queen. Urged by
my word, slay thou that dear boy of thine without delay by means of thy
frightful arrows!"'

"Markandeya continued, 'At these words of Vamadeva, O king, that arrow
of fierce energy, shot by the monarch, slew the prince in the inner
apartments, and hearing this, Dala said there and then, "Ye people of
Ikshvaku's race, I will do ye good. I shall slay this Brahmana today,
grinding him with force. Bring me another arrow of fierce energy. Ye
lords of earth, behold my prowess now." And at these words of Dala,
Vamadeva said, "This arrow of terrible mien and tempered with poison,
that thou aimest at me, thou shall not, O ruler of men, be able to aim
nor even to shoot." And thereupon the king said, "Ye men of Ikshvaku's
race, behold me incapable of shooting the arrow that hath been taken up
by me. I fail to compass the death of this Brahmana. Let Vamadeva who is
blessed with a long life live." Then Vamadeva said, "Touching thy queen
with this arrow, thou mayst purge thyself of the sin (of attempting to
take the life of a Brahmana)." And king Dala did as he was directed and
the queen then addressed the _Muni_, and said, "O Vamadeva, let me be
able to duly instruct this wretched husband of mine from day to day,
