is drenched and saturated with fiery brightness, but the rays from
the centre of life pass on to each of the sister spheres in its turn,
and travel away outwards to where the remotest of them all rolls in
its far-off orbit, unknown for millenniums to dwellers closer to the
sun, but through all the ages visited by warmth and light according
to its needs. Like that poor, sickly woman who could lay her wasted
fingers on the hem of Christ's garment, notwithstanding the thronging
multitude, we can reach our hands through all the crowd, or rather He
reaches His strong hand to us and heals and blesses us. All the
guests are fed full at that great table. One's gain is not another's
loss. The multitudes sit on the green grass, and the last man of
the last fifty gets as much as the first. 'They did all eat, and were
filled'; and more remains than fed them all. So all beings are
'nourished from the King's country,' and none jostle others out of
their share. This healing fountain is not exhausted of its curative
power by the early comers. 'I will give unto this last, even as unto
thee.' 'Nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, shall be able to
separate us from the love of God.'

III. The love of God is raised above the power of time.

'Nor things present, nor things to come,' is the Apostle's next class
of powers impotent to disunite us from the love of God. The
rhythmical arrangement of the text deserves to be noticed, as bearing
not only on its music and rhetorical flow, but as affecting its
force. We had first a pair of opposites, and then a triplet; 'death
and life: angels, principalities, and powers.' We have again a pair
of opposites; 'things present, things to come,' again followed by a
triplet, 'height nor depth, nor any other creature.' The effect of
this is to divide the whole into two, and to throw the first and
second classes more closely together, as also the third and fourth.
Time and Space, these two mysterious ideas, which work so fatally on
all human love, are powerless here.

The great revelation of God, on which the whole of Judaism was built,
was that made to Moses of the name 'I Am that I Am.' And parallel to
the verbal revelation was the symbol of the Bush, burning and
unconsumed, which is so often misunderstood. It appears wholly
contrary to the usage of Scriptural visions, which are ever wont to
express in material form the same truth which accompanies them in
words, that the meaning of that vision should be, as it is frequently
taken as being, the continuance of Israel unharmed by the fiery
furnace of persecution. Not the continuance of Israel, but the
eternity of Israel's God is the teaching of that flaming wonder. The
burning Bush and the Name of the Lord proclaimed the same great truth
of self-derived, self-determined, timeless, undecaying Being. And
what better symbol than the bush burning, and yet not burning out,
could be found of that God in whose life there is no tendency to
death, whose work digs no pit of weariness into which it falls, who
gives and is none the poorer, who fears no exhaustion in His
spending, no extinction in His continual shining?

And this eternity of Being is no mere metaphysical abstraction. It is
eternity of love, for God is love. That great stream, the pouring out
of His own very inmost Being, knows no pause, nor does the deep
fountain from which it flows ever sink one hair's-breadth in its pure
basin.

We know of earthly loves which cannot die. They have entered so
deeply into the very fabric of the soul, that like some cloth dyed in
grain, as long as two threads hold together they will retain the
tint. We have to thank God for such instances of love stronger than
death, which make it easier for us to believe in the unchanging
duration of His. But we know, too, of love that can change, and we
know that all love must part. Few of us have reached middle life, who
do not, looking back, see our track strewed with the gaunt skeletons
of dead friendships, and dotted with 'oaks of weeping,' waving green
and mournful over graves, and saddened by footprints striking away
from the line of march, and leaving us the more solitary for their
departure.

How blessed then to know of a love which cannot change or die! The
past, the present, and the future are all the same to Him, to whom 'a
thousand years,' that can corrode so much of earthly love, are in
their power to change 'as one day,' and 'one day,' which can hold so
few of the expressions of our love, may be 'as a thousand years' in
the multitude and richness of the gifts which it can be expanded to
contain. The whole of what He has been to any past, He is to us
to-day. 'The God of Jacob is our refuge.' All these old-world stories
of loving care and guidance may be repeated in our lives.

So we may bring the blessedness of all the past into the present, and
calmly face the misty future, sure that it cannot rob us of His love.

Whatever may drop out of our vainly-clasping hands, it matters not,
if only our hearts are stayed on His love, which neither things
present nor things to come can alter or remove. Looking on all the
flow of ceaseless change, the waste and fading, the alienation and
cooling, the decrepitude and decay of earthly affection, we can lift
up with gladness, heightened by the contrast, the triumphant song of
the ancient Church: 'Give thanks unto the Lord: for He is good:
because His mercy endureth for ever!'

IV. The love of God is present everywhere.

The Apostle ends his catalogue with a singular trio of antagonists;
'nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,' as if he had got
impatient of the enumeration of impotencies, and having named the
outside boundaries in space of the created universe, flings, as it
were, with one rapid toss, into that large room the whole that it can
contain, and triumphs over it all.

As the former clause proclaimed the powerlessness of Time, so this
proclaims the powerlessness of that other great mystery of creatural
life which we call Space, Height or depth, it matters not. That
diffusive love diffuses itself equally in all directions. Up or down,
it is all the same. The distance from the centre is the same to
Zenith or to Nadir.

Here, we have the same process applied to that idea of Omnipresence
as was applied in the former clause to the idea of Eternity. That
thought, so hard to grasp with vividness, and not altogether a glad
one to a sinful soul, is all softened and glorified, as some solemn
Alpine cliff of bare rock is when the tender morning light glows on
it, when it is thought of as the Omnipresence of Love. 'Thou, God,
seest me,' may be a stern word, if the God who sees be but a mighty
Maker or a righteous Judge. As reasonably might we expect a prisoner
in his solitary cell to be glad when he thinks that the jailer's eye
is on him from some unseen spy-hole in the wall, as expect any
thought of God but one to make a man read that grand one hundred and
thirty-ninth Psalm with joy: 'If I ascend into heaven, Thou art
there; if I make my bed in Sheol, behold, Thou art there.' So may a
man say shudderingly to himself, and tremble as he asks in vain,
'Whither shall I flee from Thy Presence?' But how different it all is
when we can cast over the marble whiteness of that solemn thought the
warm hue of life, and change the form of our words into this of our
text: 'Nor height, nor depth, shall be able to separate us from the
love of God.'

In that great ocean of the divine love we live and move and have our
being, floating in it like some sea flower which spreads its filmy
beauty and waves its long tresses in the depths of mid-ocean. The
sound of its waters is ever in our ears, and above, beneath, around
us, its mighty currents run evermore. We need not cower before the
fixed gaze of some stony god, looking on us unmoved like those
Egyptian deities that sit pitiless with idle hands on their laps, and
wide-open lidless eyes gazing out across the sands. We need not fear
the Omnipresence of Love, nor the Omniscience which knows us
altogether, and loves us even as it knows. Rather we shall be glad
that we are ever in His Presence, and desire, as the height of all
felicity and the power for all goodness, to walk all the day long in
the light of His countenance, till the day come when we shall receive
the crown of our perfecting in that we shall be 'ever with the Lord.'

The recognition of this triumphant sovereignty of love over all these
real and supposed antagonists makes us, too, lords over them, and
delivers us from the temptations which some of them present us to
separate ourselves from the love of God. They all become our servants
and helpers, uniting us to that love. So we are set free from the
dread of death and from the distractions incident to life. So we are
delivered from superstitious dread of an unseen world, and from
craven fear of men. So we are emancipated from absorption in the
present and from careful thought for the future. So we are at home
everywhere, and every corner of the universe is to us one of the many
mansions of our Father's house. 'All things are yours, ... and ye are
Christ's; and Christ is God's.'

I do not forget the closing words of this great text. I have not
ventured to include them in our present subject, because they would
have introduced another wide region of thought to be laid down on our
already too narrow canvas.

But remember, I beseech you, that this love of God is explained by
our Apostle to be 'in Christ Jesus our Lord.' Love illimitable,
all-pervasive, eternal; yes, but a love which has a channel and a
course; love which has a method and a process by which it pours
itself over the world. It is not, as some representations would make
it, a vague, nebulous light diffused through space as in a chaotic
half-made universe, but all gathered in that great Light which rules
the day--even in Him who said: 'I am the Light of the world.' In
Christ the love of God is all centred and embodied, that it may be
imparted to all sinful and hungry hearts, even as burning coals are
gathered on a hearth that they may give warmth to all that are in the
house. 'God _so_ loved the world'--not merely _so much_, but in _such
a fashion_--'that'--that what? Many people would leap at once from
the first to the last clause of the verse, and regard eternal life
for all and sundry as the only adequate expression of the universal
love of God. Not so does Christ speak. Between that universal love
and its ultimate purpose and desire for every man He inserts two
conditions, one on God's part, one on man's. God's love reaches its
end, namely, the bestowal of eternal life, by means of a divine act
and a human response. 'God _so_ loved the world, that He _gave_ His
only begotten Son, that whosoever _believeth_ in Him should not
perish, but have everlasting life.' So all the universal love of God
for you and me and for all our brethren is 'in Christ Jesus our
Lord,' and faith in Him unites us to it by bonds which no foe can
break, no shock of change can snap, no time can rot, no distance can
stretch to breaking. 'For I am persuaded, that neither death nor
life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord.'




THE SACRIFICE OF THE BODY

   'I beseech you, therefore, brethren, by the mercies of
   God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice,
   holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable
   service.'--ROMANS xii. 1.


In the former part of this letter the Apostle has been building up a
massive fabric of doctrine, which has stood the waste of centuries,
and the assaults of enemies, and has been the home of devout souls.
He now passes to speak of practice, and he binds the two halves of
his letter indissolubly together by that significant 'therefore,'
which does not only look back to the thing last said, but to the
whole of the preceding portion of the letter. 'What God hath joined
together let no man put asunder.' Christian living is inseparably
connected with Christian believing. Possibly the error of our
forefathers was in cutting faith too much loose from practice, and
supposing that an orthodox creed was sufficient, though I think the
extent to which they did suppose that has been very much exaggerated.
The temptation of this day is precisely the opposite. 'Conduct is
three-fourths of life,' says one of our teachers. Yes. But what about
the _fourth_ fourth which underlies conduct? Paul's way is the
right way. Lay broad and deep the foundations of God's facts revealed
to us, and then build upon that the fabric of a noble life. This
generation superficially tends to cut practice loose from faith, and
so to look for grapes from thorns and figs from thistles. Wrong
thinking will not lead to right doing. 'I beseech you, _therefore_,
brethren, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice.'

The Apostle, in beginning his practical exhortations, lays as the
foundations of them all two companion precepts: one, with which we
have to deal, affecting mainly the outward life; its twin sister,
which follows in the next verse, affecting mainly the inward life. He
who has drunk in the spirit of Paul's doctrinal teaching will present
his body a living sacrifice, and be renewed in the spirit of his
mind; and thus, outwardly and inwardly, will be approximating to
God's ideal, and all specific virtues will be his in germ. Those two
precepts lay down the broad outline, and all that follow in the way
of specific commandments is but filling in its details.

I. We observe that we have here, first, an all-inclusive directory
for the outward life.

Now, it is to be noticed that the metaphor of sacrifice runs through
the whole of the phraseology of my text. The word rendered 'present'
is a technical expression for the sacerdotal action of offering. A
tacit contrast is drawn between the sacrificial ritual, which was
familiar to Romans as well as Jews, and the true Christian sacrifice
and service. In the former a large portion of the sacrifices
consisted of animals which were slain. Ours is to be 'a living
sacrifice.' In the former the offering was presented to the Deity,
and became His property. In the Christian service, the gift passes,
in like manner, from the possession of the worshipper, and is set
apart for the uses of God, for that is the proper meaning of the word
'holy.' The outward sacrifice gave an odour of a sweet smell, which,
by a strong metaphor, was declared to be fragrant in the nostrils of
Deity. In like manner, the Christian sacrifice is 'acceptable unto
God.' These other sacrifices were purely outward, and derived no
efficacy from the disposition of the worshipper. Our sacrifice,
though the material of the offering be corporeal, is the act of the
inner man, and so is called 'rational' rather than 'reasonable,' as
our Version has it, or as in other parts of Scripture, 'spiritual.'
And the last word of my text, 'service,' retains the sacerdotal
allusion, because it does not mean the service of a slave or
domestic, but that of a priest.

And so the sum of the whole is that the master-word for the outward
life of a Christian is sacrifice. That, again, includes two
things--self-surrender and surrender to God.

Now, Paul was not such a superficial moralist as to begin at the
wrong end, and talk about the surrender of the outward life, unless
as the result of the prior surrender of the inward, and that priority
of the consecration of the man to his offering of the body is
contained in the very metaphor. For a priest needs to be consecrated
before he can offer, and we in our innermost wills, in the depths of
our nature, must be surrendered and set apart to God ere any of our
outward activities can be laid upon His altar. The Apostle, then,
does not make the mistake of substituting external for
internal surrender, but he presupposes that the latter has preceded.
He puts the sequence more fully in the parallel passage in this very
letter: 'Yield yourselves unto God, and your bodies as instruments of
righteousness unto Him.' So, then, first of all, we must be priests
by our inward consecration, and then, since 'a priest must have
somewhat to offer,' we must bring the outward life and lay it upon
His altar.

Now, of the two thoughts which I have said are involved in this great
keyword, the former is common to Christianity, with all noble systems
of morality, whether religious or irreligious. It is a commonplace,
on which I do not need to dwell, that every man who will live a man's
life, and not that of a beast, must sacrifice the flesh, and rigidly
keep it down. But that commonplace is lifted into an altogether new
region, assumes a new solemnity, and finds new power for its
fulfilment when we add to the moralist's duty of control of the
animal and outward nature the other thought, that the surrender must
be to God.

There is no need for my dwelling at any length on the various
practical directions in which this great exhortation must be wrought
out. It is of more importance, by far, to have well fixed in our
minds and hearts the one dominant thought that sacrifice is the
keyword of the Christian life than to explain the directions in which
it applies. But still, just a word or two about these. There are
three ways in which we may look at the body, which the Apostle here
says is to be yielded up unto God.

It is the recipient of impressions from without. _There_ is a field
for consecration. The eye that looks upon evil, and by the look has
rebellious, lustful, sensuous, foul desires excited in the heart,
breaks this solemn law. The eye that among the things seen dwells
with complacency on the pure, and turns from the impure as if a hot
iron had been thrust into its pupil; that in the things seen discerns
shimmering behind them, and manifested through them, the things
unseen and eternal, is the consecrated eye. 'Art for Art's sake,' to
quote the cant of the day, has too often meant art for the flesh's
sake. And there are pictures and books, and sights of various sorts,
flashed before the eyes of you young men and women which it is
pollution to dwell upon, and should be pain to remember. I beseech
you all to have guard over these gates of the heart, and to pray,
'Turn away mine eyes from viewing vanity.' And the other senses, in
like manner, have need to be closely connected with God if they are
not to rush us down to the devil.

The body is not only the recipient of impressions. It is the
possessor of appetites and necessities. See to it that these are
indulged, with constant reference to God. It is no small attainment
of the Christian life 'to eat our meat with gladness and singleness
of heart, praising God.' In a hundred directions this characteristic
of our corporeal lives tends to lead us all away from supreme
consecration to Him. There is the senseless luxury of this
generation. There is the exaggerated care for physical strength and
completeness amongst the young; there is the intemperance in eating
and drinking, which is the curse and the shame of England. There is
the provision for the flesh, the absorbing care for the procuring of
material comforts, which drowns the spirit in miserable anxieties,
and makes men bond-slaves. There is the corruption which comes from
drunkenness and from lust. There is the indolence which checks lofty
aspirations and stops a man in the middle of noble work. And there
are many other forms of evil on which I need not dwell, all of which
are swept clean out of the way when we lay to heart this injunction:
'I beseech you present your bodies a living sacrifice,' and let
appetites and tastes and corporeal needs be kept in rigid
subordination and in conscious connection with Him. I remember a
quaint old saying of a German schoolmaster, who apostrophised his
body thus: 'I go with you three times a day to eat; you must come
with me three times a day to pray.' Subjugate the body, and let it be
the servant and companion of the devout spirit.

It is also, besides being the recipient of impressions, and the
possessor of needs and appetites, our instrument for working in the
world. And so the exhortation of my text comes to include this, that
all our activities done by means of brain and eye and tongue and hand
and foot shall be consciously devoted to Him, and laid as a sacrifice
upon His altar. That pervasive, universally diffused reference to
God, in all the details of daily life, is the thing that Christian
men and women need most of all to try to cultivate. 'Pray without
ceasing,' says the Apostle. This exhortation can only be obeyed if
our work is indeed worship, being done by God's help, for God's sake,
in communion with God.

So, dear friends, sacrifice is the keynote--meaning thereby
surrender, control, and stimulus of the corporeal frame, surrender to
God, in regard to the impressions which we allow to be made upon our
senses, to the indulgence which we grant to our appetites, and the
satisfaction which we seek for our needs, and to the activities which
we engage in by means of this wondrous instrument with which God has
trusted us. These are the plain principles involved in the
exhortation of my text. 'He that soweth to the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption.' 'I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection.' It is a good servant; it is a bad master.

II. Note, secondly, the relation between this priestly service and
other kinds of worship.

I need only say a word about that. Paul is not meaning to depreciate
the sacrificial ritual, from which he drew his emblem. But he is
meaning to assert that the devotion of a life, manifested through
bodily activity, is higher in its nature than the symbolical worship
of any altar and of any sacrifice. And that falls in with prevailing
tendencies in this day, which has laid such a firm hold on the
principle that daily conduct is better than formal worship, that it
has forgotten to ask the question whether the daily conduct is likely
to be satisfactory if the formal worship is altogether neglected. I
believe, as profoundly as any man can, that the true worship is
distinguishable from and higher than the more sensuous forms of the
Catholic or other sacramentarian churches, or the more simple of the
Puritan and Nonconformist, or the altogether formless of the Quaker.
I believe that the best worship is the manifold activities of daily
life laid upon God's altar, so that the division between things
secular and things sacred is to a large extent misleading and
irrelevant. But at the same time I believe that you have very little
chance of getting this diffused and all-pervasive reference of all a
man's doings to God unless there are, all through his life, recurring
with daily regularity, reservoirs of power, stations where he may
rest, kneeling-places where the attitude of service is exchanged for
the attitude of supplication; times of quiet communion with God which
shall feed the worshipper's activities as the white snowfields on the
high summits feed the brooks that sparkle by the way, and bring
fertility wherever they run. So, dear brethren, remember that whilst
life is the field of worship there must be the inward worship within
the shrine if there is to be the outward service.

III. Lastly, note the equally comprehensive motive and ground of this
all-inclusive directory for conduct.

'I beseech you, by the mercies of God.' That plural does not mean
that the Apostle is extending his view over the whole wide field of
the divine beneficence, but rather that he is contemplating the one
all-inclusive mercy about which the former part of his letter has
been eloquent--viz. the gift of Christ--and contemplating it in the
manifoldness of the blessings which flow from it. The mercies of God
which move a man to yield himself as a sacrifice are not the diffused
beneficences of His providence, but the concentrated love that lies
in the person and work of His Son.

And there, as I believe, is the one motive to which we can appeal
with any prospect of its being powerful enough to give the needful
impetus all through a life. The sacrifice of Christ is the ground on
which our sacrifices can be offered and accepted, for it was the
sacrifice of a death propitiatory and cleansing, and on it, as the
ancient ritual taught us, may be reared the enthusiastic sacrifice of
a life--a thankoffering for it.

Nor is it only the ground on which our sacrifice is accepted, but it
is the great motive by which our sacrifice is impelled. _There_
is the difference between the Christian teaching, 'present your
bodies a sacrifice,' and the highest and noblest of similar teaching
elsewhere. One of the purest and loftiest of the ancient moralists
was a contemporary of Paul's. He would have re-echoed from his heart
the Apostle's directory, but he knew nothing of the Apostle's motive.
So his exhortations were powerless. He had no spell to work on men's
hearts, and his lofty teachings were as the voice of one crying in
the wilderness. Whilst Seneca taught, Rome was a cesspool of moral
putridity and Nero butchered. So it always is. There may be noble
teachings about self-control, purity, and the like, but an evil and
adulterous generation is slow to dance to such piping.

Our poet has bid us--

  'Move upwards, casting out the beast,
  And let the ape and tiger die.'

But how is this heavy bulk of ours to 'move upwards'; how is the
beast to be 'cast out'; how are the 'ape and tiger' in us to be
slain? Paul has told us, 'By the mercies of God.' Christ's gift,
meditated on, accepted, introduced into will and heart, is the one
power that will melt our obstinacy, the one magnet that will draw us
after it.

Nothing else, brethren, as your own experience has taught you, and as
the experience of the world confirms, nothing else will bind
Behemoth, and put a hook in his nose. Apart from the constraining
motive of the love of Christ, all the cords of prudence, conscience,
advantage, by which men try to bind their unruly passions and manacle
the insisting flesh, are like the chains on the demoniac's
wrists--'And he had oftentimes been bound by chains, and the chains
were snapped asunder.' But the silken leash with which the fair Una
in the poem leads the lion, the silken leash of love will bind the
strong man, and enable us to rule ourselves. If we will open our
hearts to the sacrifice of Christ, we shall be able to offer
ourselves as thankofferings. If we will let His love sway our wills
and consciences, He will give our wills and consciences power to
master and to offer up our flesh. And the great change, according to
which He will one day change the body of our humiliation into the
likeness of the body of His glory, will be begun in us, if we live
under the influence of the motive and the commandment which this
Apostle bound together in our text and in his other great words, 'Ye
are not your own; ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God
in your body and spirit, which are His.'




TRANSFIGURATION

   'Be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by
   the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that
   good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.'--ROMANS xii. 2.


I had occasion to point out, in a sermon on the preceding verse, that
the Apostle is, in this context, making the transition from the
doctrinal to the practical part of his letter, and that he lays down
broad principles, of which all his subsequent injunctions and
exhortations are simply the filling up of the details. One master
word, for the whole Christian life, as we then saw, is sacrifice,
self-surrender, and that to God. In like manner, Paul here brackets,
with that great conception of the Christian life, another equally
dominant and equally comprehensive. In one aspect, it is
self-surrender; in another, it is growing transformation. And, just
as in the former verse we found that an inward surrender preceded the
outward sacrifice, and that the inner man, having been consecrated as
a priest, by this yielding of himself to God, was then called upon to
manifest inward consecration by outward sacrifice, so in this further
exhortation, an inward 'renewing of the mind' is regarded as the
necessary antecedent of transformation of outward life.

So we have here another comprehensive view of what the Christian life
ought to be, and that not only grasped, as it were, in its very
centre and essence, but traced out in two directions--as to that
which must precede it within, and as to that which follows it as
consequence. An outline of the possibilities, and therefore the
duties, of the Christian, is set forth here, in these three thoughts
of my text, the renewed mind issuing in a transfigured life, crowned
and rewarded by a clearer and ever clearer insight into what we ought
to be and do.

I. Note, then, that the foundation of all transformation of character
and conduct is laid deep in a renewed mind.

Now it is a matter of world-wide experience, verified by each of us
in our own case, if we have ever been honest in the attempt, that the
power of self-improvement is limited by very narrow bounds. Any man
that has ever tried to cure himself of the most trivial habit which
he desires to get rid of, or to alter in the slightest degree the set
of some strong taste or current of his being, knows how little he can
do, even by the most determined effort. Something may be effected,
but, alas! as the proverbs of all nations and all lands have taught
us, it is very little indeed. 'You cannot expel nature with a fork,'
said the Roman. 'What's bred in the bone won't come out of the
flesh,' says the Englishman. 'Can the Ethiopian change his skin or
the leopard his spots?' says the Hebrew. And we all know what the
answer to that question is. The problem that is set before a man when
you tell him to effect self-improvement is something like that
which confronted that poor paralytic lying in the porch at the pool:
'If you can walk you will be able to get to the pool that will make
you able to walk. But you have got to be cured before you can do what
you need to do in order to be cured.' Only one knife can cut the
knot. The Gospel of Jesus Christ presents itself, not as a mere
republication of morality, not as merely a new stimulus and motive to
do what is right, but as an actual communication to men of a new
power to work in them, a strong hand laid upon our poor, feeble hand
with which we try to put on the brake or to apply the stimulus. It is
a new gift of a life which will unfold itself after its own nature,
as the bud into flower, and the flower into fruit; giving new
desires, tastes, directions, and renewing the whole nature. And so,
says Paul, the beginning of transformation of character is the
renovation in the very centre of the being, and the communication of
a new impulse and power to the inward self.

Now, I suppose that in my text the word 'mind' is not so much
employed in the widest sense, including all the affections and will,
and the other faculties of our nature, as in the narrower sense of
the perceptive power, or that faculty in our nature by which we
recognise, and make our own, certain truths. 'The renewing of the
mind,' then, is only, in such an interpretation, a theological way of
putting the simpler English thought, a change of estimates, a new set
of views; or if that word be too shallow, as indeed it is, a new set
of convictions. It is profoundly true that 'As a man thinketh, so
is he.' Our characters are largely made by our estimates of what is
good or bad, desirable or undesirable. And what the Apostle is
thinking about here is, as I take it, principally how the body of
Christian truth, if it effects a lodgment in, not merely the brain of
a man, but his whole nature, will modify and alter it all. Why, we
all know how often a whole life has been revolutionised by the sudden
dawning or rising in its sky, of some starry new truth, formerly
hidden and undreamed of. And if we should translate the somewhat
archaic phraseology of our text into the plainest of modern English,
it just comes to this: If you want to change your characters, and God
knows they all need it, change the deep convictions of your mind; and
get hold, as living realities, of the great truths of Christ's
Gospel. If you and I really believed what we say we believe, that
Jesus Christ has died for us, and lives for us, and is ready to pour
out upon us the gift of His Divine Spirit, and wills that we should
be like Him, and holds out to us the great and wonderful hopes and
prospects of an absolutely eternal life of supreme and serene
blessedness at His right hand, should we be, could we be, the sort of
people that most of us are? It is not the much that you say you
believe that shapes your character; it is the little that you
habitually realise. Truth professed has no transforming power; truth
received and fed upon can revolutionise a man's whole character.

So, dear brethren, remember that my text, though it is an analysis of
the methods of Christian progress, and though it is a wonderful
setting forth of the possibilities open to the poorest, dwarfed,
blinded, corrupted nature, is also all commandment. And if it is true
that the principles of the Gospel exercise transforming power upon
men's lives, and that in order for these principles to effect their
natural results there must be honest dealing with them, on our parts,
take this as the practical outcome of all this first part of my
sermon--let us all see to it that we keep ourselves in touch with the
truths which we say we believe; and that we thorough-goingly apply
these truths in all their searching, revealing, quickening, curbing
power, to every action of our daily lives. If for one day we could
bring everything that we do into touch with the creed that we
profess, we should be different men and women. Make of your every
thought an action; link every action with a thought. Or, to put it
more Christianlike, let there be nothing in your creed which is not
in your commandments; and let nothing be in your life which is not
moulded by these. The beginning of all transformation is the
revolutionised conviction of a mind that has accepted the truths of
the Gospel.

II. Well then, secondly, note the transfigured life.

The Apostle uses in his positive commandment, 'Be ye transformed,'
the same word which is employed by two of the Evangelists in their
account of our Lord's transfiguration. And although I suppose it
would be going too far to assert that there is a distinct reference
intended to that event, it may be permissible to look back to it as
being a lovely illustration of the possibilities that open to an
honest Christian life--the possibility of a change, coming from
within upwards, and shedding a strange radiance on the face, whilst
yet the identity remains. So by the rippling up from within of the
renewed mind will come into our lives a transformation not altogether
unlike that which passed on Him when His garments did shine 'so as no
fuller on earth could white them'; and His face was as the sun in his
strength.

The life is to be transfigured, yet it remains the same, not only in
the consciousness of personal identity, but in the main trend and
drift of the character. There is nothing in the Gospel of Jesus
Christ which is meant to obliterate the lines of the strongly marked
individuality which each of us receives by nature. Rather the Gospel
is meant to heighten and deepen these, and to make each man more
intensely himself, more thoroughly individual and unlike anybody
else. The perfection of our nature is found in the pursuit, to the
furthest point, of the characteristics of our nature, and so, by
reason of diversity, there is the greater harmony, and, all taken
together, will reflect less inadequately the infinite glories of
which they are all partakers. But whilst the individuality remains,
and ought to be heightened by Christian consecration, yet a change
should pass over our lives, like the change that passes over the
winter landscape when the summer sun draws out the green leaves from
the hard black boughs, and flashes a fresh colour over all the brown
pastures. There should be such a change as when a drop or two of ruby
wine falls into a cup, and so diffuses a gradual warmth of tint over
all the whiteness of the water. Christ in us, if we are true to Him,
will make us more ourselves, and yet new creatures in Christ Jesus.

And the transformation is to be into His likeness who is the pattern
of all perfection. We must be moulded after the same type. There are
two types possible for us: this world; Jesus Christ. We have to make
our choice which is to be the headline after which we are to try to
write. 'They that make them are like unto them.' Men resemble their
gods; men become more or less like their idols. What you conceive to
be desirable you will more and more assimilate yourselves to. Christ
is the Christian man's pattern; is He not better than the blind,
corrupt world?

That transformation is no sudden thing, though the revolution which
underlies it may be instantaneous. The working _out_ of the new
motives, the working _in_ of the new power, is no mere work of a
moment. It is a lifelong task till the lump be leavened. Michael
Angelo, in his mystical way, used to say that sculpture effected its
aim by the removal of parts; as if the statue lay somehow hid in the
marble block. We have, day by day, to work at the task of removing
the superfluities that mask its outlines. Sometimes with a heavy
mallet, and a hard blow, and a broad chisel, we have to take away
huge masses; sometimes, with fine tools and delicate touches, to
remove a grain or two of powdered dust from the sparkling block, but
always to seek more and more, by slow, patient toil, to conform
ourselves to that serene type of all perfectness that we have learned
to love in Jesus Christ.

And remember, brethren, this transformation is no magic change
effected whilst men sleep. It is a commandment which we have to brace
ourselves to perform, day by day to set ourselves to the task of more
completely assimilating ourselves to our Lord. It comes to be a
solemn question for each of us whether we can say, 'To-day I am liker
Jesus Christ than I was yesterday; to-day the truth which renews the
mind has a deeper hold upon me than it ever had before.'

But this positive commandment is only one side of the transfiguration
that is to be effected. It is clear enough that if a new likeness is
being stamped upon a man, the process may be looked at from the other
side; and that in proportion as we become liker Jesus Christ, we
shall become more unlike the old type to which we were previously
conformed. And so, says Paul, 'Be not conformed to this world, but be
ye transformed.' He does not mean to say that the nonconformity
precedes the transformation. They are two sides of one process; both
arising from the renewing of the mind within.

Now, I do not wish to do more than just touch most lightly upon the
thoughts that are here, but I dare not pass them by altogether. 'This
world' here, in my text, is more properly 'this age,' which means
substantially the same thing as John's favourite word 'world,' viz.
the sum total of godless men and things conceived of as separated
from God, only that by this expression the essentially fleeting
nature of that type is more distinctly set forth. Now the world is
the world to-day just as much as it was in Paul's time. No doubt the
Gospel has sweetened society; no doubt the average of godless life in
England is a better thing than the average of godless life in the
Roman Empire. No doubt there is a great deal of Christianity diffused
through the average opinion and ways of looking at things, that
prevail around us. But the World is the world still. There are maxims
and ways of living, and so on, characteristic of the Christian life,
which are in as complete antagonism to the ideas and maxims and
practices that prevail amongst men who are outside of the influences
of this Christian truth in their own hearts, as ever they were.

And although it can only be a word, I want to put in here a very
earnest word which the tendencies of this generation do very
specially require. It seems to be thought, by a great many people,
who call themselves Christians nowadays, that the nearer they can
come in life, in ways of looking at things, in estimates of
literature, for instance, in customs of society, in politics, in
trade, and especially in amusements--the nearer they can come to the
un-Christian world, the more 'broad' (save the mark!) and 'superior
to prejudice' they are. 'Puritanism,' not only in theology, but in
life and conduct, has come to be at a discount in these days. And it
seems to be by a great many professing Christians thought to be a
great feat to walk as the mules on the Alps do, with one foot over
the path and the precipice down below. Keep away from the edge. You
are safer so. Although, of course, I am not talking about mere
conventional dissimilarities; and though I know and believe and feel
all that can be said about the insufficiency, and even insincerity,
of such, yet there is a broad gulf between the man who believes in
Jesus Christ and His Gospel and the man who does not, and the
resulting conducts cannot be the same unless the Christian man is
insincere.

III. And now lastly, and only a word, note the great reward and crown
of this transfigured life.

Paul puts it in words which, if I had time, would require some
commenting upon. The issue of such a life is, to put it into plain
English, an increased power of perceiving, instinctively and surely,
what it is God's will that we should do. And that is the reward. Just
as when you take away disturbing masses of metal from near a compass,
it trembles to its true point, so when, by the discipline of which I
have been speaking, there are swept away from either side of us the
things that would perturb our judgment, there comes, as blessing and
reward, a clear insight into that which it is our duty to do.

There may be many difficulties left, many perplexities. There is no
promise here, nor is there anything in the tendencies of Christ-like
living, to lead us to anticipate that guidance in regard to matters
of prudence or expediency or temporal advantage will follow from such
a transfigured life. All such matters are still to be determined in
the proper fashion, by the exercise of our own best judgment and
common-sense. But in the higher region, the knowledge of good and
evil, surely it is a blessed reward, and one of the highest that can
be given to a man, that there shall be in him so complete a harmony
with God that, like God's Son, he 'does always the things that please
Him,' and that the Father will show him whatsoever things Himself
doeth; and that these also will the son do likewise. To know beyond
doubt what I ought to do, and knowing, to have no hesitation or
reluctance in doing it, seems to me to be heaven upon earth, and the
man that has it needs but little more. This, then, is the reward.
Each peak we climb opens wider and clearer prospects into the
untravelled land before us.

And so, brethren, here is the way, the only way, by which we can
change ourselves, first let us have our minds renewed by contact with
the truth, then we shall be able to transform our lives into the
likeness of Jesus Christ, and our faces too will shine, and our lives
will be ennobled, by a serene beauty which men cannot but admire,
though it may rebuke them. And as the issue of all we shall have
clearer and deeper insight into that will, which to know is life, in
keeping of which there is great reward. And thus our apostle's
promise may be fulfilled for each of us. 'We all with unveiled faces
reflecting'--as a mirror does--'the glory of the Lord, are changed
... into the same image.'




SOBER THINKING

   'For I say, through the grace that is given unto me, to
   every man that is among you, not to think of himself more
   highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly,
   according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of
   faith.'--ROMANS xii. 3.


It is hard to give advice without seeming to assume superiority; it
is hard to take it, unless the giver identifies himself with the
receiver, and shows that his counsel to others is a law for himself.
Paul does so here, led by the delicate perception which comes from a
loving heart, compared with which deliberate 'tact' is cold and
clumsy. He wishes, as the first of the specific duties to which he
invites the Roman Christians, an estimate of themselves based upon
the recognition of God as the Giver of all capacities and graces, and
leading to a faithful use for the general good of the 'gifts
differing according to the grace given to us.' In the first words of
our text, he enforces his counsel by an appeal to his apostolic
authority; but he so presents it that, instead of separating himself
from the Roman Christians by it, he unites himself with them. He
speaks of 'the grace given to _me_,' and in verse 6 of 'the grace
given to _us_.' He was made an Apostle by the same giving God who has
bestowed varying gifts on each of _them_. He knows what is the grace
which he possesses as he would have them know; and in these counsels
he is assuming no superiority, but is simply using the special gift
bestowed on him for the good of all. With this delicate turn of what
might else have sounded harshly authoritative, putting prominently
forward the divine gift and letting the man Paul to whom it was given
fall into the background, he counsels as the first of the social
duties which Christian men owe to one another, a sober and just
estimate of themselves. This sober estimate is here regarded as being
important chiefly as an aid to right service. It is immediately
followed by counsels to the patient and faithful exercise of
differing gifts. For thus we may know what our gifts are; and the
acquisition of such knowledge is the aim of our text.

I. What determines our gifts.

Paul here gives a precise standard, or 'measure' as he calls it,
according to which we are to estimate ourselves. 'Faith' is the
measure of our gifts, and is itself a gift from God. The strength of
a Christian man's faith determines his whole Christian character.
Faith is trust, the attitude of receptivity. There are in it a
consciousness of need, a yearning desire and a confidence of
expectation. It is the open empty hand held up with the assurance
that it will be filled; it is the empty pitcher let down into the
well with the assurance that it will be drawn up filled. It is the
precise opposite of the self-dependent isolation which shuts us out
from God. The law of the Christian life is ever, 'according to your
faith be it unto you'; 'believe that ye receive and ye have them.' So
then the more faith a man exercises the more of God and Christ he
has. It is the measure of our capacity, hence there may be indefinite
