us in New Zealand.  'Heroes,' says Mr. Taylor, 'were thought to become
stars of greater or less brightness, according to the number of their
victims slain in fight.'  The Aryan race is seldom far behind, when there
are ludicrous notions to be credited or savage tales to be told.  We have
seen that Aristophanes, in Greece, knew the Eskimo doctrine that stars
are souls of the dead.  The Persians had the same belief, {134a} 'all the
unnumbered stars were reckoned ghosts of men.' {134b}  The German
folklore clings to the same belief, 'Stars are souls; when a child dies
God makes a new star.'  Kaegi quotes {134c} the same idea from the Veda,
and from the Satapatha Brahmana the thoroughly Australian notion that
'good men become stars.'  For a truly savage conception, it would be
difficult, in South Africa or on the Amazons, to beat the following story
from the 'Aitareya Brahmana' (iii. 33.) Pragapati, the Master of Life,
conceived an incestuous passion for his own daughter.  Like Zeus, and
Indra, and the Australian wooer in the Pleiad tale, he concealed himself
under the shape of a beast, a roebuck, and approached his own daughter,
who had assumed the form of a doe.  The gods, in anger at the awful
crime, made a monster to punish Pragapati.  The monster sent an arrow
through the god's body; he sprang into heaven, and, like the Arcadian
bear, this Aryan roebuck became a constellation.  He is among the stars
of Orion, and his punisher, also now a star, is, like the Greek Orion, a
hunter.  The daughter of Pragapati, the doe, became another
constellation, and the avenging arrow is also a set of stars in the sky.
What follows, about the origin of the gods called Adityas, is really too
savage to be quoted by a chaste mythologist.

It would be easy to multiply examples of this stage of thought among
Aryans and savages.  But we have probably brought forward enough for our
purpose, and have expressly chosen instances from the most widely
separated peoples.  These instances, it will perhaps be admitted,
suggest, if they do not prove, that the Greeks had received from
tradition precisely the same sort of legends about the heavenly bodies as
are current among Eskimo and Bushmen, New Zealanders and Iowas.  As much,
indeed, might be inferred from our own astronomical nomenclature.  We now
give to newly discovered stars names derived from distinguished people,
as Georgium Sidus, or Herschel; or, again, merely technical appellatives,
as Alpha, Beta, and the rest.  We should never think when 'some new
planet swims into our ken' of calling it Kangaroo, or Rabbit, or after
the name of some hero of romance, as Rob Roy, or Count Fosco.  But the
names of stars which we inherit from Greek mythology--the Bear, the
Pleiads, Castor and Pollux, and so forth--are such as no people in our
mental condition would originally think of bestowing.  When Callimachus
and the courtly astronomers of Alexandria pretended that the golden locks
of Berenice were raised to the heavens, that was a mere piece of flattery
constructed on the inherited model of legends about the crown (Corona) of
Ariadne.  It seems evident enough that the older Greek names of stars are
derived from a time when the ancestors of the Greeks were in the mental
and imaginative condition of Iowas, Kanekas, Bushmen, Murri, and New
Zealanders.  All these, and all other savage peoples, believe in a kind
of equality and intercommunion among all things animate and inanimate.
Stones are supposed in the Pacific Islands to be male and female and to
propagate their species.  Animals are believed to have human or
superhuman intelligence, and speech, if they choose to exercise the gift.
Stars are just on the same footing, and their movements are explained by
the same ready system of universal anthropomorphism.  Stars, fishes,
gods, heroes, men, trees, clouds, and animals, all play their equal part
in the confused dramas of savage thought and savage mythology.  Even in
practical life the change of a sorcerer into an animal is accepted as a
familiar phenomenon, and the power of soaring among the stars is one on
which the Australian Biraark, or the Eskimo Shaman, most plumes himself.
It is not wonderful that things which are held possible in daily practice
should be frequent features of mythology.  Hence the ready invention and
belief of star-legends, which in their turn fix the names of the heavenly
bodies.  Nothing more, except the extreme tenacity of tradition and the
inconvenience of changing a widely accepted name, is needed to account
for the human and animal names of the stars.  The Greeks received from
the dateless past of savage intellect the myths, and the names of the
constellations, and we have taken them, without inquiry, from the Greeks.
Thus it happens that our celestial globes are just as queer menageries as
any globes could be that were illustrated by Australians or American
Indians, by Bushmen or Peruvian aborigines, or Eskimo.  It was savages,
we may be tolerably certain, who first handed to science the names of the
constellations, and provided Greece with the raw material of her
astronomical myths--as Bacon prettily says, that we listen to the harsh
ideas of earlier peoples 'blown softly through the flutes of the
Grecians.'

This position has been disputed by Mr. Brown, in a work rather komically
called 'The Law of Kosmic Order.'  Mr. Brown's theory is that the early
Accadians named the zodiacal signs after certain myths and festivals
connected with the months.  Thus the crab is a figure of 'the darkness
power' which seized the Akkadian solar hero, Dumuzi, and 'which is
constantly represented in monstrous and drakontic form.'  The bull,
again, is connected with night and darkness, 'in relation to the horned
moon,' and is, for other reasons, 'a nocturnal potency.'  Few stars, to
tell the truth, are diurnal potencies.  Mr. Brown's explanations appear
to me far-fetched and unconvincing.  But, granting that the zodiacal
signs reached Greece from Chaldaea, Mr. Brown will hardly maintain that
Australians, Melanesians, Iowas, Amazon Indians, Eskimo, and the rest,
borrowed their human and animal stars from 'Akkadia.'  The belief in
animal and human stars is practically universal among savages who have
not attained the 'Akkadian' degree of culture.  The belief, as Mr. Tylor
has shown, {137} is a natural result of savage ideas.  We therefore infer
that the 'Akkadians,' too, probably fell back for star-names on what they
inherited from the savage past.  If the Greeks borrowed certain
star-names from the Akkadians, they also, like the Aryans of India,
retained plenty of savage star-myths of their own, fables derived from
the earliest astronomical guesses of early thought.

The first moment in astronomical science arrives when the savage, looking
at a star, says, like the child in the nursery poem, 'How I wonder what
you are!'  The next moment comes when the savage has made his first rough
practical observations of the movements of the heavenly body.  His third
step is to explain these to himself.  Now science cannot offer any but a
fanciful explanation beyond the sphere of experience.  The experience of
the savage is limited to the narrow world of his tribe, and of the
beasts, birds, and fishes of his district.  His philosophy, therefore,
accounts for all phenomena on the supposition that the laws of the
animate nature he observes are working everywhere.  But his observations,
misguided by his crude magical superstitions, have led him to believe in
a state of equality and kinship between men and animals, and even
inorganic things.  He often worships the very beasts he slays; he
addresses them as if they understood him; he believes himself to be
descended from the animals, and of their kindred.  These confused ideas
he applies to the stars, and recognises in them men like himself, or
beasts like those with which he conceives himself to be in such close
human relations.  There is scarcely a bird or beast but the Red Indian or
the Australian will explain its peculiarities by a myth, like a page from
Ovid's 'Metamorphoses.'  It was once a man or a woman, and has been
changed to bird or beast by a god or a magician.  Men, again, have
originally been beasts, in his philosophy, and are descended from wolves,
frogs or serpents, or monkeys.  The heavenly bodies are traced to
precisely the same sort of origin; and hence, we conclude, come their
strange animal names, and the strange myths about them which appear in
all ancient poetry.  These names, in turn, have curiously affected human
beliefs.  Astrology is based on the opinion that a man's character and
fate are determined by the stars under which he is born.  And the nature
of these stars is deduced from their names, so that the bear should have
been found in the horoscope of Dr. Johnson.  When Giordano Bruno wrote
his satire against religion, the famous 'Spaccio della bestia
trionfante,' he proposed to banish not only the gods but the beasts from
heaven.  He would call the stars, not the Bear, or the Swan, or the
Pleiads, but Truth, Mercy, Justice, and so forth, that men might be born,
not under bestial, but moral influences.  But the beasts have had too
long possession of the stars to be easily dislodged, and the tenure of
the Bear and the Swan will probably last as long as there is a science of
Astronomy.  Their names are not likely again to delude a philosopher into
the opinion of Aristotle that the stars are animated.

This argument had been worked out to the writer's satisfaction when he
chanced to light on Mr. Max Muller's explanation of the name of the Great
Bear.  We have explained that name as only one out of countless similar
appellations which men of every race give to the stars.  These names,
again, we have accounted for as the result of savage philosophy, which
takes no great distinction between man and the things in the world, and
looks on stars, beasts, birds, fishes, flowers, and trees as men and
women in disguise.  Mr. Muller's theory is based on philological
considerations.  He thinks that the name of the Great Bear is the result
of a mistake as to the meaning of words.  There was in Sanskrit, he says,
{140} a root ark, or arch, meaning 'to be bright.'  The stars are called
riksha, that is, bright ones, in the Veda.  'The constellations here
called the Rikshas, in the sense of the "bright ones," would be
homonymous in Sanskrit with the Bears.  Remember also that, apparently
without rhyme or reason, the same constellation is called by Greeks and
Romans the Bear. . . .  There is not the shadow of a likeness with a
bear.  You will now perceive the influence of words on thought, or the
spontaneous growth of mythology.  The name Riksha was applied to the bear
in the sense of the bright fuscous animal, and in that sense it became
most popular in the later Sanskrit, and in Greek and Latin.  The same
name, "in the sense of the bright ones," had been applied by the Vedic
poets to the stars in general, and more particularly to that
constellation which in the northern parts of India was the most
prominent.  The etymological meaning, "the bright stars," was forgotten;
the popular meaning of Riksha (bear) was known to everyone.  And thus it
happened that, when the Greeks had left their central home and settled in
Europe, they retained the name of Arktos for the same unchanging stars;
but, not knowing why those stars had originally received that name, they
ceased to speak of them as arktoi, or many bears, and spoke of them as
the Bear.'

This is a very good example of the philological way of explaining a myth.
If once we admit that ark, or arch, in the sense of 'bright' and of
'bear,' existed, not only in Sanskrit, but in the undivided Aryan tongue,
and that the name Riksha, bear, 'became in that sense most popular in
Greek and Latin,' this theory seems more than plausible.  But the
explanation does not look so well if we examine, not only the Aryan, but
all the known myths and names of the Bear and the other stars.  Professor
Sayce, a distinguished philologist, says we may not compare non-Aryan
with Aryan myths.  We have ventured to do so, however, in this paper, and
have shown that the most widely severed races give the stars animal
names, of which the Bear is one example.  Now, if the philologists wish
to persuade us that it was decaying and half-forgotten language which
caused men to give the names of animals to the stars, they must prove
their case on an immense collection of instances--on Iowa, Kaneka, Murri,
Maori, Brazilian, Peruvian, Mexican, Egyptian, Eskimo, instances.  It
would be the most amazing coincidence in the world if forgetfulness of
the meaning of their own speech compelled tribes of every tongue and race
to recognise men and beasts, cranes, cockatoos, serpents, monkeys, bears,
and so forth, in the heavens.  How came the misunderstood words always to
be misunderstood in the same way?  Does the philological explanation
account for the enormous majority of the phenomena?  If it fails, we may
at least doubt whether it solves the one isolated case of the Great Bear
among the Greeks and Romans.  It must be observed that the philological
explanation of Mr. Muller does not clear up the Arcadian story of their
own descent from a she-bear who is now a star.  Yet similar stories of
the descent of tribes from animals are so widespread that it would be
difficult to name the race or the quarter of the globe where they are not
found.  Are they all derived from misunderstood words meaning 'bright'?
These considerations appear to be a strong argument for comparing not
only Aryan, but all attainable myths.  We shall often find, if we take a
wide view, that the philological explanation which seemed plausible in a
single case is hopelessly narrow when applied to a large collection of
parallel cases in languages of various families.

Finally, in dealing with star myths, we adhere to the hypothesis of Mr.
Tylor: 'From savagery up to civilisation,' Akkadian, Greek, or English,
'there may be traced in the mythology of the stars a course of thought,
changed, indeed, in application, yet never broken in its evident
connection from first to last.  The savage sees individual stars as
animate beings, or combines star-groups into living celestial creatures,
or limbs of them, or objects connected with them; while at the other
extremity of the scale of civilisation the modern astronomer keeps up
just such ancient fancies, turning them to account in useful survival, as
a means of mapping out the celestial globe.'




MOLY AND MANDRAGORA.


'I have found out a new cure for rheumatism,' said the lady beside whom
it was my privilege to sit at dinner.  'You carry a potato about in your
pocket!'

Some one has written an amusing account of the behaviour of a man who is
finishing a book.  He takes his ideas everywhere with him and broods over
them, even at dinner, in the pauses of conversation.  But here was a lady
who kindly contributed to my studies and offered me folklore and
survivals in cultivated Kensington.

My mind had strayed from the potato cure to the New Zealand habit of
carrying a baked yam at night to frighten away ghosts, and to the old
English belief that a bit of bread kept in the pocket was sovereign
against evil spirits.  Why should ghosts dread the food of mortals when
it is the custom of most races of mortals to feed ancestral ghosts?  The
human mind works pretty rapidly, and all this had passed through my brain
while I replied, in tones of curiosity: 'A potato!'

'Yes; but it is not every potato that will do.  I heard of the cure in
the country, and when we came up to town, and my husband was complaining
of rheumatism, I told one of the servants to get me a potato for Mr.
Johnson's rheumatism.  "Yes, ma'am," said the man; "but it must be a
_stolen_ potato."  I had forgotten that.  Well, one can't ask one's
servants to steal potatoes.  It is easy in the country, where you can
pick one out of anybody's field.'  'And what did you do?'  I asked.  'Oh,
I drove to Covent Garden and ordered a lot of fruit and flowers.  While
the man was not looking, I stole a potato--a very little one.  I don't
think there was any harm in it.'  'And did Mr. Johnson try the potato
cure?'  'Yes, he carried it in his pocket, and now he is quite well.  I
told the doctor, and he says he knows of the cure, but he dares not
recommend it.'

How oddly superstitions survive!  The central idea of this modern folly
about the potato is that you must pilfer the root.  Let us work the idea
of the healing or magical herb backwards, from Kensington to European
folklore, and thence to classical times, to Homer, and to the Hottentots.
Turning first to Germany, we note the beliefs, not about the potato, but
about another vegetable, the mandrake.  Of all roots, in German
superstition, the Alraun, or mandrake, is the most famous.  The herb was
conceived of, in the savage fashion, as a living human person, a kind of
old witch-wife. {144}

Again, the root has a human shape.  'If a hereditary thief who has
preserved his chastity gets hung,' the broad-leafed, yellow-flowered
mandrake grows up, in his likeness, beneath the gallows from which he is
suspended.  The mandrake, like the moly, the magical herb of the Odyssey,
is 'hard for men to dig.'  He who desires to possess a mandrake must stop
his ears with wax, so that he may not hear the deathly yells which the
plant utters as it is being dragged out of the earth.  Then before
sunrise, on a Friday, the amateur goes out with a dog, 'all black,' makes
three crosses round the mandrake, loosens the soil about the root, ties
the root to the dog's tail, and offers the beast a piece of bread.  The
dog runs at the bread, drags out the mandrake root, and falls dead,
killed by the horrible yell of the plant.  The root is now taken up,
washed with wine, wrapped in silk, laid in a casket, bathed every Friday,
'and clothed in a little new white smock every new moon.'  The mandrake
acts, if thus considerately treated, as a kind of familiar spirit.  'Every
piece of coin put to her over night is found doubled in the morning.'
Gipsy folklore, and the folklore of American children, keep this belief
in doubling deposits.  The gipsies use the notion in what they call 'The
Great Trick.'  Some foolish rustic makes up his money in a parcel which
he gives to the gipsy.  The latter, after various ceremonies performed,
returns the parcel, which is to be buried.  The money will be found
doubled by a certain date.  Of course when the owner unburies the parcel
he finds nothing in it but brass buttons.  In the same way, and with
pious confidence, the American boy buries a marble in a hollow log,
uttering the formula, 'What hasn't come here, _come_! what's here, _stay_
here!' and expects to find all the marbles he has ever lost. {145}  Let
us follow the belief in magical roots into the old Pagan world.

The ancients knew mandragora and the superstitions connected with it very
well.  Dioscorides mentions mandragorus, or antimelon, or dircaea, or
Circaea, and says the Egyptians call it apemoum, and Pythagoras
'anthropomorphon.'  In digging the root, Pliny says, 'there are some
ceremonies observed, first they that goe about this worke, look
especially to this that the wind be not in their face, but blow upon
their backs.  Then with the point of a sword they draw three circles
round about the plant, which don, they dig it up afterwards with their
face unto the west.'  Pliny says nothing of the fetich qualities of the
plant, as credited in modern and mediaeval Germany, but mentions
'sufficient it is with some bodies to cast them into sleep with the smel
of mandrago.'  This is like Shakespeare's 'poppy and mandragora, and all
the drowsy syrups of the world.'  Plato and Demosthenes {146a} also speak
of mandragora as a soporific.  It is more to the purpose of magic that
Columella mentions 'the _half-human_ mandragora.'  Here we touch the
origin of the mandrake superstitions.  The roots have a kind of fantastic
resemblance to the human shape; Pliny describes them as being 'of a
fleshy substance and tender.'  Now it is one of the recognised principles
in magic, that things like each other, however superficially, affect each
other in a mystic way, and possess identical properties.  Thus, in
Melanesia, according to Mr. Codrington, {146b} 'a stone in the shape of a
pig, of a bread-fruit, of a yam, was a most valuable find,' because it
made pigs prolific, and fertilised bread-fruit trees and yam-plots.  In
Scotland, too, 'stones were called by the names of the limbs they
resembled, as "eye-stane," "head-stane."  A patient washed the affected
part of his body, and rubbed it well with the stone corresponding.'
{147a}  In precisely the same way, the mandrake root, being thought to
resemble the human body, was credited with human and superhuman powers.
Josephus mentions {147b} a plant 'not easily caught, which slips away
from them that wish to gather it, and never stands still' till certain
repulsive rites are performed.  These rites cannot well be reported here,
but they are quite familiar to Red Indian and to Bushman magic.  Another
way to dig the plant spoken of by Josephus is by aid of the dog, as in
the German superstition quoted from Grimm.  AElian also recommends the
use of the dog to pluck the herb aglaophotis, which shines at night.
{147c}  When the dog has dragged up the root, and died of terror, his
body is to be buried on the spot with religious honours and secret sacred
rites.

So much for mandragora, which, like the healing potato, has to be
acquired stealthily and with peril.  Now let us examine the Homeric herb
moly.  The plant is thus introduced by Homer: In the tenth book of the
'Odyssey,' Circe has turned Odysseus's men into swine.  He sets forth to
rescue them, trusting only to his sword.  The god Hermes meets him, and
offers him 'a charmed herb,' 'this herb of grace' ([Greek]) whereby he
may subdue the magic wiles of Circe.

The plant is described by Homer with some minuteness.  'It was black at
the root, but the flower was like to milk.  "Moly," the gods call it, but
it is hard for mortal men to dig, howbeit with the gods all things are
possible.'  The etymologies given of 'moly' are almost as numerous as the
etymologists.  One derivation, from the old 'Turanian' tongue of Accadia,
will be examined later.  The Scholiast offers the derivation '[Greek], to
make charms of no avail'; but this is exactly like Professor Blackie's
etymological discovery that Erinys is derived from [Greek]: 'he might as
well derive critic from criticise.' {148}  The Scholiast adds that moly
caused death to the person who dragged it out of the ground.  This
identification of moly with mandrake is probably based on Homer's remark
that moly is 'hard to dig.'  The black root and white flower of moly are
quite unlike the yellow flower and white fleshy root ascribed by Pliny to
mandrake.  Only confusion is caused by regarding the two magical herbs as
identical.

But why are any herbs or roots magical?  While some scholars, like De
Gubernatis, seek an explanation in supposed myths about clouds and stars,
it is enough for our purpose to observe that herbs really have medicinal
properties, and that untutored people invariably confound medicine with
magic.  A plant or root is thought to possess virtue, not only when
swallowed in powder or decoction, but when carried in the hand.  St.
John's wort and rowan berries, like the Homeric moly, still 'make evil
charms of none avail;'

   Rowan, ash, and red threed
   Keep the devils from their speed,

says the Scotch rhyme.  Any fanciful resemblance of leaf or flower or
root to a portion of the human body, any analogy based on colour, will
give a plant reputation for magical virtues.  This habit of mind survives
from the savage condition.  The Hottentots are great herbalists.  Like
the Greeks, like the Germans, they expect supernatural aid from plants
and roots.  Mr. Hahn, in his 'Tsui Goam, the Supreme Being of the Khoi
Khoi' (p. 82), gives the following examples:--

   Dapper, in his description of Africa, p. 621, tells us:--'Some of them
   wear round the neck roots, which they find far inland, in rivers, and
   being on a journey they light them in a fire or chew them, if they
   must sleep the night out in the field.  They believe that these roots
   keep off the wild animals.  The roots they chew are spit out around
   the spot where they encamp for the night; and in a similar way if they
   set the roots alight, they blow the smoke and ashes about, believing
   that the smell will keep the wild animals off.

   I had often occasion to observe the practice of these superstitious
   ceremonies, especially when we were in a part of the country where we
   heard the roaring of the lions, or had the day previously met with the
   footprints of the king of the beasts.

   The Korannas also have these roots as safeguards with them.  If a
   Commando (a warlike expedition) goes out, every man will put such
   roots in his pockets and in the pouch where he keeps his bullets,
   believing that the arrows or bullets of the enemy have no effect, but
   that his own bullets will surely kill the enemy.  And also before they
   lie down to sleep, they set these roots alight, and murmur, 'My
   grandfather's root, bring sleep on the eyes of the lion and leopard
   and the hyena.  Make them blind, that they cannot find us, and cover
   their noses, that they cannot smell us out.'  Also, if they have
   carried off large booty, or stolen cattle of the enemy, they light
   these roots and say: 'We thank thee, our grandfather's root, that thou
   hast given us cattle to eat.  Let the enemy sleep, and lead him on the
   wrong track, that he may not follow us until we have safely escaped.'

   Another sort of shrub is called abib.  Herdsmen, especially, carry
   pieces of its wood as charms, and if cattle or sheep have gone astray,
   they burn a piece of it in the fire, that the wild animals may not
