the way from Mount Zalmon to Shechem be filled with the tossing joy.
Good news! This bonfire of the Gospel shall consume the last temple of
sin, and will illumine the sky with apocalyptic joy that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save sinners. Any new plan that makes a man
quit his sin, and that prostrates a wrong, I am as much in favor of as
though all the doctors, and the bishops, and the archbishops, and the
synods, and the academical gownsmen of Christianity sanctioned it. The
temple of Berith must come down, and I do not care how it comes.

Still further, I learn from this subject the power of example. If
Abimelech had sat down on the grass and told his men to go and get the
boughs, and go out to the battle, they would never have gone at all,
or, if they had, it would have been without any spirit or effective
result; but when Abimelech goes with his own ax and hews down a
branch, and with Abimelech's arm puts it on Abimelech's shoulder, and
marches on--then, my text says, all the people did the same. How
natural that was! What made Garibaldi and Stonewall Jackson the most
magnetic commanders of this century? They always rode ahead. Oh, the
overcoming power of example! Here is a father on the wrong road; all
his boys go on the wrong road. Here is a father who enlists for
Christ; his children enlist.

I saw, in some of the picture-galleries of Europe, that before many of
the great works of the masters--the old masters--there would be
sometimes four or five artists taking copies of the pictures. These
copies they were going to carry with them, perhaps to distant lands;
and I have thought that your life and character are a masterpiece, and
it is being copied, and long after you are gone it will bloom or blast
in the homes of those who knew you, and be a Gorgon or a Madonna. Look
out what you say. Look out what you do. Eternity will hear the echo.
The best sermon ever preached is a holy life. The best music ever
chanted is a consistent walk.

I saw, near the beach, a wrecker's machine. It was a cylinder with
some holes at the side, made for the thrusting in of some long poles
with strong leverage; and when there is a vessel in trouble or going
to pieces out in the offing, the wreckers shoot a rope out to the
suffering men. They grasp it, and the wreckers turn the cylinder, and
the rope winds around the cylinder, and those who are shipwrecked are
saved. So at your feet to-day there is an influence with a tremendous
leverage. The rope attached to it swings far out into the billowy
future. Your children, your children's children, and all the
generations that are to follow, will grip that influence and feel the
long-reaching pull long after the figures on your tombstone are so
near worn out that the visitor can not tell whether it was in 1885, or
1775, or 1675 that you died.

Still further, I learn from this subject the advantages of concerted
action. If Abimelech had merely gone out with a tree-branch the work
would not have been accomplished, or if ten, twenty, or thirty men had
gone; but when all the axes are lifted, and all the sharp edges fall,
and all these men carry each his tree-branch down and throw it about
the temple, the victory is gained--the temple falls. My friends, where
there is one man in the Church of God at this day shouldering his
whole duty there are a great many who never lift an ax or swing a
blow.

Oh, we all want our boat to get over to the golden sands, but the most
of us are seated either in the prow or in the stern, wrapped in our
striped shawl, holding a big-handled sunshade, while others are
blistered in the heat, and pull until the oar-locks groan, and the
blades bend till they snap. Oh, religious sleepy-heads, wake up! While
we have in our church a great many who are toiling for God, there are
some too lazy to brush the flies off their heavy eyelids.

Suppose, in military circles, on the morning of battle the roll is
called, and out of a thousand men only a hundred men in the regiment
answered. What excitement there would be in the camp! What would the
colonel say? What high talking there would be among the captains, and
majors, and the adjutants! Suppose word came to head-quarters that
these delinquents excused themselves on the ground that they had
overslept themselves, or that the morning was damp and they were
afraid of getting their feet wet, or that they were busy cooking
rations. My friends, this is the morning of the day of God Almighty's
battle! Do you not see the troops? Hear you not all the trumpets of
heaven and all the drums of hell? Which side are you on? If you are on
the right side, to what cavalry troop, to what artillery service, to
what garrison duty do you belong? In other words, in what
Sabbath-school do you teach? in what prayer-meeting do you exhort? to
what penitentiary do you declare eternal liberty? to what almshouse do
you announce the riches of heaven? What broken bone of sorrow have you
ever set? Are you doing nothing? Is it possible that a man or woman
sworn to be a follower of the Lord Jesus Christ is doing nothing? Then
hide the horrible secret from the angels. Keep it away from the book
of judgment. If you are doing nothing do not let the world find it
out, lest they charge your religion with being a false-face. Do not
let your cowardice and treason be heard among the martyrs about the
throne, lest they forget the sanctity of the place and curse your
betrayal of that cause for which they agonized and died.

May the eternal God rouse us all to action! As for myself, I feel I
would be ashamed to die now and enter heaven until I have accomplished
something more decisive for the Lord that bought me. I would like to
join with you in an oath, with hand high uplifted to heaven, swearing
new allegiance to Jesus Christ, and to work more for His kingdom. Are
you ready to join with me in some new work for Christ? I feel that
there is such a thing as claustral piety, that there is such a thing
as insular work; but it seems to me that what we want now is concerted
action. The temple of Berith is very broad, and it is very high. It
has been going up by the hands of men and devils, and no human
enginery can demolish it; but if the fifty thousand ministers of
Christ in this country should each take a branch of the tree of life,
and all their congregations should do the same, and we should march on
and throw these branches around the great temples of sin, and
worldliness and folly, it would need no match, or coal, or torch of
ours to touch off the pile; for, as in the days of Elijah, fire would
fall from heaven and kindle the bonfire of Christian victory over
demolished sin. It is kindling now! Huzzah! The day is ours!

Still further, I learn from this subject the danger of false refuges.
As soon as these Shechemites got into the temple they thought they
were safe. They said: "Berith will take care of us. Abimelech may
batter down everything else; he can not batter down this temple where
we are now hid." But very soon they heard the timbers crackling, and
they were smothered with smoke, and they miserably died. And you and I
are just as much tempted to false refuges. The mirror this morning may
have persuaded you that you have a comely cheek; your best friends
may have persuaded you that you have elegant manners. Satan may have
told you that you are all right; but bear with me if I tell you that,
if unpardoned, you are all wrong. I have no clinometer by which to
measure how steep is the inclined plane you are descending, but I know
it is very steep. "Well," you say, "if the Bible is true I am a
sinner. Show me some refuge; I will step right into it."

I suppose every person in this audience this moment is stepping into
some kind of refuge. Here you step in the tower of good works. You
say: "I shall be safe here in this refuge." The battlements are
adorned; the steps are varnished; on the wall are pictures of all the
suffering you have alleviated, and all the schools you have
established, and all the fine things you have ever done. Up in that
tower you feel you are safe. But hear you not the tramp of your
unpardoned sins all around the tower? They each have a match. They are
kindling the combustible material. You feel the heat and the
suffocation. Oh, may you leap in time, the Gospel declaring: "By the
deeds of the law shall no flesh living be justified."

"Well," you say, "I have been driven out of that tower; where shall I
go?" Step into this tower of indifference. You say: "If this tower is
attacked, it will be a great while before it is taken." You feel at
ease. But there is an Abimelech, with ruthless assaults, coming on.
Death and his forces are gathering around, and they demand that you
surrender everything, and they clamor for your immortal overthrow, and
they throw their skeleton arms in the windows, and with their iron
fists they beat against the door; and while you are trying to keep
them out you see the torches of judgment kindling, and every forest is
a torch, and every mountain a torch, and every sea a torch; and while
the Alps, the Pyrenees, and Himalayas turn into a live coal, blown
redder and redder by the whirlwind breath of a God omnipotent, what
will become of your refuge of lies?

"But," says some one, "you are engaged in a very mean business,
driving us from tower to tower." Oh, no. I want to tell you of a
Gibraltar that never has been and never will be taken; of a wall that
no satanic assault can scale; of a bulwark that the judgment
earthquakes can not budge. The Bible refers to it when it says: "In
God is thy refuge, and underneath thee are the everlasting arms." Oh,
fling yourself into it! Tread down unceremoniously everything that
intercepts you. Wedge your way there. There are enough hounds of death
and peril after you to make you hurry. Many a man has perished just
outside the tower, with his foot on the step, with his hand on the
latch. Oh, get inside! Not one surplus second have you to spare.
Quick, quick, quick!

Great God, is life such an uncertain thing? If I bear a little too
hard with my right foot on the earth, does it break through into the
grave? Is this world, which swings at the speed of thousands of miles
an hour around the sun, going with tenfold more speed toward the
judgment-day? Oh, I am overborne with the thought; and in the
conclusion I cry to one and I cry to the other: "Oh, time! Oh,
eternity! Oh, the dead! Oh, the judgment-day! Oh, Jesus! Oh, God!"
But, catching at the last apostrophe, I feel that I have something to
hold on to: for "in God is thy refuge, and underneath thee are the
everlasting arms." And, exhausted with my failure to save myself, I
throw my whole weight of body, mind, and soul on this divine promise,
as a weary child throws itself into the arms of its mother; as a
wounded soldier throws himself on the hospital pillow; as a pursued
man throws himself into the refuge; for "in God is thy refuge, and
underneath thee are the everlasting arms." Oh, for a flood of tears
with which to express the joy of this eternal rescue!




ALL THE WORLD AKIN.

    "And hath made of one blood all nations of men."--ACTS xvii: 26.


Some have supposed that God originally made an Asiatic Adam and a
European Adam and an African Adam and an American Adam, but that
theory is entirely overthrown by my text, which says that all nations
are blood relatives, having sprung from one and the same stock. A
difference in climate makes much of the difference in national temper.

An American goes to Europe and stays there a long while, and finds his
pulse moderating and his temper becoming more calm. The air on this
side the ocean is more tonic than on the other side. An American
breathes more oxygen than a European. A European coming to America
finds a great change taking place in himself. He walks with more rapid
strides, and finds his voice becoming keener and shriller. The
Englishman who walks in London Strand at the rate of three miles the
hour, coming to America and residing for a long while here, walks
Broadway at the rate of four miles the hour. Much of the difference
between an American and a European, between an Asiatic and an African,
is atmospheric. The lack of the warm sunlight pales the Greenlander.
The full dash of the sunlight darkens the African.

Then, ignorance or intelligence makes its impression on the physical
organism--in the one case ignorance flattening the skull, as with the
Egyptian; in the other case intelligence building up the great dome of
the forehead, as with the German. Then the style of god that the
nation worships decides how much it shall be elevated or debased, so
that those nations that worship reptiles are themselves only a
superior form of reptile, while those nations that worship the natural
sun in the heavens are the noblest style of barbaric people. But
whatever be the difference of physiognomy, and whatever the difference
of temperament, the physiologist tells us that after careful analysis
he finds out that the plasma and the disk in the human blood have the
same characteristics: so that if you should put twenty men from twenty
nationalities abreast in line of battle, and a bullet should fly
through the hearts of the twenty men, the blood flowing forth would,
through analysis, prove itself to be the same blood in every instance.
In other words, the science of the day confirming the truth of my text
that "God hath made of one blood all nations of men."

I have thought, my friends, it might be profitable this morning if I
gave you some of the moral and religious impressions which I received
when, through your indulgence, I had transatlantic absence. First, I
observe that the majority of people in all lands are in a mighty
struggle for bread. While in nearly all lands there are only a few
cases of actual starvation reported, there is a vast population in
every country I visited who have a limited supply of food, or such
food as is incompetent to sustain physical vigor. This struggle in
some lands is becoming more agonizing, while here and there it is
lightened. I have joy in reporting that Ireland, about the sufferings
of which we have heard so much, has far better prospects than I have
seen there in previous visits. In 1879, coming home from that land, I
prophesied the famine that must come upon, and did come upon, the
deluged fields of that country. This year the crops are large, and
both parties--those who like the English Government and those who
don't like it--are expecting relief. I said to one of the intelligent
men of Ireland: "Tell me in a few words what are the sufferings of
Ireland, and what is the Land Relief enactment?" He replied: "I will
tell you. Suppose I am a landlord and you a tenant. You rent from me a
place for ten pounds a year. You improve it. You turn it from a bog
into a garden. You put a house upon it. After a while I, the landlord,
come around, and I say to my agent: 'How much rent is this man
paying;' He answers, 'Ten pounds.' 'Is that all? Put his rent up to
twenty pounds.' The tenant goes on improving his property, and after
awhile I come around and I say to my agent, 'How much rent is this man
paying?' He says, 'Twenty pounds.' 'Put his rent up to twenty-five
pounds.' The tenant protests and says, 'I can't pay it.' Then I, the
landlord, say, 'Pay it or get out;' and the tenant is helpless, and,
leaving the place, the property in its improved condition turns over
to the landlord. Now, to stop that outrage the Relief Enactment comes
in and appoints commissioners who shall see that if the tenant is
turned out, he shall receive the difference of value between the farm
as he got it and the farm as he surrenders it. Moreover, the
government loans money to the tenant, so that he may buy the property
out and out if the landlord will sell." Mighty advancement toward the
righting of a great wrong! But there and in all lands, not excepting
our own, there is a far-reaching distress. And let those who broke
their fast this morning, and those who shall dine to-day, remember
those who are in want, and by prayer and practical beneficence do all
they can to alleviate the hunger swoon of nations.

Another impression was--indeed the impression carried with me all the
summer--the thought already suggested, the brotherhood of man. The
fact is that the differences are so small between nations that they
may be said to be all alike. Though I spent the most of the summer in
silence, I spoke a few times and to people of different nations, and
how soon I noticed that they were very much alike! If a man knows how
to play the piano, it does not make any difference whether he finds it
in New Orleans or San Francisco or Boston or St. Petersburg or Moscow
or Madras; it has so many keys, and he puts his fingers right on them.
And the human heart is a divine instrument, with just so many keys in
all cases, and you strike some of them and there is joy, and you
strike some of them and there is sorrow. Plied by the same motives,
lifted up by the same success, depressed by the same griefs. The
cab-men of London have the same characteristics as the cab-men of New
York, and are just as modest and retiring. The gold and silver drive
Piccadilly and the Boulevards just as they drive Wall Street. If there
be a great political excitement in Europe, the Bourse in Paris howls
just as loudly as ever did the American gold-room.

The same grief that we saw in our country in 1864 you may find now in
the military hospitals of England containing the wounded and sick from
the Egyptian wars. The same widowhood and orphanage that sat down in
despair after the battles of Shiloh and South Mountain poured their
grief in the Shannon and the Clyde and the Dee and the Thames. Oh, ye
men and women who know how to pray, never get up from your knees until
you have implored God in behalf of the fourteen hundred millions of
the race just like yourselves, finding life a tremendous struggle! For
who knows but that as the sun to-day draws up drops of water from the
Caspian and the Black seas and from the Amazon and the Mississippi,
after a while to distill the rain, these very drops on the fields--who
knows but that the sun of righteousness may draw up the tears of your
sympathy, and then rain them down in distillation of comfort o'er all
the world?

Who is that poor man, carried on a stretcher to the Afghan ambulance?
He is your brother. If in the Pantheon at Paris you smite your hand
against the wall among the tombs of the dead, you will hear a very
strange echo coming from all parts of the Pantheon just as soon as you
smite the wall. And I suppose it is so arranged that every stroke of
sorrow among the tombs of bereavement ought to have loud, long, and
oft-repeated echoes of sympathy all around the world. Oh, what a
beautiful theory it is--and it is a Christian theory--that Englishman,
Scotchman, Irishman, Norwegian, Frenchman, Italian, Russian, are all
akin. Of one blood all nations. That is a very beautiful inscription
that I saw a few days ago over the door in Edinburgh, the door of the
house where John Knox used to live. It is getting somewhat dim now,
but there is the inscription, fit for the door of any household--"Love
God above all, and your neighbor as yourself."

I was also impressed in journeying on the other side the sea with the
difference the Bible makes in countries. The two nations of Europe
