lucrative posts at Court, or in the houses of the Arab nobles, or as
government officials. But though the lay community was well off, the
clergy and stricter churchmen had something to complain of; for the
Church[5] could not be said to be free, though the worship was, since
the power of summoning councils had now passed to the Arab executive,
who, as we have seen, made even Moslems and Jews sit at these councils.
Sees were also put up to auction, and the scandalous spectacle was not
unknown, of atheists and heretics holding the titles, and drawing the
emoluments, of bishops.[6]

    [1] Schott., iv. 246.

    [2] Rohrbacher, xii. 192.

    [3] Charter, apud Florez, xiv. 397.

    [4] See above, p. 36, note 1. A letter also is mentioned of
    John Servus Dei, Bishop of Toledo, to the Muzarabes with regard
    to the late martyrdoms and apostasies, purporting to have been
    written in 937.

    [5] Dozy, ii. 47.

    [6] Alvar, "Ep.," xiii. 3. Samson, "Apol.," ii. cc. ii.-iv.

As was to be expected, Arabic soon began to displace Latin throughout
the country, and even before the ninth century the Scriptures were
translated into the tongue of the conquerors [1] by Odoarius, Bishop of
Accita, and John of Seville. Hischem I. (788-796) forbade the use of any
language but Arabic, so that his Christian subjects had to use Arabic
Gospels;[2] and the Spaniards were soon not even permitted to write in
Latin.[3] Even if this statement be doubtful, we know that Latin came
gradually to be neglected and forgotten. Alvar utters an eloquent
protest against this: "Alas, the Christians are ignorant of their own
tongue, and Latins neglect their language, so that in all the College of
Christ[4] there is scarcely to be found one who can write an address of
welcome to his brother intelligibly in Latin, while numbers can be found
competent to mouth the flowery rhetoric of the Chaldeans."[5] In the
department of poetry--the peculiar boast of the Arabs--the Christians
seem even to have surpassed their masters; and to the rivalry of the two
nations in this art we may attribute the excellence and abundance of
native ballads of which Spain can boast.

We have seen how Eulogius did his best to check this neglect of Latin,
by introducing into Spain some of the masterpieces in that language; but
it is doubtful whether his efforts had much result. We can see from the
remains of the Spanish writers which we possess that the structure of
that language had considerably degenerated in Spain.[6]

    [1] Murphy, "Hist. Mahom. Empire in Spain," p. 309.

    [2] Yonge, p. 60.

    [3] Conde, i. 239.

    [4] "Omni Christi collegio."

    [5] Alvar, "Ind. Lum.," sec. 35.

    [6] See Elipandus and Alvar passim. Alcuin, on the other hand,
    writes wonderfully good Latin.

Some sentences are so ungrammatical as to be scarcely intelligible.
Moreover, we find Samson[1] directly accusing Hostegesis, Bishop of
Malaga, of not being able to write Latin; and similarly Jonas of Orleans
(839) accusing Claudius, Bishop of Turin, who was himself a Spaniard, of
the same defect.

The neglect of Latin was accompanied by an increasing indifference to
the doctrinal basis of Christianity, educated Christians being led to
devote their time, which might have been more profitably spent on their
own Scriptures, to becoming acquainted with the Mohammedan religion, and
even to unravelling the intricacies of the controversial theology which
had grown up round, and overlaid, the original simplicity of the
Koran.[2] The great Fathers of the Church were laid aside unread, and
even the Prophets and Apostles, and the Gospel itself, found few to
study them. While the higher classes were indifferent to religion, the
lower were sunk in poverty[3] and ignorance.[4] The inevitable result of
this indifference, ignorance, and poverty, was a visible deterioration
in the character of Spanish Christianity, of which there are only too
many proofs.

    [1] Samson, "Apol.," c. vii.

    [2] Alvar, "Ind. Lum.," sec. 35--"Ac dum illorum sacramenta
    inquirimus, et philosophorum sectas scire non pro ipsorum
    convincendis erroribus sed pro elegantia leporis et locutione
    luculenter diserta. Quis rogo hodie solers in nostris fidelibus
    laicis invenitur, qui Scripturis sanctis intentus volumina
    quorumcunque Doctorum Latine conscripta respiciat? Quis
    Evangelico, quis Prophetico, quis Apostolico ustus tenetur
    amore? Nonne omnes iuvenes Christiani vultu decori, linguae
    diserti, habitu gestuque conspicui, Gentilicia eruditione
    praeclari, Arabico eloquio sublimati, volumina Chaldaeorum
    avidissime tractunt?"

    [3] Florez, xix. 383, Charter of 993; see also "Dozy," iii. 31;
    and for the condition of Christians in the Free States, Buckle,
    "Hist. of Civiliz.," i. 443.

    [4] Dozy (l.l.).

We find the abbot Samson distinctly accusing Hostegesis, Bishop of
Malaga, of simony, asserting that he sold the priesthood to low and
unworthy people;[1] while Alvar charges Saul, Bishop of Cordova, with
obtaining his bishopric by bribery.[2] Other irregularities imputed to
Hostegesis were that he held his see from his twentieth year, contrary
to the canons of the church, and that he beat priests, in order to
extort money from them, till they died under his hands.

Besides the election to the priesthood, by unworthy means, of unworthy
men, whose ignorance and impudence the congregation had to endure in
silence,[3] many were informally ordained without vouchers for character
being given, or the assent of their fellow-clergy and flocks being
obtained.[4] Many churches presented the unseemly spectacle of two rival
pastors, contrary to the ordinances received from the Fathers.[5]

Changes, too, were made in doctrine and ritual, for which no authority
could be alleged, in contravention of established custom and the
teaching of the Church. So far was this carried that Samson was accused
by his opponents of being a heretic and an idolator because he permitted
the marriage of cousins; dissented from the view that God was ever
enclosed in the chambers of the Virgin's heart;[6] asserted the
omnipresence of God, even in idols and the Devil, and this in an actual,
not a metaphysical, sense;[7] and denied that God sat upon an exalted
throne above his creatures. From this it is clear that Hostegesis and
those who thought with him[8] were infected with the anthropomorphite
heresy.

    [1] Samson, "Apol.," Bk. ii., Pref. sec. 2.

    [2] See "Letter to Saul," sec. 3--"Poterant enim quovis
    asserente canonice incohationis vestrae primordia comprobari,
    si quadringenti solidi non fuissent palam eunuchis vel aliis
    exsoluti." Dozy, ii. 140, adds that the money was guaranteed on
    the episcopal revenues, but this is a conjecture.

    [3] Samson, "Apol.," ii. Pref. sec 5; Dozy, ii. 268.

    [4] Alvar ad Saulum, sec. 3--"Sine testimonis, sine connibentia
    clericorum."

    [5] _Ibid._

    [6] Samson, "Apol.," ii. Pref. sec. 7 and iii.--"Cubiculum
    cordis Virginei." This appears to be a quotation from the
    Gothic liturgy.

    [7] "Per substantiam, non per subtilitatem."--_Ibid._

    [8] Romanus and Sebastianus, Samson, Pref, sec. 6.

Not only did many of the clergy hold heretical views, but their
depravity was notorious. Hostegesis did not blush to spend the produce
of the church tithes and offerings, which he had with difficulty
extorted from his flock,[1] in bribing the court officials and the
king's sons, giving them feasts at which open and flagrant vice was
indulged in.[2] The clergy were not above pretending illness in order to
avoid paying the monthly tax to their Moslem rulers.[3] Some, even in
the highest positions in the Church, denied their Saviour and
apostatized to the Moslems; one of these renegades being Samuel, Bishop
of Elvira, the uncle of Hostegesis' mother, who, with a pervert's zeal,
persecuted the Church he had deserted, imprisoning the clergy, taxing
his former flock, and even forcing some to embrace Islam.[4]

It is not surprising, therefore, that bishops and clergy were sometimes
deposed. Samson, indeed, underwent this disgrace at the hands of a
hostile faction under Hostegesis, on the ground of his pretended heresy;
and, similarly, Valentius,[5] Bishop of Cordova, was deprived of his see
because he was a supporter of Samson. But these instances reflect more
discredit on the deposers than on their victims. Instances of deposition
are not wanting, in the free states the North. Sisenandus, seventh
Bishop of Compostella (940), was deposed by King Sancho for dissolute
living, and malversation of Church moneys.[6] On the king's death he
recovered his see, driving out his successor. Pelayo, another bishop of
Compostella, suffered the same punishment.[7]

    [1] The offering of one-third for the Church was refused to
    Hostegesis as being sacrilegious; so he proceeded to extort it,
    "suis codicibus institutis."--Samson "Apol.," ii. Pref. sec. 2.

    [2] _Ibid._ The state of the Church in the North was not much
    better. See Yonge, p. 86.

    [3] Leovigild de habitu Clericorum. Dozy, ii. 110.

    [4] Samson, Pref. ii. 4.

    [5] Succeeded Saul in 861, and was deposed in 864.

    [6] Mariana, viii. 5. He went over to the Moslems. Southey,
    "Chronicle of the Cid," p. 228. Yonge, p. 86.

    [7] Mariana (1.1.).

When the kings of Castile gradually drove back the Moors, and when
Alfonso took Toledo in 1085, his wife, Constance of Burgundy, and her
spiritual adviser, a monk named Bernard, were horrified at the laxity in
morals and doctrine of the Muzarabic Christians. Their addiction to
poetry and natural science was regarded with suspicious aversion, and
the pork-eating, circumcision, and, not least, the cleanly habits,[1]
contracted from an intercourse with Moslems, were looked upon as so many
marks of the beast. In 1209 the Crusaders, who had swarmed to the wars
in Spain, even wished to turn their pious arms against these poor
Muzarabes, so scandalised were they at the un-Romish rites. Yet we are
told that Alfonso the Great, when building and restoring churches in the
territory newly wrested from the Moors, set up again the ordinances of
the Goths, as formerly observed at Toledo.[2]

The free church in the North had itself been in great danger of
extinction, when the armies of the great Almanzer (977-1002) swept
yearly through the Christian kingdoms like some devastating tempest.[3]
Fifty-two victorious campaigns did that irresistible warrior lead
against the infidels.[4] Barcelona, Pampluna, and Leon fell before his
arms, and the sacred city of Compostella was sacked, and for a time left
desolate, the bells of St James' shrine being carried off to Cordova to
serve as lamps in the grand mosque. We are not, therefore, surprised to
find that there were many bishops in the North who had lost their sees;
and this was the case even before the tenth century, for a bishop named
Sabaricus, being driven from his own see by the Arabs, was given that of
Mindumetum by Alfonso III. in 867,[5] and twenty years later a bishop
named Sebastian received the see of Auria in the same way.[6]

It is natural enough that the Moslems and the clergy of the Christian
Church should be hostile to one another, but it is surprising to
find--as we do find in some cases--the latter making common cause with
the Arabs in ill-treating their fellow-countrymen and coreligionists.
Thus, as we have seen, Hostegesis, relying on the support of the secular
arm,[7] beat and imprisoned the clergy for withholding from him the
Church tithes, dragging them through the city naked, with a crier crying
before them:--"Such is the punishment of those who will not pay their
tithes to their bishop."[8] Bishops were even found to make episcopal
visitations, getting the names of all their flock, as if with the
intention of praying for them individually, and then to hand in their
names to the civil power for the purpose of taxation.[9] Others obtained
from the Arabs the privilege of farming the revenues derived from
Christian taxation, and cruelly oppressed their coreligionists.[10]

    [1] The Christians in the North were vulgarly supposed by the
    Arabs not to wash. See Conde, i. 203--"It is related of these
    people of Galicia ... that they live like savages or wild
    beasts, and never wash either their persons or their garments."

    [2] "Chron. Albeld.," sec. 58--"Ordinem Gothorum sicuti Toleto
    fuerat statuit."

    [3] "Chron. Silense," sec. 72--"Eadem tempestate in Hispania
    omnis divinus cultus periit."

    [4] He was not defeated in his last battle, as is generally
    stated in histories.--See Al Makkari, ii. 197.

    [5] Florez, "Esp. Sagr.," xviii. 312.

    [6] _Ibid._, xvii. 244.

    [7] "Praesidali manu fultus." Samson, ii. Pref. sec. 2.

    [8] _Ibid._

    [9] _Ibid._, and Eulog., "Mem. Sanct.," iii. c. iv. sec. 5.

    [10] Eul., 1.1.

These nefarious measures were backed up, even if they were not
instigated, by Servandus, the Christian Count of Cordova. He was the son
of a serf of the Church,[1] and married a cousin of Hostegesis.[2]
Instead of championing the cause of the Christians, as his position
should have impelled him to do, he went so far in the opposite direction
as to call them up before him, and try to shake their attachment to
Christianity--a religion, nominally at least, his own also. Those who
held firm he forced to pay increased taxes, and even levied blackmail on
the churches. He did not scruple to drag forth the bodies of martyrs
from under the altars of churches, and, showing them to the king, to
remind him that it had been forbidden to Christians to bury their
martyrs.[3]

Following up the hostile measures instituted by Hostegesis against
Samson and Valentius, he proceeded to accuse them of inciting the
fanatics to revile Mohammed, urging that they should be tested with this
dilemma. They should be asked whether what the revilers said were true
or not. "If they answer, 'true,' let them be punished as well as the
reviler; if 'false,' bid them slay the man themselves; refusing which,
you will know that they have aided and abetted him to abuse your
Prophet. In that case, give me permission, and I will slay the three
myself."[4]

    [1] Dozy, ii. 268.

    [2] Samson, "Apol.," ii. Pref. sec. 5.

    [3] Samson, 1.1.

    [4] _Ibid._, sec. 9. This same Servandus, the meanest of
    timeservers, seeing the Sultan's (Abdallah's) cause failing,
    deserted to the rebel Omar and his Christian following, and was
    killed at Polei(?)--Ibn Hayyan., apud Dozy, ii. 270. His Arab
    name was Sherbil, and he was beheaded at Cordova by the
    Arabs.--See De Gayangos' note on Al Mak., ii. 451, 2.

We have had occasion to mention one or two cases of Church, and
national, Councils held in Spain under the Arabs, and it will be worth
while to enumerate all the instances which are recorded, that we may
contrast them with those held under the Goths. It was one of the most
characteristic features of the Old Church in Spain that it was united
so closely with the civil power as almost to render the Government of
Spain a theocracy. This intimate connection of Church and State was
naturally overthrown by the Arab conquest; but the Moslem rulers, seeing
how useful such institutions as general councils were likely to be in
adjusting the relations between Mussulmans and Christians, both allowed
purely ecclesiastical councils to be called under their jurisdiction,
and also summoned others in which they took part themselves, together
with Jews, to the great scandal of the stricter Christians.[1]

To the purely ecclesiastical kind belong a council held at Seville by
Elipandus[2] to condemn the errors of Migetius; and another, held by
Cixila at Toledo in 776, against the errors of Egila, bishop of
Elvira.[3] Whether Egila abjured his error is not known, but it is
certain that he remained bishop.

Elipandus is also said, but on very doubtful authority, to have held a
council, whereat he renounced his own error of Adoptionism.[4]

    [1] We even find in 962 that the bishops of Toledo and Cordova
    had Moslem names, viz., Obeidollah ibn Kasim (Al Makkari, ii.
    162), and Akbar ibn Abdallah. Dozy, iii. 99.

    [2] The exact date is unknown. Fleury, ii. p. 235.

    [3] "Pseudo Luitprand," sec. 236, says--"Ad concilium ex
    omnibus Hispaniae partibus concurrunt." See also Pope Adrian
    I.'s Letter to the bishops of Spain in 785. Very little is
    known of this Egila, nor is it certain of what see he was the
    bishop.

    [4] See below, p. 131 ad fin. and 166 ff.

But the other class of councils, partly ecclesiastical and partly
political, seem to have been commoner, and we have already seen how
Reccafredus, Bishop of Seville, in conjunction with the Moslem
authorities, held such a council, in order to coerce the fanatical party
among the Christians; and we have a more particular account of another,
which was held by Hostegesis, Bishop of Malaga, and Servandus, Count of
Cordova.[1] This council seems to have had some connection with the
preceding one under Reccafredus, for Servandus was a strong and
unscrupulous opponent of the party led by Eulogius, while Samson was
their devoted supporter, though he did not carry his opinions so far as
to suffer martyrdom in his own person. Samson was now accused of
heresy[2] and sacrilege, as has been already mentioned. Hostegesis
forced his views on the assembled bishops by the help of the secular
arm, and a sentence of anathema and deposition was accordingly
pronounced against the unfortunate Abbot.[3] One of the apparently
consenting bishops was Valentius, Bishop of Cordova, but his judgement
had evidently been coerced, for after the close of the council he
sounded the other consenting bishops, and some who had not attended, as
to their opinions, and found that most of them were ready to affirm
Samson's orthodoxy, and a memorial was drawn up to that effect This
action of Valentius' brought upon him also a sentence of deposition, and
he was succeeded by Stephanus Flaccus,[4]--the election of the latter
being quite informal, as no metropolitan assisted thereat,[5] and
neither the clergy nor laymen of his diocese made a petition in his
favour.

    [1] Samson, "Apol.," ii. Pref.

    [2] On the ground, among others, that he recognised "nescio
    quam similitudines (besides the Trinity) non creaturas sed
    creatores." These appear (chap, ix.) to have been merely
    qualities, such as wisdom, etc. See Samson, chap. iii.

    [3] "Indiscreta simplicitate et metu impiorum in superbiae
    fascibus sedentium."--_Ibid_. Samson was rendered incapable of
    holding office, or even of belonging to the Church.--_Ibid_.

    [4] In 864.

    [5] See above, p. 8.

This fresh deposition was formally sanctioned by a new council, held at
the church of St Acislus; Flaccus, and some of those who had sided with
Valentius, but were now terrified into submission, being in attendance;
while the places of those who refused to come were taken by Jews and
Moslems.[1] These high-handed proceedings nearly led to an open rupture
in the Church.[2]

In 914 a council is said to have been held (but on doubtful authority)
by Orontius of Toledo,[3] and twenty years later by Basilius of Cordova.
These would fall under the reign of the greatest of the Umeyyade Khalifs
