
"Not only great pleasure may be derived from such a volume, but
lasting and useful impressions. Many are keenly alive to the harmony
of verse and the fresh outbursts of poetic feeling, who would pore
with delight over such a volume, and many might thus be won to high
thought and serious reflection."--_Christian Examiner._

THE YOUNG MAIDEN. Seventh Edition. By Rev. A.B. MUZZEY, Author of "The
Young Man's Friend," "Sunday School Guide," etc., etc. 16mo. pp. 264.
Price, 62-1/2 cents.

CONTENTS.--The Capacities of Woman; Female Influence; Female
Education; Home; Society; Love; Single Life; Reasons for Marriage;
Conditions of True Marriage; Society of Young Men; First Love; Conduct
during Engagement; Trials of Woman and her Solace; Encouragements.

"The sentiments and principles enforced in this book may be safely
commended to the attention of women of all ranks. Its purpose is
excellent throughout; and as it is everywhere governed by a just and
amiable spirit, we believe it is calculated to do much good."--_London
Atlas._

"A little work, well worthy, from its good sense and good feeling, to
be a permanent and favorite monitor to our fair
countrywomen."--_Morning Herald._

A HISTORY OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS and of Religious Education, from the
Earliest Times. By LEWIS G. PRAY. Embellished with two Engravings.
16mo. pp. 270. Price, 62-1/2 cents.

"The author has been for a long period engaged in the cause of which
he has now become the historian; and if ardor, perseverance, and
faithfulness in that service qualify him to write its history, we know
of no one to whom it could have been more properly
confided."--_Portsmouth Journal._

"A volume of great Interest to all who have at heart the subject
discussed."--_Literary World._

LIFE IN THE SICK-ROOM. Essays, by HARRIET MARTINEAU. With an
Introduction to the American Edition, by MRS. FOLLEN. Second American
Edition. 16mo. pp. 196. Price, 62-1/2 cents.

"For the principles which it inculcates, for the exalted ideal it
presents, for the renovating spirit with which it is filled, the book
cannot fail to be a blessing to humanity."--_Christian Examiner._

EUTHANASY, or Happy Talk towards the End of Life. By WILLIAM
MOUNTFORD. Author of "Martyria." 16mo. pp.

"This is a book which will prove an incalculable treasure to those who
are in sorrow and bereavement, and cannot be perused by any thoughtful
mind without pleasure and improvement."--_Christian Examiner._

THE CHRISTIAN PARENT. By Rev. A.B. MUZZEY, Author of "The Young
Maiden," &c., &c. 16mo. Price, 75 cents.

RELIGIOUS CONSOLATION. Edited by Rev. EZRA S. GANNETT. 16mo. Price, 50
cents.

CONTENTS.--The Good of Affliction; The Mourner Comforted; Erroneous
Views of Death; The Departed; Death and Sleep; Immortality; Trust in
God under Afflictions; Filial Trust; The Future Life; Friends in
Heaven; Hope; Thanksgiving in Affliction; Trust amidst Trial; Life and
Death; The Voices of the Dead; To the Memory of a Friend; A Prayer in
Affliction; Duties of the Afflicted; The Mourner Blessed; Consolation;
The Dangers of Adversity; Trust in Divine Love; The Promises of Jesus;
The Believer's Hope; The Uses of Affliction; Time Passing; The
Christian's Death; The Hope of Immortality; God our Father.

THOUGHTS; selected from the Works of WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING, D.D.
32mo. pp. 160. Price, 37-1/2 cents.

"This is a diamond of a volume, the purpose of which is well expressed
in the following 'thought' from Channing, which is put on the
title-page:--

"'Sometimes a single word, spoken by the voice of genius, goes far
into the heart. A hint, a suggestion, an undefined delicacy of
expression, teaches more than we gather from volumes of less gifted
men.'

"Those who differ in theological views from the gifted Channing will
of course find many thoughts in this little volume not to their taste.
But those to whom any theological views have ever done much good will
nevertheless prize the book for its thoughts. Thoughts they are, not
faint reflections of thought. And those who would be wise above all
things prize to know what can be thought on all sides of every
important subject. To enrich our columns we borrow a gem or
two."--_Chronotype._

"A collection of noble thoughts, that may well take its place by the
side of the celebrated thoughts of Pascal, which have in them more of
metaphysics, but less that touches the human heart. It makes a
beautiful pocket volume."--_Christian Examiner._

"We have long desired to see a book of this kind, and now, from a
slight examination, believe that it is well done. It is a beautiful
collection of beautiful thoughts, and must be a welcome possession,
not only for all who agree with Dr. Channing in his peculiar religious
opinions, but for all who value lofty sentiments worthily expressed,
and who by the influence of such thoughts would be strengthened to
duty, or raised to a higher sphere of contemplation."--_Christian
Register._

DAVID ELLINGTON. By Rev. HENRY WARE, JR. With other Extracts from his
Writings. 18mo. pp. 192. Price, 37-1/2 cents.

"Mr. Ware has left very few things which will do so much towards
promoting the great object for which he lived and labored. The simple
story of the every-day life of a good man, told as these stories are
told, finds a response in the hearts of those most indifferent to the
great concerns of virtue and religion; it reaches and touches what
nothing else, not the eloquent preaching of an apostle, could reach
and touch."

CHRISTIAN CONSOLATIONS. Sermons designed to furnish Comfort and
Strength to the Afflicted. By Rev. A.P. PEABODY, Pastor of the South
Church, Portsmouth, N.H. 16mo. pp. 320. Price, 75 cents.

"We welcome with almost as much surprise as satisfaction the
appearance of a volume of discourses as excellent as those of Mr.
Peabody. They are rich in thought, and of a high order of literary
merit."--_N.A. Review._

THE GENERAL FEATURES OF THE MORAL GOVERNMENT OF GOD. By A.B. JACOCKS.
16mo. pp. 94. Price, 37-1/2 cents.

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF THE PHILOSOPHY OF NATURE: with an Outline of
some of its recent Developments among the Germans, embracing the
Philosophical Systems of Schelling and Hegel, and Oken's System of
Nature. By J.B. STALLO, A.M., lately Professor of Analytical
Mathematics, Natural Philosophy, and Chemistry in St. John's College,
N.Y. 12mo. pp. 532. Price, $1.25.

"It grapples with the most abstruse problems, and tugs fiercely to
pluck out the heart of their mystery. No difficulty is too great for
the author to meet, and none seems able to upset his theory. In truth,
the book is one of the most profound ever published in Boston, and
whatever opinion may be given regarding its principles, none can
gainsay its vigor of understanding and reach of learning. The
pertinent question, Who reads an American book? will change somewhat
its meaning, if American literature takes the abstruse direction
indicated by Mr. Stallo's volume. In that event, our books will remain
unread, not because they are too shallow, but because they are too
deep."--_Boston Courier._

MORNING AND EVENING MEDITATIONS, for every Day in a Month. By MISS
CARPENTER (daughter of the late Dr. Lant Carpenter). 16mo. pp. 312.
Price, 62-1/2 cents.

"The compiler of this work has rendered good service to all possessed
of Christian sympathies."--_Literary World._

"We like its spirit, and believe it will prove an excellent closet
companion for those who will faithfully use it."--_Christian
Register._

THE WORDS OF CHRIST; from the New Testament. 16mo. pp. 150. Price, 50
cents.

"The compiler has most happily collected the words of Christ, so that,
by the slightest reference possible to the tables, every text is
ascertained under the several heads. It will prove very beneficial to
the Biblical scholar, clergyman, and Sunday-school
teacher."--_Christian World._

DISCOURSES ON THE CHRISTIAN SPIRIT AND LIFE. By Rev. CYRUS A. BARTOL.
Second Edition, Revised, with an Introduction. 12mo. pp. 408. Price,
$1.00.

DISCOURSES ON THE RECTITUDE OF HUMAN NATURE. By GEORGE W. BURNAP, D.D.
12mo. pp. 409. Price, $1.00.

A HISTORY OF JESUS. By Rev. WILLIAM H. FURNESS. 12mo. pp. 231. Price,
$1.00.

COMMUNION THOUGHTS. By Rev. S.G. BULFINCH. 16mo. pp. 204. Price,
62-1/2 cents.

INTRODUCTORY LESSONS ON CHRISTIAN EVIDENCES. By ARCHBISHOP WHATLEY.
18mo. pp. 131. Price, 20 cents.

RELIGIOUS THOUGHTS AND OPINIONS OF A STATESMAN. By WILLIAM VON
HUMBOLDT. 16mo.

THE STARS AND EARTH; OR THOUGHTS UPON SPACE, TIME, AND ETERNITY. 18mo.
pp. 88. Price, 31 cents.

A MEMOIR OF REV. HIRAM WITHINGTON, With Selections from his Writings.
16mo. pp. 190. Price, 50 cents.

TEN DISCOURSES ON ORTHODOXY. By Rev. JOSEPH H. ALLEN, 12mo. pp. 227.
Price, 75 cents.

POPULAR OBJECTIONS TO UNITARIAN CHRISTIANITY CONSIDERED AND ANSWERED.
In Seven Discourses. By Rev. GEORGE W. BURNAP. 16mo. pp. 166. Price,
37-1/2 cents.

CONTENTS.--The Position of Unitarianism defined. Unitarians not
Infidels. Explaining the Bible and Explaining it away. Unitarianism
not mere Morality. Unitarianism Evangelical Christianity. Unitarianism
does not tend to Unbelief. Dr. Watts a Unitarian.

"These topics Mr. Burnap treats with a freshness of thought which will
render the volume acceptable to those who have a taste for reading of
this sort, while its general merits place it in the class of works one
would wish to see extensively circulated among those who think that
Unitarianism has nothing to stand upon, or that it is a doctrine full
of impiety."--_Christian Examiner._

THE MISCELLANEOUS WRITINGS OF F.W.P. GREENWOOD, D.D. 12mo. pp. 400.
Price, $1.00.

"It is a profitable book for any one to read,--partly because it
communicates information and offers instruction, but chiefly because
its moral tone is of the healthiest kind."--_Christian Examiner._

ECHOES OF INFANT VOICES. 16mo. pp. 144. Price, 50 cents.

MEMOIR AND WRITINGS OF REV. JAMES H. PERKINS. Edited by Rev. WILLIAM
H. CHANNING. 2 Vols. 12mo.

A STUDY FOR YOUNG MEN; or a Sketch of Sir Thomas Fowell Buxton. By
Rev. THOMAS BINNEY. 16mo. pp. 150. Price, 42 cents.

HYMNS FOR THE SANCTUARY. Compiled by a Committee of the West Boston
Society. 12mo.

CHRISTIAN HYMNS FOR PUBLIC AND PRIVATE WORSHIP. A Collection compiled
by a Committee of the Cheshire Pastoral Association. Twenty-eighth
Edition. 18mo. pp. 562. Price, 50 cents.

Although this book has been published but four years, it is now used
in _forty_ societies, and this fact is considered sufficient to show
the estimation in which it is held, and the manner in which it has
stood the test of comparison with other collections.

The following are some of the peculiar merits of the Christian
Hymns:--the number of hymns is very large; the variety of subjects and
metres is very great; the hymns are better adapted for singing; the
plan of arrangement is improved; and the price is very low.


MANUALS FOR SABBATH SCHOOLS.

LESSONS ON THE PARABLES OF THE SAVIOUR, for Sunday Schools and
Families. By Rev. F.D. HUNTINGTON. 18mo. Fourth Edition.

QUESTIONS ADAPTED TO THE TEXT OF THE NEW TESTAMENT. By C. SOULE
CARTEE. 18mo. Parts I. and II. Fourth Thousand.

A SCRIPTURE CATECHISM OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION, stated in the Words
of the Bible. By EPHRAIM PEABODY. 18mo. pp. 56. Third Thousand.

FIRST BOOK FOR SUNDAY SCHOOLS. Fifth Edition. 18mo. pp. 36.

THE MINISTRY OF CHRIST. With Notes and Questions By Rev. THOMAS B.
FOX. Third Edition, Revised and Corrected. 18mo. pp. 261.

A MANUAL ON THE BOOK OF ACTS. By Rev. THOMAS B. FOX. 18mo.

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL SERVICE-BOOK. By Hon. STEPHEN C. PHILLIPS, President
of the Boston Sunday School Society. 18mo.

THE SUNDAY SCHOOL SINGING-BOOK. By E.L. WHITE. Square 16mo.

QUESTIONS ON THE GOSPEL NARRATIVES; their Origin, Peculiarities, and
Transmission. By Rev. HENRY A. MILES. 18mo. pp. 18.


JUVENILE BOOKS.

THE CHILDHOOD OF MARY LEESON. By MARY HOWITT. 18mo. pp. 143.

THE PLAYMATE. A Pleasant Companion for Spare Hours. Embellished with
more than a Hundred Engravings. Large 16mo. pp. 400.

HYMNS, SONGS, AND FABLES. By MRS. FOLLEN. 18mo. pp. 107.

THE TWO NEW SCHOLARS, and Other Stories. 18mo. pp. 92.

FIVE YEARS OF YOUTH; of Sense and Sentiment. By HARRIET MARTINEAU.
With a Preface by MRS. FOLLEN. 18mo. pp. 255.

ALLEGORIES AND CHRISTIAN LESSONS; for Children. By T.B. FOX. 18mo. pp.
144.

ELLA HERBERT; or Self-Denial. By a Lady. 18mo. pp. 71.

TRADITIONS OF PALESTINE. By HARRIET MARTINEAU. 18mo. pp. 142.

THE ESKDALE HERDBOY. By LADY STODDART. 18mo. pp. 146.

THE BOY OF SPIRIT. 18mo. pp. 123.

WHEN ARE WE HAPPIEST? 18mo. pp. 149.

HURRA FOR NEW ENGLAND! 18mo. pp. 112.

HOW TO SPOIL A GOOD CITIZEN; and Other Stories. By the Author of
"Willie Rogers," &c., &c. 18mo. pp. 180.


MRS. TUTHILL'S JUVENILES.

I WILL BE A GENTLEMAN. Twelfth Edition. 18mo. pp. 154.

I WILL BE A LADY. Twelfth Edition. 18mo. pp. 173.

ONWARD! RIGHT ONWARD! Seventh Edition. 18mo. pp. 173.

ANY THING FOR SPORT. Third Edition. 18mo. pp. 136.

THE BOARDING-SCHOOL GIRL. Second Edition. 18mo. pp. 145.

A STRIKE FOR FREEDOM, or Law and Order, 18mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE BOY OF MOUNT RHIGI. By Miss SEDGWICK. 16mo. pp. 252.

THE GLORIOUS STRANGER. 18mo.

COUSIN HATTY'S HYMNS AND TWILIGHT STORIES. 16mo.

ALL FOR THE BEST. By T.S. ARTHUR. 16mo.

BARDOUC. A Persian Tale. 18mo.

THE CHILD'S MORNING BOOK. 18mo.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE CHRISTIAN EXAMINER AND RELIGIOUS MISCELLANY. Edited by Rev. GEORGE
PUTNAM, D.D., and Rev. GEORGE E. ELLIS.

"This work, which combines literature with theology, has always
sustained a high reputation for learning and ability,--nearly all the
more eminent Unitarians of the day having been at different times
numbered among its contributors."

The Examiner was first issued under the superintendence of the late
Dr. Noah Worcester. It has since been edited by Rev. John G. Palfrey,
D.D., Rev. Francis Jenks, Rev. F.W.P. Greenwood, D.D., Rev. James
Walker, D.D., Rev. William Ware, Rev. Alvan Lamson, D.D., and Rev.
Ezra S. Gannett, D.D., and through its pages the writings of
Worcester, Channing, Norton, and Ware have been given to the public.

The Christian Examiner is published on the first days of January,
March, May, July, September, and November, in numbers of one hundred
and forty-four octavo pages each, at _four dollars_ per annum.








