self, whilst in this State_[33]: In doing which I shall still have
regard to the Errors receiv'd concerning these things in the present
Age.

Sec. 3. In order to this I shall examine the Ways and Means by which the
People of God in all Ages, came to the Understanding of his Will. Now
'tis evident, from the absurd Notions which the ancient Heathens had of
the Deity, and their Idolatry, that Mankind was so far degenerated and
deprav'd, that they had lost the true Knowledge of God, and of his
Attributes, and consequently were ignorant of their Duty towards him;
for which reason, God was pleas'd, out of his infinite Love and Mercy
towards Mankind, to send at sundry times _Prophets_; that is, Men who
were inspir'd by the _Holy Spirit_, and had the Will of God
_immediately_ reveal'd to them; to the end that they might instruct
others how to serve him (the ancient Tradition receiv'd from our first
Parents, and those good Men which succeeded them, being now almost worn
out, and over-grown by the increasing Wickedness of the World) and
thereby avoid those Judgments which would otherwise infallibly overtake
them, if they continu'd in Impenitence and Disobedience.

Sec. 4. This was the Means which the Generality of the People of God had to
know his Will. They receiv'd it from the _Prophets_, who had it
_immediately_ from God. So that the Difference of their Knowledge
consisted in the Manner of their receiving of it, not in the Things
receiv'd, which were the same both to the _Prophets_ and the _People_.
Only the _Prophets_ receiv'd it _immediately_, but not the _People_: for
then consequently they would all have been Prophets, which it is plain
they were not.

Sec. 5. And when it had pleas'd God to give a clearer and fuller Revelation
of his Will to the Prophet _Moses_; what was deliver'd to him, was
committed to the Care of the Priests, of whom both King and People were
oblig'd to learn their Duty. Deut. xvii. 18. _And it shall be when he
sitteth upon the Throne of his Kingdom, that he shall write him a Copy
of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before the Priests the
Levites, and it shall be with him, and, he shall read therein all the
Days of his Life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, to keep
all the Words of this Law, and these Statutes, to do them_. And Malachi
xi. 7. _The Priests Lips should preserve Knowledge, and they should seek
the Law at his Mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts_. So
that they were not to seek after any other more perfect manner of
Worship, than what was deliver'd in that Book, nor to expect that those
Truths or Precepts which were contained in it, should be reveal'd to
them anew, either by any Prophet living in their time, or by _immediate
Revelation_; but to draw all their Instructions from the aforesaid
Helps. And accordingly we never find any of the Prophets making any
Alteration in the Law, or calling the people to a more perfect way of
Worship. From whence 'tis plain that they were well assur'd of its
Sufficiency, till the _Messias_, who was to compleat it should come; and
their never bidding the People to look for any other way of teaching
than what was to be had from that Book, and the Mouth of the Priests,
proves evidently that they knew those means to be sufficient.

Sec. 6. Thus we have seen which way the generality of the People of God
were taught; let us now examine by what means the Prophets attain'd
their Faculty of Prophesying and wherein it did consist. Now it is most
certain that the Faculty of Prophesying cannot be attain'd by any
Application or Improvement of our Abilities whatsoever, but depends
wholly and entirely upon the positive Will of God, who upon important
and weighty Occasions, in his own due time, and to such Persons as seem
best in his infinite Wisdom, does send such as he is pleas'd to set
apart and qualifie for that Service, by the Inspiration of his Holy
Spirit. _For Prophecy came not in old time by the Will of Man; but holy
Men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost_[34]. It must not
denyed, but that a sober, righteous and godly Life, a Heavenly
Conversation, and the keeping our selves pure both in Body and Spirit,
are excellent Means to invite the Holy Spirit to dwell in and abide with
us. And this is agreeable to right Notions of the Purity of God, and his
Love of that which is Good, and Abhorrence of that which is Evil: It is
confirmed by right Reason, the Testimony of ancient Churches and Holy
Scripture it self. But then the Question is, How does God dwell in those
that are his? Certainly, not so as to make Prophets of them, but to
strengthen them in their Holy Resolutions, and enable them to perform
such Things as tend most to his Glory, and their own Salvation. And upon
a due Examination, we shall find that this is all which the greatest
number by far of Godly Men ever attain'd; who notwithstanding must by no
means be accus'd of Slothfulness in not approving their Talent, nor of
being wanting in their Endeavours to make the nearest Approaches to God
that they were capable of.

Sec. 7. This will appear further, if we consider that those means which
were us'd by Holy Persons of Old, in order to the Improvement of
themselves or others, in the Exercise of Piety and Religion, cannot upon
any account be reckon'd as means of their becoming Prophets. Tho'
_Samuel_ was dedicated to the Service of God from his Birth, and it
pleas'd God to chuse him for a Prophet; yet there is no question to be
made, but that there were several others so dedicated, which did never
prophesy.

Tho' _Daniel_ was heard _from the first day that he did set his Heart to
understand, and to chasten himself before God_[35], and had an Angel
sent to him with a Revelation, yet cannot that disciplining of himself
be in any wise accounted a Cause of that Revelation; for if it were, the
same Method would produce the same Effect in another Man. And tho' there
were particular Advantages in being a Member of the College of
_Prophets_; as the Prophet _Amos_[36] intimates, where he says, _I was
no Prophet, nor A Prophet's Son_ (which must be interpreted _The Scholar
of a Prophet_, for the Scholars of the Prophets are always call'd _Sons
of the Prophets_ in Scripture) yet none of these Means were sufficient
to help Men to the Gift of Prophecy. The pious Parents thought it a very
good way of improving their Children in the Fear and Love of God, and
the Knowledge of his Will, to have them brought up under those Holy and
Exemplary Men the Prophets; and accordingly they waited upon them, went
on Errands and did their Service; at the same time enjoying the great
Advantage of their Example and Discourse. And according to their
Example, even after Prophesy was ceas'd among the _Jews_, the eminent
Men and chief Doctors of the Law had their Scholars and Disciples, more
or fewer, according to the Credit and Esteem of the Matter. So that our
Blessed Saviour's chusing his twelve Disciples, was no new thing among
the _Jews_, but had been practis'd all along, since those Schools of the
Prophets. But never did any one imagine, that these means of Discipline,
or any other, were Steps to the attaining the Gift of Prophecy, which
always depended, not upon Mens Acquirements or Improvements in that
which is good, but upon the _positive Will of God_.

Sec. 8. Now, if, as appears from what is already said, God has not afforded
to Man, any Means whereby he can attain to the more inferior Degree of
Prophecy, which consists in having only some part of his Will reveal'd;
and that not constantly or habitually, but as occasion serves: How vain
and fond is it then for any one to imagine that he has given him a
Capacity of enjoying his Presence as he is, and of seeing all things in
him?[37] Which is as much above the Attainments of the greatest
Prophets, as theirs is above the weakest of Men. For if we consider we
shall find that the Prophets Business consisted in delivering a
particular Message to one or more; the Contents of which sometimes they
receiv'd by Day[38], which sort of Vision is call'd _Machazeh_, or,
_Mareeh_, or else by Night in a Dream, and this was call'd _Hhalom, a
Dream_, or _Hezyon Hallaiyelah, a Nocturnal Vision_. But what is either
or both these to the Intuition of the Divine Presence? There is as much
Difference, as there is between a great Courtier and a Favourite, who
when he pleases, enjoys the Presence of his Prince, and one who is now
and then sent by him on an Errand. And yet to such a degree of
Enthusiasm have some gone, as our Author here in particular, and several
more of the same strain in those former Ages, and the _Quietists_ and
other _Mysticks_ and Enthusiasts in our times, that nothing will down
with him less than the Intuition of the Divine-Being, and they despise
_Meditation_[39], as a mean thing, and too much below one that aspires
to Perfection. And this, it seems, is attainable by Application and
continued Exercise; whereby they have at once set all Mankind in a
Capacity of out-doing infinitely the ancient Prophets, who if they had
known any thing of this way, certainly would not have been so sparing of
it in their Writings, especially when their Business was to labour for
the Benefit and Instruction of Mankind. But there is not one word in all
their Writings which favours this Opinion, from whence we may safely
conclude, that they had no such Notion; and yet it must not be in the
least doubted, but that they were throughly acquainted with the Will of
God, and knew more of his secret Counsel than any other Men in the World
whatsoever.

Sec. 9. It must needs be acknowledg'd by us Christians, as well as by the
Jews, that _Moses_ was, without Controversie, the the greatest Prophet
that ever appear'd upon Earth before our Saviour's time, and had the
most frequent and greatest Revelations of the Divine Will. For tho' it
was a singular Favour which God vouchsafed the other Prophets, in
communicating to them some of the Secrets of his Purposes; yet _Moses_
was the Man whom God chose to be the Instrument of the Deliverance of
his People _Israel_, by such convincing Signs and Wonders, as were
undeniable Evidences of the Divine Power by which they were wrought, and
who was not only to be God's Messenger to his People in some few
Particulars, but the immediate Receiver of that Law, and all the
Oeconomy, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, by which God's People were to
be governed without any Addition or Diminution, so many hundred Years,
till the Coming of the promised _Messias_. God himself bears Witness to
this, _Numb_. xii. 6. _If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will
make my self known unto him in a Vision, and will speak unto him in a
Dream. My Servant Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine House.
With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
Speeches, and the Similitude of the Lord shall he behold_. Now _Moses_
had not been faithful in God's House, if he had not reveal'd the whole
Will of God to his People, as it was deliver'd to him; which most
certainly he did. But how? Why, he commands the People thus, _Deut_. vi.
17. _You shall diligently keep the Commandments of the Lord your God,
and his Testimonies and his Statutes which he hath commanded thee_;
which were, no doubt, the very same which he had received upon Mount
_Sinai_. Nor did this Holy Man, this _faithful Servant in God's House_,
ever recommend, or so much as hint any such Service of God, as is
dream'd of by our _Mysticks,_ or give the least Encouragement for any to
hope for the Gift of Prophecy, or an Intuition or beholding the Divine
Being in this State. And yet it is certain that both _Moses_ himself,
and Multitudes of others after him, were Heavenly-minded Men, and did
that which was acceptable in the Sight of God, and shall be Partakers of
Everlasting Glory.

Sec. 10. Nor did any of the Prophets, which came after him, ever advance
any such refin'd way of Worship; but constantly blam'd the People for
not observing the Law of _Moses_, and neglecting the Statutes and
Ordinances which he had left them. And the Sum of their Prophecies
consists, either in Exhorting, Reproving, Promising or Threatning, and
some Hints of the _Messias_. But not one Syllable concerning any such
abstracted Worship, nor any Mention made of Mens attaining the
_Beatifick Vision_. Notwithstanding which, there have been, and still
are, a great many deluded Souls, who imagine that the warm Conceptions
of distemper'd Brains, are a great Measure of that Holy Spirit by which
the old Prophets spake; and pretend to such a Familiarity and intimate
Conversation with God; such an entire Communication and Intercourse,
that they might, if what they said were true, seem to be glorified
Spirits, rather than _Prophets_, subject to the like Infirmities with
other Men; and to have left the Church Militant to take their place in
the Triumphant. Not considering, that all this is only a pleasing sort
of an Amusement, a Fool's Paradise, and grounded upon no better Reason
or Foundation, than the Man that was distracted had to fancy himself an
Emperor, and all that came about him his Subjects. These Men do not
consider that we live in such an Age of the World, as we are not to
expect such extraordinary Effusions of the Spirit: All that we can
reasonably expect, or that God has promis'd, is, to give his Holy Spirit
to those that ask it of him; that is, so to guide them by his gracious
Assistance, as that they may overcome their Spiritual Enemies, and be
crown'd hereafter with Glory and Immortality; which certainly ought to
content any reasonable Man, without aspiring to _Immediate Revelation,
Prophecy_, obtaining the _Vision of God_, and such like Things,which God
has deny'd to us, whilst in this State.

Sec. 11. Indeed, if it were in _Religion_, as in _Arts and Sciences_, it
might with a great deal more Reason have been expected; that considering
the vast Distance of Time since the first planting of the Christian
Religion to this present Age, we might have been improved to a Degree of
Prophecy. For _Arts_ and _Sciences_ receive their Beginnings from very
small Hints at first, and are afterwards improved proportionally to the
Industry and Capacity of those who cultivate them; and therefore we may
reasonably expect, that the longer they continue, the more they will be
advanc'd. But the case is vastly different in Religion, which is always
best and purest at its first setting out. And there is a very good
Reason to be given, why it should be so; for after the first Covenant
made by God with Mankind in the Person of _Adam_: every other
Dispensation has found Men under a State of Corruption, and in the
actual Possession of Errors, diametrically opposite to those Truths
which it came to instruct them in; and therefore it was requisite that
the means to remove these at first, should bear Proportion with the
Difficulties they were to encounter. Upon which account, at the
Beginning of any new Dispensation, those Persons whom God was pleas'd to
employ to publish it to Mankind, have been endu'd with more Zeal and
greater Abilities, than the Professors of the same Religion in after
Ages. And as no Person can doubt, but that the Jewish Religion was much
more perfect in the Days of _Moses_, and those which immediately
succeeded him, than in after Times, when it was obscur'd and mudded by
Pharisaical Inventions and Traditions: So must it also be confess'd,
that the Christian Religion was much more perfect in the Days of the
Apostles, and the Ages immediately succeeding them, than since it has
been obscur'd by the Interest of the Designing on the one hand, and the
Prejudice and Ignorance of the Unlearned on the other. And this is what
is plainly confess'd by the Practice of most contending Parties amongst
the Professors of Christianity; who constantly make their Appeals to the
earliest Writers of the Primitive Christian Church, and use all means to
bring them over to their own Side; which is an evident Concession that
they value their Authority, and look upon them as the most competent
Judges of their Controversies. Now, if I shall make it appear, that
there was no such thing as is contended for by our Enthusiasts, in those
early Times, when the Holy Spirit must be confess'd on all hands to be
more plentifully pour'd out than in the succeeding Ages; I hope it will
appear evidently to any unprejudic'd Person, that it is not at all to be
expected under the Christian Dispensation.

Sec. 12. To begin therefore with our Blessed Saviour himself. It is evident
that he never recommended any such way of worshipping God, as is
contended for by the _Mysticks_, nor promised to reward the most sincere
of his Followers with the _Vision of God_ whilst in this State. As for
his own Life, which is certainly the most perfect Pattern, it was
_Active_ to the greatest Degree; and bating some times of Retirement, to
pray or the like, was wholly spent in Conversation, and doing Good to
others. Then as to the Substance of his Doctrine, it consisted in
acquainting the _Jews_ that he himself was the _Messias_, whose Coming
was so long ago, and so often foretold by the Ancient Prophets. He also
acquainted them with the Nature of his Office and Mediatorship, and
shew'd them how mightily they were mistaken in their Interpretations of
the Prophets concerning him. He let them know, that, contrary to their
Expectation, his Kingdom was not of this World; but that his Business
was to bring Men out of Darkness to Light, and from the Bondage and
Slavery of Sin, to the Liberty of the Sons of God. He taught them to
abandon all ungodly Lusts, and to set their Hearts upon Things above;
assuring them, that if they continu'd in his Love, they should be
rewarded with everlasting Happiness. And lest his Disciples,and those
Churches which should be planted by their Ministry, should be destitute
of necessary Encouragement and Assistance, he assures them, in most
endearing Terms, of his Love towards and Care over them, and promises
speedily to send them _the Comforter, the Spirit of Truth_[40], which
should not only assure them of his own, and the Father's Love towards
them, but also enable them to work such Miracles as should be sufficient
to confirm the Truth of their Mission. But no where promises the
Enjoyment of the _Beatifick Vision_ here; but bid them to expect their
Reward hereafter; assuring them, that _whither he went they could not
follow him now, but should follow him afterwards_[41], and _that he went
to prepare a place for them_. Nor did he even mention his having
purchas'd for Mankind such a Privilege, as that they might, by
diligently improving what was given them, come to God without any other
Means, but rather the quite contrary: For he says, _No Man cometh to the
father but by me_[42]; now certainly the way to come to Christ, is to
believe in him; which, according to the Apostle S. _Paul_, presupposes,
hearing him preach'd.

Sec. 13, And as our Blessed Saviour did never promise to reward the
Endeavours of sincere Persons, with such a Power whereby they might
attain, without any External Means, all Things necessary to Salvation,
much less the Intuition, or beholding the Divine Presence whilst in this
Life; so neither do we find that they either expected or enjoy'd it. The
Method of God in teaching his People, was still the same as it ever had
been, _viz_. by revealing his Will to some few, in order to the having
it communicated by their Ministry to others. And I desire any one that
thinks otherwise, to produce me one single Instance of any Person that
came to the true Knowledge of God, and the necessary means of Salvation,
but by this way. The contrary is evident from the Example of the
_Eunuch_ (_Acts_ viii.) who was a devout Person, and well dispos'd; and
we find his Zeal and Sincerity rewarded by God's sending to him a proper
Person to instruct him.

Sec. 14. Which is still further confirmed by the Example of
_Cornelius_(Acts x.) who being _a devout Man, and one that fear'd God
with all his House, and gave much Alms to the People, and pray'd to God
always_, was so far accepted by God, that he was graciously pleas'd to
provide Means for his further Instruction in his Duty, and sent _Peter_
to instruct him. Whereby he has plainly pointed out to us the way by
which he would have us seek for the Knowledge of him, _viz_. by applying
our selves to such as he has appointed to teach his People. Accordingly
we find that _Cornelius_'s Alms and Devotions, and incessant waiting
upon God, did neither advance him to the _Beatifick Vision_, nor so far
as to have those Truths presented to him by way of Object,
_immediately_, which were necessary to be believ'd by him in order to
his Salvation; neither is he at all encourag'd to look for or depend
upon _Vision_ or _Intuition_, but is sent to a Man like himself, to hear
with his outward Ears, those things which concern'd his Eternal Welfare.
Whereas, if God had ever granted to Mankind a Power whereby he might, by
due Application and Attention, attain to a sufficient Knowledge of God,
and Things necessary to Salvation; or, if such a Privilege, though
deny'd before, had been purchas'd by Jesus Christ; there is no question,
but Persons so extraordinarily well qualified as these two good Men,
_Cornelius_ and the _Eunuch_, were, would have enjoy'd the Benefit of
it; and then the Event would have been, that by their constant attending
upon God, and unwearied Diligence in meditating and practising good
Things, they would have increas'd in Spiritual Knowledge, and made
nearer Approaches to God, till they had attain'd to Perfection. But we
find nothing like this, but that on the contrary they were oblig'd to be
instructed by the same means which God had appointed for other Men.

Sec. 15. And then as to matter of _Vision,_ the whole Tenor of the
Apostle's Doctrine runs counter to it. S. _Paul_ tells us, that all
those noble Actions which were perform'd by the Ancient Worthies (_Heb_.
xi.) were done thro' _Faith_; which as himself defines, is (_v_.i.) is,
_The Substance of Things hoped for, the Evidence of Things not seen_. It
is an Assent which we give to Things as true, which we can neither
apprehend by our Senses, nor demonstrate by our Reasoning; so that the
only Objects of our Faith are such Things as we receive upon the Credit
of another; which, how far it is from _Vision_, is evident to common
Sense. And the same Apostle tells us, that _now we see through A Glass
darkly_; and that _we know in part, and prophesie in part_[43].

Sec. 16. Hence it is plain, that all those Texts which speak of the
plentiful Effusion of the Spirit in the times of the Gospel, are quite
misunderstood by all those, who interpret them after such a manner, as
if God had given such a Measure of it to all Mankind, that upon a due
Improvement of it, they might attain to the Knowledge of him, and of all
Things necessary to Salvation. Whereas it appears, that even in the
earliest Times of the Gospel, there was no such thing; but then all the
Churches were planted by the Ministry of the Apostles, who ordain'd
others to succeed them in their Office. If therefore in those Times it
was not granted, it is a ridiculous Absurdity to expect it in this Age;
and no small Degree, either of Impudence or Madness to pretend to it.

Sec. 17. Since it is not foreign to the Matter in hand, the Reader will, I
hope, pardon me if I digress a little, to shew why we cannot reasonably
expect Prophets now. And it seems to me, that there are several Reasons
to be given why there should be Prophets during the time of the Mosaical
Dispensation, rather than after the Gospel had taken Root. For, the
Promises made to the _Jews_ having Relation to their possessing the Land
of _Canaan_, God was pleas'd to send them Prophets to quicken their
Memories, and keep them in mind of their Duty, that thereby his
Judgments might be averted from them; (and especially, because of the
prevailing Idolatry of those Times; for after they were well fix'd in
the Practice of the True Religion, and out of that Danger, we find no
Prophets;) and we find that most of the Ancient Prophecies tend that
way. But now we are quite upon another Bottom; we are taught, that _we
have here no continuing City_; that, _when these Tabernacles shall be
dissolv'd, we have a Habitation not made with Hands, eternal in the
Heavens_. That we are to _set our Minds on Things above, not on Things
on the Earth_; that we are to _deny our selves, and take up our Cross
and follow Christ_; that, _through many Tribulations we must enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven_, and many Passages to the same Effect. So that to
have Prophets foretelling future Events, relating to the Welfare and
Preservation of our Temporals, or the contrary, seems not so proper for
a People, whose very Profession supposes them to have laid aside all
Solicitude concerning them. Again, before the Coming of Christ, God's
Will was but imperfectly reveal'd; and it was necessary that there
should be Fore-runners to prepare the way against his Coming, and raise
the Expectation of him in the People, that they might be the better
prepar'd to receive him. But after he was once come, who was to compleat
and fulfil all; after _God, who at sundry times, and in divers manners,
spake in time past unto the fathers by the Prophets,_[44] had, _in these
last days, spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all
things,_ &c. _who was the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image
of his person_, &c. I say, after God had, by this glorious Person,
manifested and reveal'd his whole Will to us, and declared whatsoever he
requir'd to be believ'd and done by us, whilst in these Mortal Bodies;
there was no longer need of Revelation to those who had received the
most perfect one that could be deliver'd. So that all those Reasons
being remov'd, which were to be given for a Succession of immediately
inspired Prophets before the Coming of Christ; it is altogether
groundless, to say no worse of it, to expect any now he is come. What
Methods God will use, when his time is come, to bring in the Fulness of
the Gentiles, and to convert the Jews; or what Endowments he will bestow
upon those Persons whom he shall please to make use of as his
Instruments to compleat that great Work, will then be best known when it
is come to pass. There is no Question but that he will use sufficient
means. All that I contend for is, that those which he has already
afforded, are abundantly sufficient for those who have the Happiness to
be baptized, and brought up in the Profession of the Christian Faith;
and consequently, that it is unreasonable to expect any other
Assistances, or to seek any other means of serving God, than what are
deliver'd in his Holy Word, and made use of in his Church.

Sec. 18. To return to our Argument. If these things, contended for by
Enthusiasts, were not granted either under the Jewish or Christian
Dispensation, as I hope has been sufficiently prov'd; it follows, _a
majori,_ that those who are depriv'd of those Advantages, which both
Jews and Christians enjoy'd cannot have them: And therefore in vain do
we search for Persons so endow'd amongst _Mahometans_ or _Heathens._ For
without any Breach of Charity, in respect to those Persons, who never
were so happy as to have the Gospel preach'd to them; we may assure our
selves, that they do not enjoy equal Privileges with us, who by our
Baptism have a foederal Right to all those Assistances of the Holy
Spirit promis'd to the Church in the Holy Scriptures. And yet there
would not be much difference, if by their diligently adhering to any
Principle or Light, which God has bestow'd upon Mankind in general, they
might attain to true saving Knowledge. And for this Reason, our Author,
who was himself a _Mahometan,_ seems as little to have consulted the
Honour of his Prophet _Mahomet_, and the necessity of believing his
Doctrine, in feigning a Person brought up by himself, to have by his
Application and Industry attain'd to the Knowledge of all things
reveal'd to that suppos'd Prophet, as our Enthusiasts do value the Means
which God has always us'd to convey his Will to Mankind[45]. Whilst out
of a groundless Charity, they do in a manner put all Men upon the Level,
as to the Means of Salvation. Which Opinion of theirs, however plausible
at first sight, upon the account of that specious Shew of Universal
Charity to Mankind, does most certainly tend to the undervaluing and
lessening those inestimable Benefits which our Blessed Saviour has
purchas'd for, and promis'd to his Church; and ought no more to be
receiv'd, than that charitable Opinion of _Origen_'s who believ'd that
after a certain time of Punishment, not only the wickedest of Men, but
also the Devils themselves should be laved.

Sec. 19. I have now shewn that what is here held by our Author, and too
many others in our times, has no manner of Foundation. That it was never
promis'd nor expected, either under the Mosaical or Christian
Dispensation; from whence I have inferr'd, that it cannot be expected
any where else, and consequently that there is no such thing at all. If
I have not spoken all the while particularly to my Author, the reason
is, because I write to Christians, and chiefly have regard to those
Errors, held by some of that Denomination, which are common with those
of our Author. Besides, if that were requisite, 'tis only allowing for
Argument sake, that the _Alcoran_ was written by Inspiration, and that
_Mahomet_ was a Prophet, and then the same way of Arguing proves the
Enthusiasm of our Author, who being a profess'd _Mahometan_, and they
being oblig'd to believe that _Mahomet_ is the _Catimo'l anbyai_, i.e.
_The Seal of the Prophets_, and that theirs is the last Dispensation,
which Mankind shall ever receive from God, has ventured to suppose the
Possibility of a Man's attaining to the true Knowledge of God, and
Things necessary to Salvation, and all other Things, both Spiritual and
Natural, belonging either to this World, or that to come, without the
Help of any outward Instruction.

Sec. 20. I need not insist upon this any longer; I shall only remark, that
as true Piety is the same in all Ages and Climates, and good solid Sense
