in our text.

Of the truth of this, there can arise no misapprehension when we
compare it with the subsequent phrase with which it is contrasted--"a
good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving favor
than silver and gold." By the choosing of riches, we are to
understand, not only a desire to obtain them, but that this desire
shall be sufficiently strong to prompt us to use all the honorable and
efficient means in our power to accumulate them. The wise man did not
mean that every man had the offer of a fortune, and could possess
himself of it by simply making choice of it independent of means. No--
his choice must be manifested by industry and economy. The means must
be used to secure the end. Just so in acquiring a good name. The
person desirous of obtaining it, must pursue that upright and virtuous
course of conduct, which alone could insure it. And just as well might
a man expect riches by being indolent and extravagant, as to expect a
good name by indulging in every species of vice. We are therefore to
understand our text thus--A good name, through pursuing a virtuous
course of conduct, is rather to be chosen than great riches, through
the plans and means by which they are obtained.

Man is a being of many wants, and to supply them he is too much
inclined to forsake the path of virtue and resort to dishonorable
means to obtain wealth.

In view of this master-passion for earthly splendor and greatness,
Solomon uttered the words of our text to recall the giddy mind from
its chase of shadows, sad turn it to the only source of unmingled
felicity in the pursuit of virtue. This would afford the mind those
rational delights that wealth, with all its dazzling splendors, cannot
impart. It does not possess the charm to convey unbroken peace to the
heart.

But there is a strong inducement to engage in a virtuous course,
because it is the surest road to wealth and honor. The thief and
robber were never rich, nor nor could they be happy if they were. An
excellent writer, observes--the importance of a good character in the
commerce of life, seems to be universally acknowledged. To those who
are to make their own way either to wealth or honors, a good character
is as necessary as address and ability. Though human nature is often
degenerate, and corrupts itself by many inventions, yet it usually
retains to the last an esteem for excellence. But even if we arrive at
such an extreme degree of depravity as to have lost our native
reverence for virtue, yet a regard to our own interest and safety will
lead us to apply for aid, in all important transactions, to men whose
integrity is unimpeached. When we choose an assistant or a partner,
our first inquiry is concerning his character. When we have occasion
for a counsellor, an attorney, or a physician, whatever we may be
ourselves, we always choose to trust our property and lives to men of
the best character. When we fix on the tradesman, who is to supply us
with necessaries, we are we are influenced by fair reputation and
honorable dealing. Young men, therefore, whose characters are yet
unfixed, and who consequently may render them just such as they wish,
ought to pay great attention to the first steps they take on entrance
into life. They are usually careless and inattentive to this object.
They pursue their own plans with ardor, and neglect the opinions which
others entertain of them. By some thoughtless action or expression,
they suffer a mark to be impressed upon them, which no subsequent
merit can entirely erase. Every man will find some persons who, though
they are not professed enemies, yet view him with an eye of envy, and
who would gladly revive any tale to which truth has given the
slightest foundation.

Though a good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and is
the surest road to wealth, yet there are thousands, who pay but little
attention to possess themselves of so valuable a treasure. They turn a
deaf ear to that hallowed voice, which pleads with them in behalf of
their dearest interest, and take the downward road to dissipation and
vice, and, by their wretched example, lead other thousands to the dark
abodes of sorrow, grief and pain. Enchanted by the siren voice of
false and fleeting pleasure, they hurry to the tremendous precipice,
where reputation and fortune lie in broken ruins. There they drag out
a wretched existence in disappointed hope, satiety and disgust. They
pay their devotions at the shrine of ignominy, where the dark and
stagnant waters of guilt and condemnation roll. There the sweet voice
of heaven-born peace was never heard, and the beauteous feet of
religion never trod. There dwells the family of pain--there is the
hell we are cautioned to avoid. This is not an illusion of fancy--it
is no reverie of the brain, but a reality too visible in the pathway
of human life.

Thousands, in this condition, are hurrying to a premature grave, and
go down to that dark abode covered with infamy, having robbed
themselves of all the substantial joys, that a virtuous conduct, and a
good unsullied name are calculated to awaken in the heart. Dissipation
darkens the brightest prospects of life. It rolls its floods of misery
indiscriminately over the dearest earthly hopes of companions,
children and friends, and paralyzes every pulse of joy that beats in
the human bosom. Many a child has been spurned from the presence of
its brutal father, and been beaten for asking bread to satisfy its
hunger. Intemperance stupefies man to the moral impressions of the
gospel, and hardens the heart with the touch of its benumbing powers.
It is the giant of human wo that slays his thousands and prostrates
the happiness of man. This champion of human war draws his sword of
vengeance against the balmy repose of public and private life, and his
fatal touch withers the brightest flowers of domestic hope and joy,
and mingles the poisonous bowl with the bitter drugs of misery. His
government is absolute monarchy, and his subjects the most
contemptible slaves. When he lays upon them his cursed hand, they reel
to the ground. When he strikes the stunning blow, they drop insensibly
to the earth. The oppressions and scourges of the most wretched slave
are enviable in comparison with those severe wounds inflicted by this
merciless tyrant, this infernal scourge of the human race.
Intemperance is a monster that may well be personified. He frolicks
through the blood, preys upon the vitals, ploughs up the brain,
dethrones reason and laughs at the feeble resistance of the best
constitution, and finally bears down all opposition before him. Like
the devouring flame, he presses on with irresistible force, urging his
deadly siege, till he consumes all that is fair and lovely in the eye
of virtue. His present gifts are poverty misery and distress, and his
capital prize, a premature grave.

This champion is ravaging our beloved country, and seducing her sons
of freedom to the disgraceful ranks of slavery and oppression.
Intemperance is that tyrant that has under his control many formidable
evils that infest the world. His boasted labor is to hurry on
thousands of victims to the commission of crime, and bring down upon
them the many misfortunes that attend man in this mutable world.
Intemperance involves public broils, tumults and disturbances, and
domestic discord, misery and strife.

We trust the number among our readers is small, who are so regardless
of a good name as to have abandoned themselves to the intoxicating
bowl, or who have sundered all the ties of moral obligation,
determined to tread the downward path of vice to a disgraceful tomb.
We hope they have a higher regard to the invaluable worth of a good
name; and we pray that they may venerate its price far above the
momentary glitter of silver and gold. That shall live, when wealth
shall have lost its lustre, and flourish immortal, when gold shall
have corroded to dust.

Blasphemy is another unreasonable vice against which the public
speaker or writer should raise his voice. And let no one flatter
himself because we believe in the universal and unbounded goodness of
God, that a man may go on as he please. So long as a Being of infinite
wisdom is enthroned in the heavens and governs the universe, so long
he can never fail to measure out to every offence its adequate
punishment, and has all the means at his disposal to bring it
unavoidably upon the head of every transgressor. He, who flatters
himself that he can sin with impunity, is ignorant of the government
of his God, and has never reflected upon human life in all its varied
lights and shades. Do you profess to be a Universalist, and yet treat
with irreverence the name of HIM who made you, and whom you
acknowledge to be a faithful Creator--an indulgent Father? Your
professions are nothing. "He that hath this hope in him purifieth
himself even as he is pure." That very breath by which he inflates the
lungs, can you breathe it back in blasphemies against his holy name,
which angels never pronounce but with veneration and awe? Choose, O
choose a good name, which can only be obtained by choosing a virtuous
course of conduct. However lightly you may treat your own station in
life, or however much you may disregard the dignity of your nature,
yet remember the station you hold, however obscure, is stamped with
responsibility. You are surrounded by a generation of youth, among
whom are your own children, ready to imitate your example. Do you wish
them well! Then guard your heart and life by setting a reasonable
value on a good name, and remember you cannot move without touching
some string that may vibrate long after your head rests on its cold
pillow of earth.

SERMON XIII

"A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving
favor rather than silver and gold." Prov. xxii:1.

In this discourse we shall more fully show why "a good name is rather
to be chosen than great riches."

Though wealth is desirable, and in many instances conducive to human
happiness, because it puts it in our power to relieve the wants and
distresses of our fellow creatures, yet it does not possess the charm
to convey unbroken peace or solid joy to any bosom. The value, of
anything within the range of human action, is to be estimated by its
usefulness in promoting the happiness of man. That, which pours the
most numerous and refined enjoyments into the soul, is to be
considered of the greatest worth; and that, which has a tendency to
bring upon us the most alarming miseries, misfortunes and woes, is of
course the most worthless. The one is to be fondly chosen and pursued
in proportion to its worth in administering to our enjoyments, and the
other is to be avoided in proportion to its unhappy effects in
multiplying our sorrows. This being an undeniable fact, the
superlative value of a good name, procured by a virtuous course of
conduct, appears, at once, to transcend all other considerations: A
pure unsullied conscience before heaven is the most permanent bliss
that a rational being can enjoy, and is of that enduring nature which
no earthly power or misfortune can destroy. It supports us in the hour
of adversity and trial; it comforts us in the dark hour of sorrow; it
remains unmoved amids the storms of life, and lights up the smile of
satisfaction on the lips of the dying.

Nor is this all. It affords us other unruffled streams of unmingled
felicity in the common intercourse of life. The approbation of the
wise and the good, the confidence and esteem of our friends and
associates, and the good opinion even of the vicious, are
considerations of no ordinary moment. They awaken emotions in the
heart of the most pleasing gratification, and open in the soul all the
avenues of heaven-born felicity, imparting that peace, which this
world can neither give nor take away. But as it respects _wealth_, we
would remark, that though it may communicate happiness by enabling us
to relieve the wants of our fellow creatures, and afford us many joys
in the indulgence of our benevolence, yet it cannot of itself
communicate happiness, but virtue can. A wicked and unprincipled man
is wretched, though he roll in all the wealth and splendors that earth
can give. He feels in his bosom a _burning flame_, that all the
streams of wealth can never quench, and a _craving desire_, that
nought on earth can gratify. If his "great riches" afford him any
enjoyments, yet these are by no means permanent and lasting. The
desolating flame may lay them in ruins--the storms on the ocean may
sink them in its waves--the famine or blighting mildew may wither them
forever, and leave him stript of all his fancied joys. But nothing of
this can happen to virtue. That remains forever unharmed amidst the
shocks of earth. A good name is, therefore, of inconceivably more
value than riches and rather to be chosen than silver and gold.

We are formed for society. God in beginning said, "it is not good that
man should be alone." This being a fact, which all past experience,
and the history of our whole race demonstrate, it is, therefore,
equally true, that our dearest enjoyments flow from the social
affections and from a sincere cultivation of the social intercourse of
life. There is, perhaps, not a human being in existence, who would
accept of all the wealth of the Indies on the condition that he should
not be respected by a single individual on earth. This circumstance
shows us, in noonday light, the superior value of a good name above
all the glittering appendages of wealth. Every man is beloved and
esteemed in proportion to his goodness and usefulness in the world,
particularly by those with whom he associate in life. If then to _love
and be beloved_ depend on our conduct in the world, and if at the same
time, our happiness is derived from the exercise of reciprocal
affection, we see the importance of pitching upon that course of life,
which alone can secure those solid pleasures resulting from a well
spent life.

Too many persons suppose, they can be happy in sin; yes, even in
criminal indulgence. But that transgressor was never yet found, who
could point to a single wicked act in his life, the remembrance of
which ever imparted one solitary gleam of joy to his heart. They may
fancy there is happiness in sin; but here is the deception. It is
immaterial what some may preach about _the pleasures of sin_, and _the
satisfaction the transgressor often takes in a wicked course_, yet all
this amounts to nothing so long as the voice of heaven declares,
"THERE IS NO PEACE, SAITH MY GOD, TO THE WICKED." Infinite wisdom
_must know_, and infinite wisdom, _has given_ the decision, and that
decision is stamped with immortality, and from it there is no appeal.
If we impress the sinner with the idea that he is not punished and
rewarded _here_, but that the whole is to be settled in the future
world, then we, in the same proportion, weaken the force of virtue and
_strengthen_ the cause of vice. And this is one obvious reason, why
men continue in sin, as long as they dare, expecting at some future
day to repent and escape _all punishment_. They go on from day to day,
and from year to year, with all the thunders of endless and immortal
pain sounded in their ears, and even believing it true, yet continue
to indulge in sin. Would they run such an awful risk, unless, by a
certain course of education, they had been made to believe that there
was happiness in transgression? No. If they believed that sin had
nought to impart but misery, they would abandon it for its _own sake_;
because happiness is the object of all men. They have, therefore, by
some means or other, been led to the strange infatuation, that sin
possesses some secret charm to communicate that happiness to the soul,
for which every bosom throbs. This fancied happiness, they vainly
imagine, they can obtain by wallowing in the dark waters of iniquity,
be happy _here_, then repent at last, and be happy _hereafter_. As
they pass along in their wretched career, expecting every moment to
grasp the fancied pleasure, yet the fond, anticipated phantom flies
from their embrace and leaves them in the ruin of their joy. Though
disappointed again and again, yet firmly believing that there is
happiness in sin, they again push on, and thus far attribute their
want of success to some miscalculation. Insensible of the nature of
sin, blinded and self-deceived, they go on in pursuit of pleasure,
while golden dreams of false felicity fire their imaginations, till at
last, age places them on the verge of the grave; their object no
nearer attained than it was the day they set out, while habit has
fixed them in a course, that has yielded them nothing but sorrow and
pain, and vanity and vexation of spirit. Stung with remorse, and
pierced through with many sorrows, they breathe a repentance, which,
the nature of their condition, forces upon them, are perhaps
pronounced _converted_, and they sink into the darkness of death!
Their names, covered with infamy, are soon blotted from the
remembrance of the living!

We observed, a moment ago, that the idea, of holding up a retribution
in the future world, weakens the force of virtue, and strengthens the
cause of vice. This has, perhaps, been abundantly shown in the
arguments already offered as being manifest in the daily conduct of
men; yet we will, in a word, bring the subject plainly before you. To
persuade a sinner that he is to be punished in the _future_ world for
his sins in _this_, is plainly saying that sin has many pleasures and
conveniences _here_, and so far as it failed of rendering him his due
desert, the balance is to be made up in another state of being.
Because the balance of punishment due him _there_, is to make up the
_deficiency_ of punishment, which sin did not pay him here. And
certainly, so far as sin did not pay him _here_, he must have been
happy in its commission. And the _expectation_, that he should be
happy in it _here_, was the _very cause_ that induced him to continue
in transgression, with the expectation of repenting and escaping
punishment _hereafter_. Thus he flattered himself, that he could sin
with impunity, and escape its punishment in this world and the world
to come.

And to satisfy a man that he is to be rewarded in the _future_ world
for his righteousness in _this_ but persuading him, that virtue is
attended with misery, and that so far as it failed to reward _here_,
the balance is to be made up _hereafter_. Because the balance of
happiness due to him _there_, is to make up the deficiency of
happiness which virtue did not pay him _here_. And so far as virtue
