forgive sin without and even before our prayer (for He has given us the
Gospel, in which is pure forgiveness before we prayed or ever thought
about it). But this is to the intent that we may recognize and accept
such forgiveness. For since the flesh in which we daily live is of such
a nature that it neither trusts nor believes God, and is ever active in
evil lusts and devices, so that we sin daily in word and deed, by
commission and omission by which the conscience is thrown into unrest,
so that it is afraid of the wrath and displeasure of God, and thus
loses the comfort and confidence derived from the Gospel; therefore it
is ceaselessly necessary that we run hither and obtain consolation to
comfort the conscience again.

But this should serve God's purpose of breaking our pride and keeping
us humble. For in case any one should boast of his godliness and
despise others, God has reserved this prerogative to Himself, that the
person is to consider himself and place this prayer before his eyes,
and he will find that he is no better than others, and that in the
presence of God all must lower their plumes, and be glad that they can
attain forgiveness. And let no one think that as long as we live here
he can reach such a position that he will not need such forgiveness. In
short, if God does not forgive without ceasing, we are lost.

It is therefore the intent of this petition that God would not regard
our sins and hold up to us what we daily deserve, but would deal
graciously with us, and forgive, as He has promised, and thus grant us
a joyful and confident conscience to stand before Him in prayer. For
where the heart is not in right relation towards God, nor can take such
confidence, it will nevermore venture to pray. But such a confident and
joyful heart can spring from nothing else than the [certain] knowledge
of the forgiveness of sin.

But there is here attached a necessary, yet consolatory addition: As we
forgive. He has promised that we shall be sure that everything is
forgiven and pardoned, yet in the manner that we also forgive our
neighbor. For just as we daily sin much against God and yet He forgives
everything through grace, so we, too, must ever forgive our neighbor
who does us injury, violence, and wrong, shows malice toward us, etc.
If, therefore you do not forgive, then do not think that God forgives
you; but if you forgive, you have this consolation and assurance, that
you are forgiven in heaven, not on account of your forgiving, -- for
God forgives freely and without condition, out of pure grace, because
He has so promised, as the Gospel teaches, -- but in order that He may
set this up for our confirmation and assurance for a sign alongside of
the promise which accords with this prayer, Luke 6, 37: Forgive, and ye
shall be forgiven. Therefore Christ also repeats it soon after the
Lord's Prayer, and says, Matt. 6,14: For if ye forgive men their
trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you, etc.

This sign is therefore attached to this petition, that, when we pray,
we remember the promise and reflect thus: Dear Father, for this reason
I come and pray Thee to forgive me, not that I can make satisfaction,
or can merit anything by my works, but because Thou hast promised and
attached the seal thereto that I should be as sure as though I had
absolution pronounced by Thyself. For as much as Baptism and the Lord's
Supper appointed as external signs, effect, so much also this sign can
effect to confirm our consciences and cause them to rejoice. And it is
especially given for this purpose, that we might use and practice it
every hour, as a thing that we have with us at all times.

 The Sixth Petition.

And lead us not into temptation.

We have now heard enough what toil and labor is required to retain all
that for which we pray, and to persevere therein, which, however, is
not achieved without infirmities and stumbling. Besides, although we
have received forgiveness and a good conscience and are entirely
acquitted, yet is our life of such a nature that one stands to-day and
to-morrow falls. Therefore, even though we be godly now and stand
before God with a good conscience, we must pray again that He would not
suffer us to relapse and yield to trials and temptations.

Temptation, however, or (as our Saxons in olden times used to call it)
Bekoerunge, is of three kinds, namely, of the flesh, of the world and
of the devil. For in the flesh we dwell and carry the old Adam about
our neck, who exerts himself and incites us daily to inchastity,
laziness, gluttony and drunkenness, avarice and deception, to defraud
our neighbor and to overcharge him, and, in short, to all manner of
evil lusts which cleave to us by nature, and to which we are incited by
the society, example and what we hear and see of other people, which
often wound and inflame even an innocent heart.

Next comes the world, which offends us in word and deed, and impels us
to anger and impatience. In short, there is nothing but hatred and
envy, enmity, violence and wrong, unfaithfulness, vengeance, cursing,
raillery slander, pride and haughtiness, with superfluous finery,
honor, fame, and power, where no one is willing to be the least, but
every one desires to sit at the head and to be seen before all.

Then comes the devil, inciting and provoking in all directions, but
especially agitating matters that concern the conscience and spiritual
affairs, namely, to induce us to despise and disregard both the Word
and works of God to tear us away from faith, hope, and love and bring
us into misbelief, false security, and obduracy, or, on the other hand,
to despair, denial of God, blasphemy, and innumerable other shocking
things. These are indeed snares and nets, yea, real fiery darts which
are shot most venomously into the heart, not by flesh and blood, but by
the devil.

Great and grievous, indeed, are these dangers and temptations which
every Christian must bear, even though each one were alone by himself,
so that every hour that we are in this vile life where we are attacked
on all sides, chased and hunted down, we are moved to cry out and to
pray that God would not suffer us to become weary and faint and to
relapse into sin, shame, and unbelief. For otherwise it is impossible
to overcome even the least temptation.

This, then, is leading us not into temptation, to wit, when He gives us
power and strength to resist, the temptation, however, not being taken
away or removed. For while we live in the flesh and have the devil
about us, no one can escape temptation and allurements; and it cannot
be otherwise than that we must endure trials, yea, be engulfed in them;
but we pray for this, that we may not fall and be drowned in them.

To feel temptation is therefore a far different thing from consenting
or yielding to it. We must all feel it, although not all in the same
manner, but some in a greater degree and more severely than others; as,
the young suffer especially from the flesh, afterwards, they that
attain to middle life and old age, from the world, but others who are
occupied with spiritual matters, that is, strong Christians, from the
devil. But such feeling, as long as it is against our will and we would
rather be rid of it, can harm no one. For if we did not feel it, it
could not be called a temptation. But to consent thereto is when we
give it the reins and do not resist or pray against it.

Therefore we Christians must be armed and daily expect to be
incessantly attacked, in order that no one may go on in security and
heedlessly, as though the devil were far from us, but at all times
expect and parry his blows. For though I am now chaste, patient, kind,
and in firm faith, the devil will this very hour send such an arrow
into my heart that I can scarcely stand. For he is an enemy that never
desists nor becomes tired, so that when one temptation ceases, there
always arise others and fresh ones.

Accordingly, there is no help or comfort except to run hither and to
take hold of the Lord's Prayer, and thus speak to God from the heart:
Dear Father, Thou hast bidden me pray; let me not relapse because of
temptations. Then you will see that they must desist, and finally
acknowledge themselves conquered. Else if you venture to help yourself
by your own thoughts and counsel, you will only make the matter worse
and give the devil more space. For he has a serpent's head, which if it
gain an opening into which he can slip, the whole body will follow
without check. But prayer can prevent him and drive him back.

The Seventh and Last Petition.

But deliver us from evil. Amen. In the Greek text this petition reads
thus: Deliver or preserve us from the Evil One, or the Malicious One;
and it looks as if He were speaking of the devil, as though He would
comprehend everything in one so that the entire substance of all our
prayer is directed against our chief enemy. For it is he who hinders
among us everything that we pray for: the name or honor of God, God's
kingdom and will, our daily bread, a cheerful good conscience, etc.

Therefore we finally sum it all up and say: Dear Father pray, help that
we be rid of all these calamities. But there is nevertheless also
included whatever evil may happen to us under the devil's kingdom --
poverty, shame, death, and, in short, all the agonizing misery and
heartache of which there is such an unnumbered multitude on the earth.
For since the devil is not only a liar, but also a murderer, he
constantly seeks our life, and wreaks his anger whenever he can afflict
our bodies with misfortune and harm. Hence it comes that he often
breaks men's necks or drives them to insanity, drowns some, and incites
many to commit suicide, and to many other terrible calamities.
Therefore there is nothing for us to do upon earth but to pray against
this arch enemy without ceasing. For unless God preserved us, we would
not be safe from him even for an hour.

Hence you see again how God wishes us to pray to Him also for all the
things which affect our bodily interests, so that we seek and expect
help nowhere else except in Him. But this matter He has put last; for
if we are to be preserved and delivered from all evil, the name of God
must first be hallowed in us, His kingdom must be with us, and His will
be done. After that He will finally preserve us from sin and shame,
and, besides, from everything that may hurt or injure us.

Thus God has briefly placed before us all the distress which may ever
come upon us, so that we might have no excuse whatever for not praying.
But all depends upon this, that we learn also to say Amen, that is,
that we do not doubt that our prayer is surely heard and [what we pray]
shall be done. For this is nothing else than the word of undoubting
faith, which does not pray at a venture, but knows that God does not
lie to him, since He has promised to grant it. Therefore, where there
is no such faith, there cannot be true prayer either.

It is, therefore, a pernicious delusion of those who pray in such a
manner that they dare not from the heart say yea and positively
conclude that God hears them, but remain in doubt and say, How should I
be so bold as to boast that God hears my prayer? For I am but a poor
sinner, etc.

The reason for this is, they regard not the promise of God, but their
own work and worthiness, whereby they despise God and reproach Him with
lying, and therefore they receive nothing. As St. James says [1, 6]:
But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for he that wavereth is
like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed. For let not
that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord. Behold, such
importance God attaches to the fact that we are sure we do not pray in
vain, and that we do not in any way despise our prayer.

Part Fourth.

OF BAPTISM.

We have now finished the three chief parts of the common Christian
doctrine. Besides these we have yet to speak of our two Sacraments
instituted by Christ, of which also every Christian ought to have at
least an ordinary, brief instruction, because without them there can be
no Christian; although, alas! hitherto no instruction concerning them
has been given. But, in the first place, we take up Baptism, by which
we are first received into the Christian Church. However, in order that
it may be readily understood we will treat of it in an orderly manner,
and keep only to that which it is necessary for us to know. For how it
is to be maintained and defended against heretics and sects we will
commend to the learned.

In the first place, we must above all things know well the words upon
which Baptism is founded, and to which everything refers that is to be
said on the subject, namely, where the Lord Christ speaks in the last
chapter of Matthew, v. 19:

Go ye therefore and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.

Likewise in St. Mark, the last chapter, v. 16:

He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned .

In these words you must note, in the first place, that here stand
God's commandment and institution, lest we doubt that Baptism is
divine, not devised nor invented by men. For as truly as I can say, No
man has spun the Ten Commandments, the Creed, and the Lord's Prayer out
of his head, but they are revealed and given by God Himself, so also I
can boast that Baptism is no human trifle, but instituted by God
Himself, moreover, that it is most solemnly and strictly commanded that
we must be baptized or we cannot be saved, lest any one regard it as a
trifling matter, like putting on a new red coat. For it is of the
greatest importance that we esteem Baptism excellent, glorious, and
exalted, for which we contend and fight chiefly, because the world is
now so full of sects clamoring that Baptism is an external thing, and
that external things are of no benefit. But let it be ever so much an
external thing here stand God's Word and command which institute,
establish, and confirm Baptism. But what God institutes and commands
cannot be a vain, but must be a most precious thing, though in
appearance it were of less value than a straw. If hitherto people could
consider it a great thing when the Pope with his letters and bulls
dispensed indulgences and confirmed altars and churches, solely because
of the letters and seals, we ought to esteem Baptism much more highly
and more precious, because God has commanded it, and, besides, it is
performed in His name. For these are the words, Go ye baptize; however,
not in your name, but in the name of God.

For to be baptized in the name of God is to be baptized not by men, but
by God Himself. Therefore although it is performed by human hands, it
is nevertheless truly God's own work. From this fact every one may
himself readily infer that it is a far higher work than any work
performed by a man or a saint. For what work greater than the work of
God can we do?

But here the devil is busy to delude us with false appearances, and
lead us away from the work of God to our own works. For there is a much
more splendid appearance when a Carthusian does many great and
difficult works and we all think much more of that which we do and
merit ourselves. But the Scriptures teach thus: Even though we collect
in one mass the works of all the monks, however splendidly they may
shine, they would not be as noble and good as if God should pick up a
straw. Why? Because the person is nobler and better. Here, then, we
must not estimate the person according to the works, but the works
according to the person, from whom they must derive their nobility. But
insane reason will not regard this, and because Baptism does not shine
like the works which we do, it is to be esteemed as nothing.

From this now learn a proper understanding of the subject, and how to
answer the question what Baptism is, namely thus, that it is not mere
ordinary water, but water comprehended in God's Word and command, and
sanctified thereby, so that it is nothing else than a divine water; not
that the water in itself is nobler than other water, but that God's
Word and command are added.

Therefore it is pure wickedness and blasphemy of the devil that now our
new spirits, to mock at Baptism, omit from it God's Word and
institution, and look upon it in no other way than as water which is
taken from the well, and then blather and say: How is a handful of
water to help the soul? Aye, my friend, who does not know that water is
water if tearing things asunder is what we are after? But how dare you
thus interfere with God's order, and tear away the most precious
treasure with which God has connected and enclosed it, and which He
will not have separated? For the kernel in the water is God's Word or
command and the name of God which is a treasure greater and nobler than
heaven and earth.

Comprehend the difference, then, that Baptism is quite another thing
than all other water; not on account of the natural quality, but
because something more noble is here added; for God Himself stakes His
honor His power and might on it. Therefore it is not only natural
water, but a divine, heavenly, holy, and blessed water, and in whatever
other terms we can praise it, -- all on account of the Word, which is a
heavenly, holy Word, that no one can sufficiently extol, for it has,
and is able to do, all that God is and can do [since it has all the
virtue and power of God comprised in it]. Hence also it derives its
essence as a Sacrament, as St. Augustine also taught: Accedat verbum ad
elementum et fit sacramentum. That is, when the Word is joined to the
element or natural substance, it becomes a Sacrament, that is, a holy
and divine matter and sign.

Therefore we always teach that the Sacraments and all external things
which God ordains and institutes should not be regarded according to
the coarse, external mask, as we regard the shell of a nut, but as the
Word of God is included therein. For thus we also speak of the parental
estate and of civil government. If we propose to regard them in as far
as they have noses, eyes, skin, and hair flesh and bones, they look
like Turks and heathen, and some one might start up and say: Why should
I esteem them more than others? But because the commandment is added:
Honor thy father and thy mother, I behold a different man, adorned and
clothed with the majesty and glory of God. The commandment (I say) is
the chain of gold about his neck, yea, the crown upon his head which
shows to me how and why one must honor this flesh and blood.

Thus, and much more even, you must honor Baptism and esteem it
glorious on account of the Word, since He Himself has honored it both
by words and deeds; moreover, confirmed it with miracles from heaven.
For do you think it was a jest that, when Christ was baptized, the
heavens were opened and the Holy Ghost descended visibly, and
everything was divine glory and majesty?

Therefore I exhort again that these two the water and the Word, by no
means be separated from one another and parted. For if the Word is
separated from it, the water is the same as that with which the servant
cooks, and may indeed be called a bath-keeper's baptism. But when it is
added, as God has ordained, it is a Sacrament, and is called
Christ-baptism. Let this be the first part regarding the essence and
dignity of the holy Sacrament.

In the second place, since we know now what Baptism is, and how it is
to be regarded, we must also learn why and for what purpose it is
instituted; that is, what it profits, gives and works. And this also we
cannot discern better than from the words of Christ above quoted: He
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved. Therefore state it most
simply thus, that the power, work, profit, fruit, and end of Baptism is
this, namely, to save. For no one is baptized in order that he may
become a prince, but, as the words declare, that he be saved. But to be
saved. we know. is nothing else than to be delivered from sin, death,
and the devil, and to enter into the kingdom of Christ, and to live
with Him forever.

Here you see again how highly and precious we should esteem Baptism,
because in it we obtain such an unspeakable treasure, which also
indicates sufficiently that it cannot be ordinary mere water. For mere
water could not do such a thing, but the Word does it, and (as said
above) the fact that the name of God is comprehended therein. But where
the name of God is, there must be also life and salvation, that it may
indeed be called a divine, blessed, fruitful, and gracious water; for
by the Word such power is imparted to Baptism that it is a laver of
regeneration, as St. Paul also calls it, Titus 3, 5.

But as our would-be wise, new spirits assert that faith alone saves,
and that works and external things avail nothing, we answer: It is
true, indeed, that nothing in us is of any avail but faith, as we shall
hear still further. But these blind guides are unwilling to see this,
namely, that faith must have something which it believes, that is, of
which it takes hold, and upon which it stands and rests. Thus faith
clings to the water, and believes that it is Baptism, in which there is
pure salvation and life; not through the water (as we have sufficiently
stated), but through the fact that it is embodied in the Word and
institution of God, and the name of God inheres in it. Now, if I
believe this, what else is it than believing in God as in Him who has
given and planted His Word into this ordinance, and proposes to us this
external thing wherein we may apprehend such a treasure?

Now, they are so mad as to separate faith and that to which faith
clings and is bound though it be something external. Yea, it shall and
must be something external, that it may be apprehended by the senses,
and understood and thereby be brought into the heart, as indeed the
entire Gospel is an external, verbal preaching. In short, what God does
and works in us He proposes to work through such external ordinances.
Wherever, therefore, He speaks, yea, in whichever direction or by
whatever means He speaks, thither faith must look, and to that it must
hold. Now here we have the words: He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved. To what else do they refer than to Baptism, that is, to
the water comprehended in God's ordinance? Hence it follows that
whoever rejects Baptism rejects the Word of God, faith, and Christ, who
directs us thither and binds us to Baptism.

In the third place since we have learned the great benefit and power of
Baptism, let us see further who is the person that receives what
Baptism gives and profits. This is again most beautifully and clearly
expressed in the words: He that believeth and is baptized shall be
saved. That is, faith alone makes the person worthy to receive
profitably the saving, divine water. For, since these blessings are
here presented and promised in the words in and with the water, they
cannot be received in any other way than by believing them with the
heart. Without faith it profits nothing, notwithstanding it is in
itself a divine superabundant treasure. Therefore this single word (He
that believeth) effects this much that it excludes and repels all
works which we can do, in the opinion that we obtain and merit
salvation by them. For it is determined that whatever is not faith
avails nothing nor receives anything.

But if they say, as they are accustomed: Still Baptism is itself a
work, and you say works are of no avail for salvation; what then,
becomes of faith? Answer: Yes, our works, indeed, avail nothing for
salvation; Baptism, however, is not our work, but God's (for, as was
stated, you must put Christ-baptism far away from a bath-keeper's
baptism). God's works, however, are saving and necessary for salvation,
and do not exclude, but demand, faith; for without faith they could not
be apprehended. For by suffering the water to be poured upon you, you
have not yet received Baptism in such a manner that it benefits you
anything; but it becomes beneficial to you if you have yourself
baptized with the thought that this is according to God's command and
ordinance, and besides in God's name, in order that you may receive in
the water the promised salvation. Now, this the fist cannot do, nor the
body; but the heart must believe it.

Thus you see plainly that there is here no work done by us, but a
treasure which He gives us, and which faith apprehends; just as the
Lord Jesus Christ upon the cross is not a work, but a treasure
comprehended in the Word, and offered to us and received by faith.
Therefore they do us violence by exclaiming against us as though we
preach against faith; while we alone insist upon it as being of such
necessity that without it nothing can be received nor enjoyed.

Thus we have these three parts which it is necessary to know
concerning this Sacrament especially that the ordinance of God is to be
held in all honor, which alone would be sufficient, though it be an
entirely external thing like the commandment, Honor thy father and thy
mother, which refers to bodily flesh and blood. Therein we regard not
the flesh and blood, but the commandment of God in which they are
comprehended, and on account of which the flesh is called father and
mother; so also, though we had no more than these words, Go ye and
baptize, etc., it would be necessary for us to accept and do it as the
ordinance of God. Now there is here not only God's commandment and
injunction, but also the promise, on account of which it is still far
more glorious than whatever else God has commanded and ordained, and
is, in short, so full of consolation and grace that heaven and earth
cannot comprehend it. But it requires skill to believe this, for the
treasure is not wanting, but this is wanting that men apprehend it and
hold it firmly.

Therefore every Christian has enough in Baptism to learn and to
practice all his life; for he has always enough to do to believe
firmly what it promises and brings: victory over death and the devil,
forgiveness of sin, the grace of God, the entire Christ, and the Holy
Ghost with His gifts. In short, it is so transcendent that if timid
nature could realize it, it might well doubt whether it could be true.
For consider, if there were somewhere a physician who understood the
art of saving men from dying, or, even though they died, of restoring
them speedily to life, so that they would thereafter live forever, how
the world would pour in money like snow and rain, so that because of
the throng of the rich no one could find access! But here in Baptism
there is brought free to every one's door such a treasure and medicine
as utterly destroys death and preserves all men alive.

Thus we must regard Baptism and make it profitable to ourselves, that
when our sins and conscience oppress us, we strengthen ourselves and
take comfort and say: Nevertheless I am baptized; but if I am baptized,
it is promised me that I shall be saved and have eternal life, both in
soul and body. For that is the reason why these two things are done in
Baptism namely, that the body, which can apprehend nothing but the
water, is sprinkled, and, in addition, the word is spoken for the soul
to apprehend. Now, since both, the water and the Word, are one Baptism,
therefore body and soul must be saved and live forever: the soul
through the Word which it believes, but the body because it is united
with the soul and also apprehends Baptism as it is able to apprehend
it. We have, therefore, no greater jewel in body and soul, for by it we
are made holy and are saved, which no other kind of life, no work upon
earth, can attain.

Let this suffice respecting the nature, blessing, and use of Baptism,
for it answers the present purpose.

 [Part Fifth.]

OF THE SACRAMENT OF THE ALTAR.

In the same manner as we have heard regarding Holy Baptism, we must
speak also concerning the other Sacrament, namely, these three points:
