of its being Christianized as Constantinople certainly must be, and it
may even on the fall of the latter become the chief centre of Sunite
orthodoxy of the existing Hanefite type, remaining so perhaps long after
the rest of Islam shall have abandoned Hanefism. It is obvious, however,
that cut off geographically as the Khanates are from the general life of
Islam, Bokhara can but vaguely represent the present religious power of
Constantinople, and will be powerless to influence the general flow of
Mohammedan thought. Its influence could be exerted only through India,
and would be supported by no political prestige. So that it is far more
likely in the future to follow than to lead opinion. Otherwise isolation
is its only fate.

The future of Shiite Mohammedanism in Persia proper is a still more
doubtful problem. Exposed like the rest of Central Asia to Russian
conquest, the Persian monarchy cannot without a speedy and complete
revolution of its internal condition fail to succumb politically. The
true Irani, however, have an unique position in Mohammedan Asia which
may save them from complete absorption. Unlike any Mohammedan race
except the Arabian, they are distinctly national. The Turk, conqueror
though he has always been, repudiates still the name of Turk, calling
himself simply a Moslem, and so likewise do the less distinguished races
he has subjected. But the Persian does not do this. He is before all
things Irani, and to the extent that he has made for himself a
Mohammedanism of his own. He boasts of a history and a literature older
far than Islam, and has not consented to forget it as a thing belonging
only to "the Age of Ignorance." He runs, therefore, little risk of being
either Russianised or Christianised by conquest; and being of an
intellectual fibre superior to that of the Russians, and, as far as the
mass of the population is concerned, being physically as well gifted, it
may be supposed that he will survive, if he cannot avert, his political
subjugation.

There is at the present moment, I am informed, a last desperate effort
making at Teheran for the re-organization of the Empire on a liberal
basis of government, and though it would be folly to count much on its
success, it may conceivably succeed. Mohammedanism would not there, as
at Constantinople, be found a barrier to reform, for Persian Shiism is
an eminently elastic creed, and on the contrary may, it is thought, be
made the instrument of a social reformation; only, as I have said it
would be folly to count on its success; and there are certain moral
defects in Persian character which do not encourage lookers-on. Shiite
Mohammedanism, however, whether Persia be absorbed or not by Russia, is
of little importance in a general review of Islam's future, and may
safely be dismissed as not directly relevant to the main question before
us.

Admitting, then, the probability, nay, the certainty, of considerable
political and territorial losses northwards, caused by the violent
pressure of a hostile Europe, let us see what yet remains to Islam as
her certain heritage, and how the changes foreshadowed may affect her
general life. I cannot myself find any cause of despair for Mussulmans
in the prospect of a curtailment of their religious area in the
directions indicated, or any certain reason of exultation for their
enemies in the thought that with the fall of Constantinople Islam, too,
will have fallen. On the contrary, I see in the coming destruction of
the Ottoman supremacy, and in the exclusion of the northern races, even
at the cost of their religious support, from the counsels of the
faithful, an element of hope in the future far outweighing the immediate
chagrin which may be caused by loss of sovereignty or loss of
population.

The Mohammedan population which the fall of Constantinople would
conceivably cut off from the main body could not at most number more
than some twenty millions, and when we remember that this is no more
than a tithe of the whole Mussulman census, and that the proportion is a
constantly decreasing one, it will be evident that there is little
ground for looking at the loss as one necessarily fatal to religion. The
northern races still give to Mohammedanism an appearance of physical
strength; but it is an appearance only, and it is given at the cost of
its intellectual vigour. The political success of the Turks has for
centuries thrown Islam off its moral equilibrium, and their
disappearance from its supreme counsels will give weight to races more
worthy of representing religious interests. Constantinople will be
replaced by Cairo or Mecca, and the Tartar by the Arab--an exchange
which, intellectually considered, no lover of Islam need deplore.

One great result the fall of Constantinople certainly will have, which I
believe will be a beneficial one. It will give to Mohammedanism a more
distinctly religious character than it has for many centuries possessed,
and by forcing believers to depend upon spiritual instead of temporal
arms will restore to them, more than any political victories could do,
their lost moral life. Even independently of considerations of race as
between Turk and Arab, I believe that the fall of the Mussulman Empire,
as a great temporal dominion, would relieve Islam of a burden of
sovereignty which she is no longer able in the face of the modern world
to support. She would escape the stigma of political depravity now
clinging to her, and her aims would be simplified and intensified. I
have already stated my opinion that it is to Arabia that Mussulmans must
in the future look for a centre of their religious system, and a return
of their Caliphate to Mecca will signify more than a mere political
change. It is obvious that empire will be there impossible in the sense
given to it at Constantinople, and that the display of armies and the
mundane glory of vast palaces and crowds of slaves will be altogether
out of place.

The Caliph of the future, in whatever city he may fix his abode, will be
chiefly a spiritual and not a temporal king, and will be limited in the
exercise of his authority by few conditions of the existing material
kind. He will be spared the burden of despotic government, the odium of
tax-gathering and conscription over unwilling populations, the constant
struggle to maintain his authority in arms, and the as constant intrigue
against rival Mohammedan princes. It is probable that all these would
readily acknowledge the nominal sovereignty of a Caliph who could not
pretend to coerce them physically, and that the spiritual allegiance of
orthodox believers everywhere would accrue to him as other Mohammedan
sovereignty relaxed its hold. Thus the dream of what is called
Pan-islamism may yet be fulfilled, though in another form from that in
which it is now presented to the faithful by Abd el Hamid and the Ulema
of Constantinople.

That Islam in this spiritual form may achieve more notable triumphs than
by arms in Eastern and Southern Asia we may well believe, and even that
it may establish itself one day as the prevailing religion of the
Continent. Its moral advance within recent times in the Malay
Archipelago, in China, in Tartary, and in India, encourages the
supposition that under alien rule Mohammedanism will be able to hold its
own, and more than own, against all rivals, and that in the decay of
Buddhism it, and not Christianity, will be the form under which God will
eventually be worshipped in the Tropics. Its progress among the Malays
under Dutch rule is certainly an astonishing phenomenon, and, taken in
connection with a hardly less remarkable progress in Equatorial Africa,
may well console those Mussulmans who see in the loss of their temporal
dominions northwards signs of the decay of Islam. Could such a
reformation as was suggested in my last chapter be indeed effected, the
vigour of conversion would doubtless be redoubled, independently of any
condition of political prosperity in the ancient seats of Mohammedan
dominion. I do not, therefore, see in territorial losses a sign of
Islam's ruin as a moral and intellectual force in the world.

It is time, however, to consider the special part destined to be played
by England in the drama of the Mussulman future. England, if I
understand her history rightly, stands towards Islam in a position quite
apart from that of the rest of the European States. These I have
described as continuing a tradition of aggression inherited from the
Crusades, and from the bitter wars waged by the Latin and Greek Empires
against the growing power of the Ottoman Turks. In the latter England
took no part, her religious schism having already separated her from the
general interests of Catholic Europe, while she had withdrawn from the
former in the still honourable stage of the adventure, and consequently
remained with no humiliating memories to avenge. She came, therefore,
into her modern relations with Mohammedans unprejudiced against them,
and able to treat their religious and political opinions in a humane and
liberal spirit, seeking of them practical advantages of trade rather
than conquest. Nor has the special nature of her position towards them
been unappreciated by Mohammedans.

In spite of the deceptions on some points of late years, and recent
vacillations of policy towards them, the still independent nations of
Islam see in England something different from the rest of Christendom,
something not in its nature hostile to them, or regardless of their
rights and interests. They know at least that they have nothing to dread
from Englishmen on the score of religious intolerance, and there is even
a tendency with some of them to exaggerate the sympathy displayed
towards them by supposing a community of beliefs on certain points
considered by them essential. Thus the idea is common among the
ignorant in many Mussulman countries that the English are _Muwahedden_,
or Unitarians, in contradistinction to the rest of Christians, who are
condemned as _Musherrakin_, or Polytheists; and the Turkish alliance is
explained by them on this supposition, supplemented in the case of the
Turks themselves with the idea that England is itself a part of Islam,
and so its natural ally.[18] These are of course but ideas of the
vulgar. Yet they represent a fact which is not without importance,
namely, that England's is accepted by Mussulmans as a friendly not a
hostile influence, and that her protection is sought without that
suspicion which is attached to the friendly offices of other powers.
Even in India, where Englishmen have supplanted the Mussulmans as a
ruling race, the sentiment towards British rule is not, as far as I can
learn, and compared with that of other sections of the Indian community,
a hostile one.

The Mussulmans of Delhi and the Punjab would no doubt desire a
resumption by themselves of practical authority in the country where
they were till lately masters; but they are conscious that they are not
strong enough now to effect this, and their feeling towards English rule
is certainly less bitter than towards the Hindoos, their former
subjects, now their rivals. Were they in any way specially protected in
their religious interests by the Indian Government, they would, I am
confident, make not only contented but actively loyal subjects.

As things stand, therefore, it would seem natural that, in the general
disruption which will follow the fall of Constantinople, it is to
England the various nations of Islam should look mainly for direction in
their political difficulties. The place of adviser and protector,
indeed, seems pointed out for her. With the disappearance of the Ottoman
Sultan there will be no longer any great Mussulman sovereignty in the
world, and the Mohammedan population of India, already the wealthiest
and most numerous, will then assume its full importance in the counsels
of believers. It will also assuredly be expected of the English Crown
that it should then justify its assumption of the old Mohammedan title
of the Moguls, by making itself in some sort the political head of
Islam. Her Majesty will be left its most powerful sovereign, and it
will be open to her advisers, if they be so minded, to exercise
paramount influence on all its affairs. I do not say that they will be
so minded, but they will have the power and the opportunity to a degree
never yet presented to any Christian Government of directing the tone of
thought of Mussulmans throughout the world, and of utilizing the
greatest religious force in Asia for the purposes of humanity and
progress. I am myself profoundly convinced that on England's acceptance
or refusal of this mission the future of her dominion in India will
mainly depend, and with it the whole solution of the problem she has set
to herself of civilizing Southern Asia.

Let us see what our actual relations with Mohammedanism are, and what is
the value of its goodwill to us in Asia. And first as to India. I find
in _Hunter's Gazetteer_, our latest authority, the following figures:--

MUSSULMAN CENSUS OF INDIA.

Bengal                      19,553,831
Assam                        1,104,601
North-West Provinces         4,189,348
Ajmere                          47,310
Oudh                         1,197,724
Punjab                       9,337,685
Central Provinces              233,247
Berar                          154,951
Mysore                         208,991
Coorg                           11,304
British Burmah                  99,846
Madras                       1,857,857
Bombay                       2,870,450
                           -----------
Total                       40,867,145

These are large figures taken merely as they stand, but in point of fact
they represent far more than is apparent. To understand them at their
full value it must be remembered--First, that the Mussulman population
is a largely increasing one, not only in actual numbers, but in its
proportion to the other races and sects of the Peninsula, a fact which I
believe the census returns of 1881, when published, will amply prove.
Secondly, that its geographical distribution coincides pretty closely
with that of the political life and energy of the country. The Punjab
and the North-West Provinces alone contain an aggregate of thirteen
million Mussulmans. Thirdly, that it is homogeneous to a degree shown by
no other Indian community. Though less numerous by two-thirds than the
whole Hindoo population, it is far more so than any coherent section of
that population, and is thus the largest body of opinion in the Empire.
Fourthly, it is also the most generally enlightened. It is the only
section of the community which knows its own history and preserves the
tradition of its lost political importance; and if it has held itself
aloof hitherto from competition with other races for the public service,
it has been through pride rather than inability. What Mussulmans there
are who have entered the service of Government have been men of
distinguished capacity. And lastly, it is no isolated body, but remains
in close communication with the mass of its fellow-believers throughout
the world. The Mohammedan population of India is, therefore, an
exceptional as well as a large one.

Our second interest in Mohammedanism lies in Egypt. Here, standing at
the threshold of our commerce with the East, we find another large
community almost wholly Mussulman, for whose well-being we are already
to a certain extent pledged, and in whose political future we perceive
our own to be involved. A hostile Egypt we rightly hold to be an
impossibility for our position; and religious antagonism at Cairo, even
if controlled by military occupation, would be to us a constant menace.
Nor must it be supposed that Egypt, like the Barbary coast, will, into
whose hands soever it falls, change its religious aspect. The population
of the Delta is too industrious, too sober, and content with too little,
to fear competition as agriculturists with either Italians, Greeks, or
Maltese; and the conditions of life under a torrid sun will always
protect Egypt from becoming an European colony. The towns may, indeed,
be overrun by foreigners, but the heart of the country will remain
unchanged, and, like India, will refuse to remodel itself on any foreign
system of civilization. Mohammedanism, therefore, will maintain itself
in Egypt intact, and its good-will will remain our necessity.[19]

A third interest lies in Asiatic Turkey. This we have guaranteed by
treaty against foreign invasion; and though our pledge is nominally to
the Sultan, not to the people of the Empire, and though that pledge is
contingent upon an impossibility, administrative reform, and is
therefore not strictly binding, it is impossible to escape the
admission that we have a moral obligation towards the Mussulmans of
Asia Minor and Syria. How far we may be disposed or able to fulfil it
remains to be seen. I do not myself anticipate any further intervention
on the part of England in defence of the Turkish-speaking lands. These,
from their geographical position, lie outside our effective military
control, and, dishonourable as a retreat from our engagements will be to
us, it may be a necessity.

It is difficult to understand how an English army could effectively
protect either Asia Minor or Mesopotamia from Russian invasion. The
occupation of Kars has given Russia the command of the Tigris and
Euphrates, and with them of Armenia, Kurdistan and Irak, so that our
protection could hardly be extended beyond the sea-coast of Asia Minor
and the Persian Gulf. No such inability, however, applies to Syria.
There, if we _will_, we certainly _can_ carry out our engagements. A
mere strip of seaboard, backed by the desert, and attackable only from
the north on a narrow frontier of some hundred miles, Syria is easily
defensible by a nation holding the sea. It is probable that a railway
run from the Gulf of Scanderun to the Euphrates, and supported by a
single important fortress, would be sufficient to effect its military
security at least for many years; and Syria might thus have given to it
a chance of self-government, and some compensation for misfortunes in
which we have had no inconsiderable share. But this is an interest of
honour rather than of political necessity to England; and he must
possess a sanguine mind who, in the present temper of Englishmen, would
count greatly on such motives as likely to determine the action of their
Government. If, however, it should be otherwise, it is evident that the
success of such a protectorate would depend principally upon the
Mohammedan element in Syria, which so greatly preponderates over any
other.

A fourth interest, also a moral one, but connected with an accepted fact
of English policy, is the attempted abolition of the African slave
trade. Now, though it is unquestionable that Mohammedanism permits, and
has hitherto encouraged, slavery as a natural condition of human
society, it is no less true that without the co-operation of the various
Mussulman princes of the African and Arabian coasts its abolition cannot
be effected. Short of the occupation by European garrisons of all the
villages of the Red Sea, and from Gardafui southwards to Mozambique, or,
on the other hand, of the subjection of all independent Moslem
communities in Arabia and elsewhere, a real end, or even a real check,
cannot be put on the traffic except through the co-operation of
Mussulmans themselves. The necessity has, indeed, been completely
recognized in the numerous treaties and arrangements made with the
Sultans of Turkey, Zanzibar, and Oman, and with the Viceroy of Egypt;
and, though I am far from stating that these arrangements are wholly
voluntary on the part of any of the princes, yet their good-will alone
can make the prevention efficient. An excellent proof of this is to be
found in the case of the Turkish Government, which, since its quarrel
with the English, has given full license to the traffic in the Red Sea,
which no means at the disposal of the latter can in any measure check.

At no modern period has a larger number of slaves been imported into
Hejaz and Yemen than during the last eighteen months, and until friendly
relations with the Porte, or whatever Mussulman authority succeeds the
Porte in those provinces, are restored, slave-trading will continue. I
do not myself entirely sympathize with anti-slave-trade ideas as applied
to Mohammedan lands, knowing as I do how tolerable and even advantageous
the social condition of the negroes is in them. But still I wish to see
slavery discontinued, and I believe that a firm but friendly attitude
towards Mussulmans will have completely extinguished it in another two
generations. A rupture with them can only prolong and aggravate its
existence.

Lastly, we may perhaps find a prospective interest for England in the
probability of a Caffre conversion to Mohammedanism at no very remote
period, and the extension of Islam to her borders in South Africa. It is
of course premature to be alarmed at this, as it is a contingency which
can hardly happen in the lifetime of any now living; but Mohammedanism
is not a creed which a hundred or two hundred years will see
extinguished in Africa or Asia, and already it has passed considerably
south of the Equator. Cape Colony at this day numbers some fifteen
thousand Mussulmans.

It would seem, then, on all these grounds difficult for England to ally
herself, in dealing with Islam, with what may be called the Crusading
States of Europe. Her position is absolutely distinct from that of any
of them, and her interests find no parallel among Christian nations,
except perhaps the Dutch. For good as for evil, she has admitted a vast
body of Mohammedans into her social community, and contracted
engagements from which she can hardly recede towards others among them,
so that it is impossible she should really work in active antagonism to
them. As Christians, Englishmen may regret this; but as practical men,
they would surely be wise to recognize the fact, and to accept the
duties it entails. Nor can these be discharged by a mere policy of
inaction. England should be prepared to do more than assert a general
doctrine of tolerance and equality for all religions in respect of this
one. Mohammedanism is not merely an opinion; a certain political
organization is a condition of its existence, and a certain geographical
latitude; and, moreover, it is a force which cannot remain
neutral--which will be either a friend or a foe. To do nothing for
Mussulmans in the next ten years will be to take cause against them. The
circumstances of their case do not admit of indifference, and they are
approaching a crisis in which they will, on two points at least, require
vigorous political protection. Their Caliphate in some form of temporal
sovereignty, though perhaps not of empire, will have to be maintained;
and short of securing this to them, and their free access as pilgrims to
Mecca, it will be idle to pretend to Mussulmans that we are protecting
their interests, or doing any part of our sovereign duty towards them.
It can hardly be argued that the Indian doctrine of religious equality
will suffer from doing political justice to Mohammedans.

On the downfall, therefore, of the Ottoman Empire, whenever that event
shall occur, the _role_ of England in regard to Islam seems plainly
marked out. The Caliphate--no longer an empire, but still an independent
sovereignty--must be taken under British protection, and publicly
guaranteed its political existence, undisturbed by further aggression
from Europe. On the Bosphorus no such guarantee can now be reasonably
given, because there it lies in a position militarily indefensible.
England is a naval power, and the seat of the Caliphate must be one
secured from all attack by land. It will then be for Mohammedans, and
especially for the Mohammedans of India, to decide upon the new
metropolis of their faith, the conditions of their choice lying within
the narrow limits of their still independent lands. If Syria be still
free, that metropolis may be Damascus; if Irak, Bagdad; or it may be in
Egypt, or Arabia, or Central Asia.

It is manifest, however, that as far as British protection against
Europe is concerned, the further it is removed from Christendom the
better, and the more easily accessible by sea. I have already given it
as my opinion that the move, when made will be one southwards, and
ultimately to Arabia. But it may well happen that its first stage will
be no further than Cairo. The Caliphate reached Constantinople through
Egypt, and may return by the same road, and there are certain quite
recent symptoms which seem to point in the direction of such a course
being the one taken. The events of the last year in Egypt are
significant. For the first time in its modern history a strong national
party has arisen on the Nile, and has found full support from the Azhar
Ulema, who are now the most powerful body of religious opinion in Islam.
They are politically hostile to the Sultan, and though they have no
design as yet of repudiating his Caliphal title, they are unlikely to be
faithful to his broken fortunes, and on the downfall of Constantinople
will doubtless proclaim a Caliph of their own. The family of Mohammed
Ali, if popular, may then hope for their suffrages, or it may be some
seyyid, or sherif, of the legitimate house of Koreysh. In any case, a
Caliphate at Cairo is a possibility which we must contemplate; and one
which, under the political direction and sole guarantee of England, but
enjoying full sovereignty there, might be a solution of the difficulty
acceptable to Mohammedans, and not unfavourable to English interests. It
seems to me, however, that it would be but a make-shift arrangement, not
a permanent settlement, and this from the complexity of foreign
interests in Egypt, which would keep the Mohammedan pontiff there under
restraints irksome to the religious sense of Mussulmans. It would be in
fact but the prelude to that final return to Arabia which Arabian
thought, if no other, destines for the Caliphate. The Sherif of Mecca
would hardly tolerate any further subjection to an Emir el Mumenin shorn
of his chief attributes of power, and unable, it might be, any longer to
enforce his authority. Sooner or later the Caliphate, in some form or
another, would return to its original seat, and find there its final
resting-place.

Established at Mecca, our duty of protecting the head of the Mussulman
religion would be comparatively a simple one. Hejaz for all military
purposes is inaccessible by land for Europeans; and Mecca, were it
necessary at any time to give the Caliph a garrison of Mussulman
troops, is within a night's march of the coast. In Arabia no Christian
rights need vindication, nor could any European power put in a claim of
interference. Yemen, the only province capable of attracting European
speculation, would, I know, gladly accept an English protectorate, such
as has been already given with such good results to Oman; and other
points of the Arabian shore might equally be declared inviolable.
Arabia, in fact, might be declared the natural appanage of the
Caliphate, the Stati Pontificali of the supreme head of the Mussulman
religion. In its internal organization we should have no cause to
interfere; nor would its protection from without involve us in any
outlay.

It has already been shown how favourable an action an Arabian Caliphate
may be expected to exercise on the progressive thought of Islam. That it
could not be a hostile power to England is equally certain. Whether or
not the Caliph reside at Mecca, the Grand Sherifate must always there
exist and the pilgrimage be continued; and we may hope the latter may
then be principally under English auspices. The regulation of the Haj
is, indeed, an immediate necessary part of our duty and condition of
our influence in the Mussulman world; and it is one we should be grossly
in error to neglect. It will have been seen by the table given in the
first chapter that nearly the whole pilgrimage to Arabia is now made by
sea, and that the largest number of pilgrims sent there by any nation
comes from British territory. With the protectorate, therefore, in the
future of Egypt, and, let us hope, of Syria, England would be in the
position of exercising a paramount influence on the commercial fortune
of the Holy Cities.

The revenue of Hejaz derived from the Haj is computed at three millions
sterling, a figure proved by the yearly excess of imports over exports
in her seaports, for she produces nothing, and the patronage of half, or
perhaps two-thirds, of this great revenue would make England's a
position there quite unassailable. An interdiction of the Haj, or the
threat of such for a single year, would act upon every purse among the
Hejazi and neutralize the hostility of the most recalcitrant of resident
caliphs or sherifs; while a systematic development of the pilgrimage as
a Government undertaking, with the construction of a railway from Jeddah
to Mecca, and the establishment of thoroughly well-ordered lines of
steamers from the principal Mohammedan ports, all matters which would
amply repay their cost, would every year add a new prestige to English
influence. This might be still further enhanced by the very simple
measure of collecting and transmitting officially the revenue of the
Wakaf property, entailed on the sherifs, in India. This is said to
amount to half a million sterling, and might, as in Turkey, take the
form of a government subsidy. At present it is collected privately, and
reaches the sherifs reduced, as I have been told, by two-thirds in the
process of collection, so that the mere assumption of this perfectly
legitimate duty by the Indian authorities would put a large sum into the
hands of those in office at Mecca, and a proportionate degree of power
into the hands of its collectors. This, indeed, would be no more than is
being already done by our Government for the Shia Shrines of Kerbela and
Meshed Ali, with results entirely beneficial to English popularity and
influence.

With regard to the pilgrimage, I will venture to quote the opinion of
one of the most distinguished and loyal Mohammedans in India, who has
lately been advocating the claims of his co-religionists on the Indian
Government for protection in this and other matters. Speaking of Sultan
Abd el Hamid's Pan-islamic schemes, which he asserts have not as yet
