"If there is a God, he is quite careless of human well-being or human
suffering. The deaths of a hundred thousand men mean no more to him than
the deaths of a hundred thousand ants. A couple of million men locked in
a death struggle on the battlefield is only a replica of the struggle
that has been going on in the animal world throughout time. If there be
a God, he made, he designed all this. He fashioned the hooks for the
slaughter, the teeth for the tearing, the talons for destruction, and
man with his multiplied weapons of destruction has but imitated his
example. A world without God, and in which humanity is gradually
learning the way to better things, is an inspiration to renewed effort
after the right. A world such as this, with God, is enough to drive
insane all with intelligence enough to appreciate the situation."
(_Chapman Cohen: "War, Civilization and the Churches."_)

When the Martian investigated the annals of the World War he found,
despite the opportunities Providence had had of showing its benevolence,
the affair of the sinking of the _Lusitania_, the torpedoing of hospital
ships, vessels that were not engaged in fighting but in bringing home
wounded men who had fought in "God's Cause." He found descriptions of
the slaughter of men and women and children in air raids, and he
naturally concludes that the "providence of God" is an insult to the
earthly intelligence.

Greatly disturbed, he picks up one of our newspapers and the stories of
hate and racial antagonism rear their ugly heads. These, together with
jealousy and fear, seem to him to be the outstanding features of our
attitudes. A benevolent, loving, omnipotent father, guiding our
destinies, yet allowing such monstrosities to exist! The conundrum grows
deeper as he proceeds.

It is a bright day, and the Martian is aware of a head-ache brought on
by the effort to understand the ways of earthlings, and therefore
decides to drive through the city streets. Yet this drive affords him no
relaxation, for on every side two diametrically opposed sights meet his
keen eyes--luxury and poverty. Poverty and starvation, yet the Lord's
Prayer: "Our Father which art in Heaven, give us this day our daily
bread!" No Martian father would allow his children to starve; if he did,
the law would fine him and imprison him. Since these earthlings are
neglected by their Heavenly Father, and are powerless to indict him, the
least they could do would be to stop paying tribute to him. If the God
of these earthlings bothers not about them, why should they trouble
about God? The Son of God who could once create a miraculous batch of
fish to satisfy a few fishermen, can do nothing to help these starving
millions! Aloud he muses, "Is there no place on Earth which is free from
this contradiction?"

His automobile happens to stop in front of an immense edifice marked
"Hospital," and his curiosity is sufficiently aroused to cause him to
alight and enter. The physician in charge courteously asks his
distinguished visitor to inspect this refuge for those suffering with
pain. He remembers that a religionist had told him that disease is a
visitation of the Lord for our sins, in the same breath with which he
had added that the Lord was loving and compassionate. If that were so,
then this was the ideal place to witness the infinite goodness and
compassion of the Creator of all earthlings. But, the first scene to
meet his gaze was that of a woman in childbirth. The torture, the
excruciating pain, and the mental anguish of the human female before his
eyes, defied his Martian power of expression. This process of birth, it
was explained to him, was not a pathological one, nor a disease, but a
physiological function. To this, the Martian could not refrain from
replying, "From your own words, Doctor, it is readily understood that
your women experience a torture more acute, more nerve-wracking, and of
longer duration than your Jesus experienced during his crucifixion. And
your world commiserates and sheds oceans of tears when they contemplate
the anguish of Jesus on the cross; but no mention is made of the agony
which is the fate of every woman who brings another human being into
this 'best of worlds.'"

"But, my dear Martian," exclaims the physician, "the Heavenly Father has
ordained that in anguish shall woman bring forth her young." The other
deliberated on the compassion of the Benevolent Father in silence, and
continued on his rounds through the hospital.

Nearby was the crib containing a baby of a few days, suffering with a
congenital heart disease. The infant's lips were blue, so was the body
blue, and the gasping for breath and heaving of the small chest were
pitiful to behold.

"This infant," nonchalantly remarked the physician, "was born with a
greatly defective heart. It will live for a few days, it will thirst for
air, it will have intense air-hunger, the lungs will fill with fluid and
then it will drown in its own secretions."

The Martian recalled the time he had plunged under the water and
remained there too long; vividly, he remembered the thirst for air, the
seeming bursting of the lungs, the compression and vise-like grip of
the muscles of the throat and chest, and he could not help exclaiming,
"Benevolent, Compassionate Being!"

The physician continued, "This child," pointing to a beautiful, robust
boy of ten years, "was in perfect health, until he fell in the street
and received a minor cut which the parents treated with home remedies,
but which in a few days was diagnosed as Tetanus." And the doctor went
on to explain that the compassion of the Lord is great when this occurs,
for the child gets convulsions, the jaws become locked, and beads of
cold sweat stand out on the child's forehead in his anguish; the
convulsions increase in severity and in duration so that finally they
are continuous and the child lies with the heels and back of the head
only touching the bed, the rest of the body is arched. The convulsions
then become so severe that the body is so bent backwards at times that
the head and trunk touch the heels. The misery of such a child is
sufficient to cause a physician to lose his reason. Again the Martian
murmurs, "Verily, the compassion of the Lord is beyond understanding."

The child in the next bed had just become paralyzed by an attack of
poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis). The Martian observes how the Lord
in His compassion saved a certain number of these children upon whom he
vents His anger for their sins, by inflicting upon them this hideous
disease. He saves their lives, but to serve as an everlasting reminder,
as a covenant between them and their Lord, He paralyzes their limbs. The
spectacle of these children attempting to move, making intense effort to
move paralyzed limbs, was the most revolting and heart-breaking sight
that he had ever witnessed. This time, too, the Martian remarked,
"Verily, the Lord in His infinite wisdom and goodness strange tasks does
perform."

The physician then informed him of the many men and women who have died
of cancer. A large number of these individuals had reached a period in
life where they could just afford to relax from their struggles for mere
sustenance; men and women who had reached a calm lake after journeying
through troubled and tortuous waters; who had fought the "good fight,"
and had won the just reward of resting after their labors. But no, the
Lord must trouble them for their sins.

A group of these sufferers is shown to the Martian, and the normal
course of this disease is explained. This time all he can do is to
protest that he firmly asserts that not one of our savage chiefs, even
were he of the most primitive tribe, of the cruelest imagination, of the
most base and insane nature, would nor could conceive of such torture as
the Loving Father conceived when he decided upon cancer as a visitation
for our sins. The roasting of a witch alive is but a mere trifle
compared to the long-drawn-out agony, the slow wasting, the anguish of a
cancer patient watching himself sink to death. And when death mercifully
releases this sufferer from his hellish torture the preacher murmurs,
"Lord, thy will be done."

The Martian talks for a few moments with a sufferer from this disease
and ascertains that the latter is a devout and true religionist, that he
has been a good, moral church-goer, and has lived strictly according to
the tenets of his creed, that he firmly and passionately believes that
he has lived so that he will merit the reward of heaven, an everlasting
sojourn in a land where there is no pain and suffering. And yet, this
devout religionist, when he was informed that he had an incurable
cancer, traveled the length and breadth of his land, from one surgeon to
another, allowing himself to be cut to pieces, in order that he might
remain on this earth but a moment longer. To stay and suffer the
tortures of the damned when he might go to heaven and get his reward in
the land where there is no pain!

"I wonder," mused the Martian, "did the grim spectre of death finally
instill a grain of scepticism into his mind?"

Later, in the quiet of his chambers, he reviews the day's
impressions--cruelty, hate, fear, jealousy, racial antagonism, poverty,
luxury, disease, pain, superstition, church, religion, and intolerance.

"If we suppose that the universe is the creation of an Omnipotent and
Benevolent God, it becomes necessary to ask how pain and evil arise.
Pain and evil are either real or unreal. If they are real then God, who,
being omnipotent, was bound by no limitations and constrained by no
necessities, willfully created them. But the being who willfully creates
pain and evil cannot be benevolent. If they are unreal, then the error
which we make when we think them real is a real error. There is no doubt
that we believe we suffer. If the belief is erroneous, then it follows
that God willfully called falsehood into existence and deliberately
involved us in unnecessary error. It follows once again that God cannot
be benevolent.

"If we regard pain and evil as due to the wickedness of man and not as
the creation of God, we are constrained to remember that man himself is
one of God's creations (God being conceived as all creative), and
received his wickedness, or his capacity for it, from whom? If we say
that man had no wickedness to begin with but willfully generated
wickedness for himself, we have to face the double difficulty of
accounting for: (a) How man, who is an emanation from God, can will with
a will of his own which is not also a piece of God's will; and (b) how a
benevolent God could, assuming pain and evil to be a purely human
creation, deliberately allow them to be introduced into a world that
knew them not, when it was open to Him to prevent such introductions."
(_C. E. M. Joad, "Mind and Matter."_)

He had seen that crime and immorality exist now, just as they had
existed before the belief in one personal God, and just as they promise
to exist beyond our time. He had scrutinized evidence revealing the
incontestable fact that most criminals were religious, and absolutely
and proportionately, a smaller number of criminals were non-believers in
a personal deity. Judging by these alone, a belief in a benevolent,
loving, omniscient, omnipotent, and compassionate Being could not be
sustained. Furthermore, if such a God ever existed, he certainly would
have revealed his true religion to the first man, Adam. If he required
prayer to satisfy his vanity, he surely would have told Adam how, when,
why, and where to pray. Then again, once having neglected to inform his
first model about all this, since He is omnipotent, he would certainly
have instilled into the minds of men "the" true creed so that no doubt
could have ever entered into any one's mind. What a universe of
suffering He would have saved!

The Martian is aware that a great number of earthlings hold that every
event must have a cause, therefore the Universe must have had a cause,
which cause was God. Everything as it now exists in the universe is the
result of an infinite series of causes and effects. Everything that
happens is the result of something else that happened previously and so
on backwards to all eternity. Applying this reasoning that everything is
the effect of some cause, and that a cause is the effect of some other
causes, the theists work back from effect to cause and from cause to
effect until they reach a First Cause. By predicating a First Cause,
however, the theist removes the mystery a stage further back. This
First Cause they assume to be a cause that was not caused and this First
Cause is God. Such a belief is a logical absurdity, and is an example of
the ancient custom of creating a mystery to explain a mystery. If
everything must have a cause, then the First Cause must be caused and
therefore: Who made God? To say that this First Cause always existed is
to deny the basic assumption of this "Theory." Moreover, if it is
reasonable to assume a First Cause as having always existed, why is it
unreasonable to assume that the materials of the universe always
existed? To explain the unknown by the known is a logical procedure; to
explain the known by the unknown is a form of theological lunacy.

The effect noted in any particular case is not of necessity related to a
single cause, and science gives no assurance that causes and effects can
be traced backward to a simple First Cause. A man is so unfortunate as
to contract pneumonia. What is the cause? An infection of the
respiratory tract by the pneumococcus. It is not quite so simple as to
ultimate causation. The person afflicted was harboring these germs in
his nose and throat, and his resistance was weakened by wetting his
feet. The day was cold and his shoes were thin. The humidity and
temperature were such that rain fell. The temperature and humidity were
caused by air currents hundreds of miles distant from the scene, and so
ad infinitum. In this series of complications where may we discern a
first cause? When applied to the much more difficult problem of physical
phenomena, we can conceive of an endless cycle of causes, but we cannot
conceive of a First Cause. "Cause and effect are not two separate
things, they are the same thing viewed under two separate aspects.... If
cause and effect are the expressions of a relation, and if they are not
two things, but only one, under two aspects, 'cause' being the name for
the related powers of the factors, and 'effect' the name for their
assemblage, to talk, as does the theist, of working back along the chain
of causes until we reach God, is nonsense." (_Chapman Cohen: "Theism or
Atheism."_)

A great many theists attempt to deduce the existence of an invisible
creator and ruler of the universe from the visible features of nature
such as the design, regularity of movement and structure, and the
various aspects of beauty which one may find in studying natural
objects. This argument from design in nature has been overruled by a
study of the evolutionary processes. Paley based his argument on the
assertion of a mind behind phenomena, the workings of which could be
seen in the forms of animal life. The theists no longer use Paley's
original arguments, but a great deal of the theistic arguments are still
based on his assumptions. From the humanistic point of view, and the
theist bases his entire arguments from design in nature from the
humanistic view, an understanding of the merciless character of organic
evolution shows clearly that the forces at work in nature are full of
waste, there are numerous plans that are futile, there is an unrelenting
preying of one form of life upon the other, and it is not always the
"higher" form that is victor; there are myriads of living organisms
coming to life only to perish before reaching an age at which they can
play their part in the perpetuation of the species; and there is a
universe of pain and misery that serves no useful purpose. The impartial
eye of science observes ugliness as well as beauty, disorder as well as
order, in nature. If there is evidence of design in a rose, there is at
least as much evidence of design in the tubercle bacillus, and the
tetanus bacillus. Whatever in nature produced the peacock produced the
itch-mite; whatever produced man produced the spirochete of syphilis. If
this earth is evolving for the better, the past is still vivid in all
its cruelty. The old and familiar argument from design and beauty in
nature is so inconsistent with the facts at hand, that most theists have
abandoned this attitude, and the retreat from this position has been
turned into a veritable rout by the steady advance of scientific
knowledge. God could by exercising His omnipotence reveal His existence
with overpowering conviction at any moment; yet, men have been searching
for centuries for just the slightest evidence of His presence.

The Martian, moreover, holds that the entire argument is irrelevant, for
even if he grants that there is a supernatural being that fashions that
which we behold at work in the universe, how can we say that he designed
all this without first knowing what his intention was? Only by knowing
the intention in the mind of a supernatural being before the act, can we
infer that something was designed. When the theist finds intention and
design in nature he is but reading his own feeling and desires into
nature. Considering the universe as a whole, the Martian fails to find
anything that suggests a conscious and purposive god, and certainly
nothing to suggest a being that considers the welfare of man. The
individual is not much interested in God as manifested in nature, what
he is vainly seeking is _God as Providence_; he is seeking an
intelligence that his clergy tell him is devoted to his welfare, an
intelligence that will guide his stumbling efforts, that will relieve
him from war and misery, that will shield the innocent from pain and
poverty. He finds that his clergy cannot point to one clear trace of the
action of God in human affairs. In the whole long record of man's career
the finger of God cannot be found pointing to one well-substantiated
fact.

The Martian considers the theistic argument that it would be impossible
to have an orderly universe merely resulting from the inherent
properties of natural forces, and that "directivity" is necessary to
keep the universe on its present track. Keeping in mind the scientific
conception of the universe and the knowledge at hand concerning the
atoms and their properties, it is inconceivable that any other
arrangement than the present one should have resulted. The Martian
cannot marvel as most earthlings do that the present order exists as it
does; the marvel to him would be if any other order should be or that
any radical alteration in it should occur. He perceives that the state
of the universe at any moment is the result of all the conditions then
prevailing, and that the natural forces possess the capacity to produce
the universe as we see it. It matters not what the ultimate nature of
these forces may be, electrons, protons, electricity, or wave energy;
these material forces possess the capacity to produce the universe as we
see it. If these forces do not possess this capacity it is indeed
difficult for the Martian to conceive in what way even a "directing and
supreme mathematician" an "ultimate," or any supernatural power however
designated could produce this capacity. Unless the capacity for
producing the universe as we see it existed in the atoms themselves, no
amount of direction could have produced it. The property of the atom and
its combinations to produce the material universe is therefore inherent
in the atoms themselves and does not necessitate the operation of a
deity. The order manifest in the universe is the necessary consequence
of the persistence of force. If a supernatural, intelligent force
existed, the Martian believes that the claims of the theist could in no
way be better substantiated than if this controlling force would in some
way manifest an inhibitive influence and prevent certain things
occurring which would have transpired but for his interference. Such
manifestations have not occurred. It is impossible for the theist to
show any instance in which the normal consequences of known forces did
not transpire in which the aberration could not be accounted for by the
operation of other known forces.
