as pious frauds are legalised by his system of religion. If he becomes a
mystic, he looks upon the ceremonial and the moral law as restrictions
imposed by an Almighty Power. The omission of the one is a sin almost, if
not quite, as bad as a breach, of the other. The advent of Mahdi is the
good time when all such restrictions shall be removed, when the utmost
freedom shall be allowed. Thus the moral sense, in many cases, becomes
deadened to an extent such as those who are not in daily contact with these
people can hardly credit. The practice of "takia," religious compromise,
and the legality of "muta'h" or temporary marriages, have done much to
demoralise the Shia'h community. The following words of a recent author
descriptive of the Shia'h system are in the main true, though they do not
apply to each individual in that system:--

    "There can be no stronger testimony of the corrupting power and the
    hard and hopeless bondage of the orthodox creed, than that men should
    escape from it into a system which established falsehood as the supreme
    law of conduct, and regarded the reduction of men to the level of swine
    as the goal of human existence."[76]

The Mutazilites, or Seceders, were once an influential body. They do not
exist as a separate sect now. An account of them will be given in the next
chapter.

In the doctrine of the Imamat, common to all the offshoots of the Shia'h
sect, is to be found the chief point of difference between the Sunni and
the Shia'h, a difference so great that there is no danger of even a
political union between these two great branches of Islam. I have already
described, too, how the Shia'hs reject the Sunnat, though they do not
reject Tradition. A good deal of ill-blood is still kept up by the
recollection--a recollection kept alive by the annual recurrence of the
Muharram fast--of the sad {85} fate of 'Ali and his sons. The Sunnis are
blamed for the work of their ancestors in the faith, whilst the Khalifs Abu
Bakr, Omar, and Osman are looked upon as usurpers. Not to them was
committed the wonderful ray of light. In the possession of that alone can
any one make good a claim to be the Imam, the Guide of the Believers. The
terrible disorders of the early days of Islam can only be understood when
we realise to some extent the passionate longing which men felt for a
spiritual head--an Imam. It was thought to be impossible that Muhammad, the
last--the seal--of the prophets should leave the Faithful without a guide,
who would be the interpreter of the will of Allah.

We here make a slight digression to show that this feeling extends beyond
the Shia'h sect, and is of some importance in its bearing upon the Eastern
Question. Apart from the superhuman claims for the Imam, what he is as a
ruler to the Shia'h, the Khalif is to the Sunni--the supreme head in Church
and State, the successor of the Prophet, the Conservator of Islam as made
known in the Quran, the Sunnat and the Ijma' of the early Mujtahidin. To
administer the laws, the administrator must have a divine sanction. Thus
when the Ottoman ruler, Selim the First, conquered Egypt, (A.D. 1516) he
sought and obtained, from an old descendant of the Baghdad Khalifs, the
transfer of the title to himself, and in this way the Sultans of Turkey
became the Khalifs of Islam. Whether Mutawakal Billal, the last titular
Khalif of the house of 'Abbas, was right or wrong in thus transferring the
title is not my purpose now to discuss. I only adduce the fact to show how
it illustrates the feeling of the need of a Pontiff--a divinely appointed
Ruler. Strictly speaking, according to Muhammadan law, the Sultans are not
Khalifs, for it is clearly laid down in the Traditions that the Khalif (or
the Imam) must be of the tribe of the Quraish, to which the Prophet himself
belonged.

Ibn-i-Umr relates that the Prophet said:--"The Khalifs shall be in the
Quraish tribe as long as there are two {86} persons in it, one to rule and
another to serve."[77] "It is a necessary condition that the Khalif should
be of the Quraish tribe."[78] Such quotations might be multiplied, and they
tend to show that it is not at all incumbent on orthodox Sunnis, other than
the Turks, to rush to the rescue of the Sultan, whilst to the Shia'hs he is
little better than a heretic. Certainly they would never look upon him as
an Imam, which personage is to them in the place of a Khalif. In countries
not under Turkish rule, the Khutbah, or prayer for the ruler, said on
Fridays in the mosques, is said for the "ruler of the age," or for the
Amir, or whatever happens to be the title of the head of the State. Of late
years it has become more common in India to say it for the Sultan. This is
not, strictly speaking, according to Muhammadan law, which declares that
the Khutbah can only be said with the permission of the ruler, and as in
India that ruler is the British Government, the prayers should be said for
the Queen. Evidently the law never contemplated large bodies of Musalmans
residing anywhere but where the influence of the Khalif extended.

In thus casting doubt on the legality of the claim made by Turkish Sultans
to the Khalifate of Islam, I do not deny that the Law of Islam requires
that there should be a Khalif. Unfortunately for Islam, there is nothing in
its history parallel to the conflict of Pope and Emperor, of Church and
State. "The action and re-action of these powerful and partially
independent forces, their resistance to each other, and their ministry to
each other, have been of incalculable value to the higher activity and life
of Christendom." In Islam the Khalif is both Pope and Emperor. Ibn Khaldoun
states that the difference between the Khalif and any other ruler is that
the former rules according to divine, the latter according to human law.
The Prophet in transmitting his sacred authority to the Khalifs, his
successors, conveyed to {87} them absolute powers. Khalifs can be
assassinated, murdered, banished, but so long as they reign anything like
constitutional liberty is impossible. It is a fatal mistake in European
politics and an evil for Turkey to recognize the Sultan as the Khalif of
Islam, for, if he be such, Turkey can never take any step forward to
newness of political life.[79]

This, however, is a digression from the subject of this chapter.

There has been from the earliest ages of Islam a movement which exists to
this day. It is a kind of mysticism, known as Sufiism. It has been
especially prevalent among the Persians. It is a re-action from the burden
of a rigid law, and a wearisome ritual. It has now existed for a thousand
years, and if it has the element of progress in it, if it is the salt of
Islam some fruit should now be seen. But what is Sufiism? The term Sufi is
most probably derived from the Arabic word Suf, "wool," of which material
the garments worn by Eastern ascetics used to be generally made. Some
persons, however, derive it from the Persian, Suf, "pure," or the Greek
[Greek: sophia], "wisdom." Tasawwuf, or Sufiism, is the abstract form of
the word, and is, according to Sir W. Jones, and other learned
orientalists, a figurative mode, borrowed mainly from the Indian
philosophers of the Vedanta school, of expressing the fervour of devotion.
The chief idea is that the souls of men differ in degree, but not {88} in
kind, from the Divine Spirit, of which they are emanations, and to which
they will ultimately return. The Spirit of God is in all He has made, and
it in Him. He alone is perfect love, beauty, etc.--hence love to him is the
only _real_ thing; all else is illusion. Sa'di says: "I swear by the truth
of God, that when He showed me His glory all else was illusion." This
present life is one of separation from the beloved. The beauties of nature,
music, and art revive in men the divine idea, and recall their affections
from wandering from Him to other objects. These sublime affections men must
cherish, and by abstraction concentrate their thoughts on God, and so
approximate to His essence, and finally reach the highest stage of
bliss--absorption into the Eternal. The true end and object of human life
is to lose all consciousness of individual existence--to sink "in the ocean
of Divine Life, as a breaking bubble is merged into the stream on the
surface of which it has for a moment risen."[80]

Sufis, who all accept Islam as a divinely established religion, suppose
that long before the creation of the world a contract was made by the
Supreme Soul with the assembled world of spirits, who are parts of it. Each
spirit was addressed separately, thus: "Art thou not with thy Lord?" that
is, bound to him by a solemn contract. To this they all answered with one
voice, "Yes."

Another account says that the seed of theosophy (m'arifat) was placed in
the ground in the time of Adam; that the plant {89} came forth in the days
of Noah, was in flower when Abraham was alive and produced fruit before
Moses passed away. The grapes of this noble plant were ripe in the time of
Jesus, but it was not till the age of Muhammad that pure wine was made from
them. Then those intoxicated with it, having attained to the highest degree
of the knowledge of God, could forget their own personality and
say:--"Praise to me, is there any greater than myself? I am the Truth."

The following verse of the Quran is quoted by Sufis in support of their
favourite dogma--the attaining to the knowledge of God: "When God said to
the angels, 'I am about to place a viceregent on the earth,' they said:
'Wilt Thou place therein one who shall commit abomination and shed blood?
Nay; we celebrate Thy praise and holiness.' God answered them, 'Verily I
know that ye wot not of.'" (Sura ii. 28.) It is said that this verse proves
that, though the great mass of mankind would commit abomination, some would
receive the divine light and attain to a knowledge of God. A Tradition
states that David said: "'Oh Lord! why hast Thou created mankind?' God
replied, 'I am a hidden treasure, and I would fain become known.'" The
business of the mystic is to find this treasure, to attain to the Divine
light and the true knowledge of God.

The earlier Muhammadan mystics sought to impart life to a rigid and formal
ritual, and though the seeds of Pantheism were planted in their system from
the first, they maintained that they were orthodox. "Our system of
doctrine," says Al-Junaid, "is firmly bound up with the dogmas of the
faith, the Quran and the Traditions." There was a moral earnestness about
many of these men which frequently restrained the arm of unrighteous power,
and their sayings, often full of beauty, show that they had the power of
appreciating the spiritual side of life. Some of these sentences are worthy
of any age. "As neither meat nor drink," says one, "profit the diseased
body, so no warning avails {90} to touch the heart full of the love of this
world." "The work of a holy man doth not consist in this, that he eats
grain, and clothes himself in wool, but in the knowledge of God and
submission to His will." "Thou deservest not the name of a learned man till
thy heart is emptied of the love of this world." "Hide thy good deeds as
closely as thou wouldst hide thy sins." A famous mystic was brought into
the presence of the Khalif Harun-ur-Rashid who said to him: "How great is
thy abnegation?" He replied, "Thine is greater." "How so?" said the Khalif.
"Because I make abnegation of this world, and thou makest abnegation of the
next." The same man also said: "The display of devotional works to please
men is hypocrisy, and acts of devotion done to please men are acts of
polytheism."

But towards the close of the second century of the Hijra, this earlier
mysticism developed into Sufiism. Then Al-Hallaj taught in Baghdad thus: "I
am the Truth. There is nought in Paradise but God. I am He whom I love, and
He whom I love is I; we are two souls dwelling in one body. When thou seest
me, thou seest Him; and when thou seest Him thou seest me." This roused the
opposition of the orthodox divines by whom Al-Hallaj was condemned to be
worthy of death. He was then by order of the Khalif flogged, tortured and
finally beheaded. Thus died one of the early martyrs of Sufiism, but it
grew in spite of bitter persecution.

In order to understand the esoteric teaching of Sufiistic poetry, it is
necessary to remember that the perceptive sense is the traveller, the
knowledge of God the goal, the doctrines of this ascent, or upward progress
is the Tarikat, or the road. The extinction of self is necessary before any
progress can be made on that road. A Sufi poet writes:--

 "Plant one foot upon the neck of self,
  The other in thy Friend's domain;
  In everything His presence see,
  For other vision is in vain."

{91}

Sa'di in the Bustan says: "Art thou a friend of God? Speak not of self, for
to speak of God and of self is infidelity." Shaikh Abu'l-Faiz, a great poet
and a friend of the Emperor Akbar, from whom he received the honourable
title of Malik-ush-Shu'ara--Master of the Poets, says: "Those who have not
closed the door on existence and non-existence reap no advantage from the
calm of this world and of the world to come." Khusrau, another well-known
poet says:--

 "I have become Thou: Thou art become I,
  I am the body, Thou the soul;
  Let no one henceforth say
  That I am distinct from Thee, and Thou from me."

The fact is, that Persian poetry is almost entirely Sufiistic. It is
difficult for the uninitiated to arrive at the esoteric meaning of these
writings. Kitman, or the art of hiding from the profane religious beliefs,
often contrary to the revealed law, has always been a special quality of
the East. Pantheistic doctrines are largely inculcated.[81] Thus:--

 "I was, ere a name had been named upon earth;
  Ere one trace yet existed of aught that has birth;
  When the locks of the Loved One streamed forth for a sign,
  And Being was none, save the Presence Divine!
  Named and name were alike emanations from Me,
  Ere aught that was 'I' existed, or 'We.'"

The poet then describes his fruitless search for rest and peace in
Christianity, Hinduism, and the religion of the Parsee. Even Islam gave him
no satisfaction, for--

 "Nor above nor beneath came the Loved One to view,
  I toiled to the summit, wild, pathless and lone,
  Of the globe-girding Kaf[82]:--but the 'Anka[83] had flown!
  {92}
  The sev'nth heaven I traversed--the sev'nth heaven explored,
  But in neither discern'd I the court of the Lord!
  I question'd the Pen and the Tablet of Fate,
  But they whisper'd not where He pavilions His state;
  My vision I strain'd; but my God-scanning eye
  No trace, that to Godhead belongs, could descry.
  My glance I bent inward; within my own breast,
  Lo, the vainly sought elsewhere, the Godhead confess'd!
  In the whirl of its transport my spirit was toss'd,
  _Till each atom of separate being I lost_."

These are the words of the greatest authority among the Sufis, the famous
Maulana Jelal-ud-din Rumi, founder of the order of the Maulavi Darwishes.
He also relates the following story: "One knocked at the door of the
beloved, and a voice from within said: 'Who is there?' Then he answered,
'_It is I._' The voice replied, 'This house will not hold _me_ and _thee_!'
So the door remained shut. The lover retired to a wilderness, and spent
some time in solitude, fasting, and prayer. One year elapsed, when he again
returned, and knocked at the door. 'Who is there?' said the voice. The
lover answered, '_It is thou._' Then the door was opened."

The great object of life, then, being to escape from the hindrances to pure
love and to a return to the divine essence, the Talib, or seeker, attaches
himself to a Murshid, or teacher. If he prosecutes his studies according to
Sufiistic methods he now often enters one of the many orders of Darwishes.
After due preparation under his Murshid, he is allowed to enter on the
road. He then becomes a Salik, or traveller, whose business henceforth is
suluk that is, devotion to one idea--the knowledge of God. In this road
there are eight stages. (1) Service. Here he must serve God and obey the
Law for he is still in bondage. (2) Love. It is supposed that now the
Divine influence has so attracted his soul that he really loves God. (3)
Seclusion. Love having expelled all worldly desires, he arrives at this
stage, and passes his time in meditation on the deeper doctrines {93} of
Sufiism regarding the Divine nature. (4) Knowledge. The meditation in the
preceding stage, and the investigation of the metaphysical theories
concerning God, His nature, His attributes and the like make him an
'Arif--one who knows. (5) Ecstasy. The mental excitement caused by such
continued meditation on abstruse subjects produces a kind of frenzy, which
is looked upon as a mark of direct illumination of the heart from God. It
is known as Hal--the state; or Wajd--ecstasy. Arrival at this stage is
highly valued, for it is the certain entrance to the next. (6) Haqiqat--the
Truth. Now to the traveller is revealed the true nature of God, now he
learns the reality of that which he has been for so long seeking. This
admits him to the highest stage in his journey, as far as this life is
concerned. (7) That stage is Wasl--union with God.

 "There was a door to which I found no key;
  There was a veil past which I could not see:
  Some little talk of Me and Thee
  There seemed--and then no more of Thee and Me."

He cannot, in this life, go beyond that, and very few reach that exalted
stage. Thus arose a "system of Pantheism, which represents joy and sorrow,
good and evil, pleasure and pain as manifestations of one changeless
essence." Religion, as made known by an outward revelation, is, to the few
who reach this stage, a thing of the past. Even its restraints are not
needed. The soul that is united to God can do no evil. The poet Khusrau
says: "Love is the object of my worship, what need have I of Islam?"

Death ensues and with it the last stage is reached. (8) It is
Fana--extinction. The seeker after all his search, the traveller after all
his wearisome journey passes behind the veil and finds--nothing! As the
traveller proceeds from stage to stage, the restraints of an objective
revelation and of an outward system are less and less heeded. "The {94}
religion of the mystic consists in his immediate communication with God,
and when once this has been established, the value of ecclesiastical forms,
and of the historical part of religion, becomes doubtful." What law can
bind the soul in union with God, what outward system impose any trammels on
one who, in the "Ecstasy," has received from Him, who is the Truth, the
direct revelation of His own glorious nature? Moral laws and ceremonial
observances have only an allegorical signification. Creeds are but fetters
cunningly devised to limit the flight of the soul; all that is objective in
religion is a restraint to the reason of the initiated.[84]

Pantheistic in creed, and too often Antinomian in practice, Sufiism
possesses no regenerative power in Islam. "It is not a substantive religion
such as shapes the life of races or of nations, it is a state of opinion."
No Muslim State makes a national profession of Sufiism.

In spite of all its dogmatic utterances, in spite of much that is sublime
in its idea of the search after light and truth, Sufiism ends in utter
negation of all separate existence. The pantheism of the Sufis, this
esoteric doctrine of Islam, as a moral doctrine leads to the same
conclusions as materialism, "the negation of human liberty, the
indifference to actions and the legitimacy of all temporal enjoyments."

The result of Sufiism has been the establishment of a large number of
religious orders known as Darwishes.[85] These men are looked upon with
disfavour by the {95} orthodox; but they flourish nevertheless, and in
Turkey at the present day have great influence. There are in Constantinople
two hundred Takiahs, or monasteries. The Darwishes are not organized with
such regularity, nor subject to discipline so severe as that of the
Christian Monastic orders; but they surpass them in number. Each order has
its own special mysteries and practices by which its members think they can
obtain a knowledge of the secrets of the invisible world. They are also
called Faqirs--poor men, not, however, always in the sense of being in
temporal want, but as being poor in the sight of God. As a matter of fact
the Darwishes of many of the orders do not beg, and many of the Takiahs are
richly endowed. They are divided into two great classes, the Ba Shara'
(with the Law) Darwishes; and the Be Shara' (without the Law). The former
prefer to rule their conduct according to the law of Islam and are called
the Salik--travellers on the path (tariqat) to heaven; the latter though
they call themselves Muslims do not conform to the law, and are called Azad
(free), or Majzub (abstracted), a term which signifies their renunciation
of all worldly cares and pursuits.
