is good reason for taking this as the sense here. The word underneath
here is translated by several different words in other passages.

Where a word in one language may be translated by any one of several
words the general sense of the passage must decide which one correctly
expresses the meaning. Here the meaning must be gotten from the whole
trend of New Testament teaching. Like the Israelites during the plagues
that came to Egypt these faithful ones will be kept untouched through
this terrible time that is to come.

The _Laodicea_ group is to be talked to plainly by one who is a true,
faithful witness in dealing with His people's faults, and who has all
the authority of God in doing so. This is the second group that actually
has not one good thing to be commended. There is no false teaching, no
compromise with evil; they are simply _asleep_. Rich, influential,
self-satisfied, grown fat and sleek,--so they seem to their neighbours
and themselves. Wretched, poor, blind, naked,--so they are. And the
chastening threatened will be of the severe radical sort that strong
love insists upon.


A Heart-breaking Sight.

Here then is the picture of the whole Church as seen by the eyes of
searching flame. There is a mixture of bad and good, active bad, active
good, and sleepy indifference. There is a Church within the Church. But
the bad is bad enough and big enough to endanger seriously the
usefulness of the whole as a light-bearer.

The glass of the lantern is so smoked and cobwebby that it is more
useless than useful to the light inside, and the crowd outside in the
dark. The uselessness threatens what usefulness is left. Smokiness is
contagious. Cobwebs grow thicker and hold more dust.

Two Churches are true and pure in the midst of sore opposition. Two are
corrupt in the very worst way. Three, including the leader, are orthodox
in form, but indifferent to Jesus Himself, or asleep, or dead; three
degrees of the same thing,--indifference, sleep, death.

In all of these five there are those who, like Ezekiel's companions,
"sigh and cry over the abominations that are going on," but they are
helpless to stay the sweep of the tide. They are the salt that is saving
the lump so far. Even Sodom would have been saved by ten righteous.

It is plainly said to the leader Church that it is no longer of use as a
candlestick, except a change come. It fails to give out the light. It is
being carried along, patiently borne with _for its own sake_. It is
failing at this point in the mission. The smoking flax sending out its
irritating smoke in place of clear light is not yet quenched. The Holy
Spirit life within is being sorely grieved, but is not yet put entirely
out.

And this is only one. Four others are plainly in much worse fix.
Five-sevenths are failing. That bit of preservative salt would seem to
be working to its full capacity.

This is the picture given us here by our Lord Himself. John would never
have dared make such a terrific arraignment of his own accord. It is a
picture of the whole Church at the beginning of the First century.

How is it at the beginning of the Twentieth? A thousand million people,
two-thirds of the race, pretty freely supplied with the light of western
oil and of gunpowder, with the help of the western sewing machine, and
with the guidance of western learning and skill, but to whom with minor
exceptions no scant ray of this light has yet gotten, these make answer.
That smokiness would seem to be rather dense.

The non-Christian crowds in so-called Christian lands, the overwhelming
majority, to whom the name of Jesus has no more practical meaning than
other foreign names, Shanghai, or Tokyo, or Calcutta,--these make
answer. The light doesn't seem to have been able to get through and out
much, even near the candlestick.

The Church itself, when it has sometimes forgotten its statistical
tables long enough to look thoughtfully into this old Patmos
looking-glass, has now and then made answer, in a few of its thoughtful
leaders, while the rank and file push on absorbed in their Ephesian or
Sardisian or Thyatiran way.

There's a striking companion bit to this in Ezekiel's vision.[66] That
messenger to the exiled colony by the Chebar had first of all the vision
of God that completely overwhelmed him. Then he is taken in spirit to
Jerusalem, and shown things as they were, through God's eyes. The
heathen idols were set up in the very temple of God, so actually
stimulating among the people the horribly gross, unnamable impurities
connected with their worship. This was done in the open, with no
pretence at concealment.

Then in the vision he digs "into the wall" to see the hidden things that
are being done. There he sees every sort of creeping, crawling, slimy,
repulsive animal pictured on the walls of this secret chamber, and the
leaders of the people burning incense and worshipping.

This he is told is a picture of the _inner hearts_ of the men who are
the leaders of the nation. For dramatic intensity it would be hard to
equal this. The imaginations of their hearts are as the unclean snakes
and beasts that are found only in the damp, unwholesome slime and ooze
of swamp and stagnant pond.

And this is God's light-bearing nation to all the earth. And these are
the leaders! But there's yet worse. The mothers and wives and daughters
of the nation, the real moulders of the nation's life and character, are
seen pouring out their very hearts over a heathen idol, with all the
horrible evil practices included in its worship. And then a group of men
are shown in the holy temple standing with their backs to God and His
temple and worshipping the sun.

Under these four items are pointed out the impurity and violence, the
injustice and oppression, that mark the people. It is the inner heart
life of the nation that is being pictured so vividly. But in the midst
of all this are those who are broken-hearted over these conditions. And
as the time of judgment comes in the vision these are marked and spared,
though they see the work of judgment on every hand.

Such is the tremendous scene depicted by Ezekiel. It will be seen at
once what a striking parallel it presents to the scene in this
Revelation book with the new light-bearer to the nations of the earth.
One would never dare make such an arraignment of his own accord. It is
humbling and heart-breaking to the last degree simply to repeat what is
spoken here by our Lord Himself.

Clearly the Patmos picture is not only of the Church then, but ever
since, and now. And the simple law of momentum in sliding down hill will
make it an accurate picture of the Church at the end, the future Church.

The colouring changes at different times in different places, the black
getting intenser, pot black, and the light shining out more brightly by
contrast. But the picture remains essentially as painted on Patmos.

The warnings so faithfully given run a sliding scale outward and
downward in five degrees. If the Church continue as it is, it is told
here that it will be rejected as a light-holder. Its privilege and
opportunity as God's messenger will be taken away.[67]

Then Christ will fight against it as an enemy,[68] it will be given over
to a time of terrible tribulation,[69] it will be treated as prey to be
robbed and plundered,[70] and it will be rejected, spewed out of the
mouth, as personally disgusting.[71]

Yet in all this plain speech there is no bitterness, only grief, only
tender pleading. The plain bluntness is the language of love that yearns
to save even yet, and that waits with untold patience hoping for a
change.


Wooing Promises.

But it is noticeable that, while the warning is to the corporate Church,
the plea and promise that persists throughout is to the individual. He
that is _willing_ to, let him hear and heed and be controlled by the
Spirit's message.

There are two groups that have remained faithful. There are scattered
through the other five those who are faithful. And there are no doubt
many who feel the pull to be true but are yielding to the strong
undertow of the rising tide by which they are being carried.

The coupled promise and plea that call out so pleadingly to these at the
close of each message are, "to him that overcometh." This word
"overcometh" is very significant. It is one of the characteristic notes
of these messages and indeed of this entire book. It is one of that sort
of word that sums up a whole situation in itself.

There is opposition. There is conflict because some won't yield to the
opposition. And the result of the conflict varies. Some are overcome by
the evil; they go over to the enemy, body and soul. Some wabble. They
slip along the line of least resistance, secretly holding on to some few
ragged remnants of convictions, but not letting these affect their
standing or comfort or particularly their profits.

Some overcome evil. There is struggle tense and continued, quickened
breath, moist brow, tightened nerves, the stain of blood, a scar here
and there, and heart-breaking experiences. But they fight on, and
victory comes. And the evil is less, weakened in its hold on this
companion and that neighbour. They get the victory over evil.

There's a wondrous promise to these. It is as though the treasure box is
placed at their disposal. It is a seven-fold promise. Every overcomer
will receive all that is contained in these seven promises. Note this
seven-fold promise: He that overcometh will have everlasting life,[72]
and this is emphasized by the reverse statement, "will not be hurt of
the second death."[73]

He will be admitted into the sweets of intimate fellowship with his
Lord, hidden from all save those in this inner circle. And will receive
a new name, the family name, that is an inheritance in the family of
God, joint heir with Jesus Christ.[74] He will have the privilege of
serving with the King in the blessed Kingdom time coming.

And with this goes the word, "I will give him _the morning star_."[75]
Jesus calls Himself "the bright, the morning star."[76] The morning star
rises in the dark of night after midnight and ushers in the new day. He
who is in touch of heart with Jesus as the night deepens to the dawn
will (probably) have an intimation in his inner spirit of the glad
coming of the Morning Star that ushers in earth's new day.

The overcomer will be made perfect in character, and find his name not
only in the family book, but mentioned by Christ personally to His
Father before the angels.[77] He will be admitted into the innermost
circle of the King and be reckoned among the dependables.[78] And he
will have closest fellowship with Christ in the administration of the
wondrous kingdom.[79]

It will be seen that these promises overlap, the same thing being put
now positively, now negatively, and being repeated in differing words to
different groups. Each promise touches the characteristic trait of the
group spoken of. The Ephesians, who had many things but lacked the vital
thing, are wooed with the promise of life itself, which is only through
touch with Jesus Himself.

Smyrna in its suffering is cheered with the prospect of suffering no
more. The Pergamum overcomer is wooed away from intimacy of friendship
with evil to intimacy of friendship with the coming King. They who
resist the evil Jezebel rule in Thyatira will have the privilege of
ruling with the King. Those in Sardis who hunger and thirst after a pure
heart will have the longing fully satisfied.

Those who have proven dependable in the trying days in Philadelphia will
have the exquisite pleasure of being depended upon in the inner circle
as wholly trustworthy. Those in Laodicea who resist the current and
insist on letting the knocking pilgrim in for heart fellowship[80] will
find themselves in fellowship with Him on the throne.

It should be noticed that these promises are one promise, and that that
is the promise of everlasting life, of a purified perfected character,
and of the privilege of closest fellowship with the King Himself in the
coming Kingdom time.

These promises do not take up the matter of rewards for faithfulness in
service, such as our Lord speaks of in the twin parables of the pounds
and talents. The things promised here are the results of being saved by
the blood of Christ. The privilege of fellowship with the King during
the Kingdom time is included in salvation. All the redeemed will reign
over the earth.[81]

This is significant. Overcoming would seem to be the decisive evidence
of faith in Jesus Christ, the faith that receives everlasting life. It
takes opposition to let you know whether you are willing to accept
Christ. A man does not know whether he really believes Christ until he
is opposed in his believing, and opposed to the real hurting point. He
has just as much faith in Christ as he is willing to declare, and stand
by, and insist upon, _when he is under fire_. Opposition is the fire
test. Faith isn't faith unless it can stand the fire test.


The Decisive Trait of Faith.

The plain inference here is that he who doesn't overcome shows that he
really doesn't believe in his heart. And the natural result is that he
does not receive these things promised. That is, he is not saved because
he won't accept the Lord Jesus as his Saviour _when it comes to the fire
test_.

There are without doubt thousands in the Church who will be left behind
on the earth when our Lord Jesus catches up His own. This does not mean
necessarily that they will be lost. There will be another opportunity of
being saved for those living on the earth at that time. The Kingdom will
be a wonderful time of salvation. There will be a continuous revival of
the realest sort going on everywhere all the time.

But these would not have the blessed privilege of fellowship with the
King in the Kingdom, nor the blessedness of fuller resurrection life _at
this time_. That is reserved for those who by grace have believed on the
Lord Jesus, during His absence and continued rejection, in spite of the
fire of opposition.

It is notable that the Thyatiran message speaks of _great tribulation_
coming to that Church if it continue unchanged. And that the
Philadelphia Church is to be kept through "the hour of trial, that which
is to come upon the whole earth." Throughout the Scriptures mention is
made of a time of persecution coming at the end. The common term for it
is tribulation. It is called _the great tribulation_. There will be more
to be said about this again.

It is possible that it will be found that this Patmos message will have
special significance during that trying time at the end. But it should
be noted that it fits into the _spirit of opposition_ that is _always_
found where there is true, faithful witnessing.

The tribulation itself will be the time of intensest opposition carried
to the extreme of violent persecution. It will be the climax of
conditions always present, wherever there is faithful witnessing.
Faithfulness to Christ always arouses opposition.

The test of whether we really accept Christ and believe Him is not in
anything we say. It is not even in what we are in our lives when all
goes smoothly. It is in what we are in our lives _when opposed_, when it
costs criticism, ostracism, petty persecution, or more outright
persecution. This is our Lord's test of acceptance of Himself.

We have had many definitions of what it means to believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ. And these have been helpful in clearing the air and
helping us to a simple acceptance of Him. These definitions have touched
chiefly the _inner_ part of faith, the part we are conscious of.

Here is another definition. Here is the last word on the subject, the
authoritative word, from our Lord Jesus Himself. It tells what faith is
in its outward working, the part the _crowd_ sees. The faith that
accepts Jesus as Saviour accepts Him also as Lord.

That faith naturally rings true to Him under all circumstances. It rings
truest and clearest whenever opposition to Him is aroused, whether the
opposition of indifference, of criticism and sneer, or of persecution.

There are certain commonly accepted things that are in themselves only
good, but which are not _conclusive_ evidence that we really have saving
faith in the Saviour. The act of coming into Church membership whether
by confirmation, by an assent to questions regarding one's personal
faith, or by being baptized, the fact of membership in the Church, the
partaking of the Lord's supper, serving as an official of the Church in
pulpit or pew, faithful attendance, liberal support,--these things are
only good.

But they do not furnish conclusive evidence of one's acceptance of
Christ. It is quite possible to be carried along on the common current
in such things. There is clear evidence that many are. The decisive
thing, the test thing is this: _how we stand opposition_, the polite,
sneering sort, the more aggressive sort, or--if it come to that--the
violent sort. The _fire_ reveals every man's faith if there be any
there.

There are two fire tests. One is of our faith in Christ, as revealed in
the frictional fires of opposition. Whoever stands that test is caught
up into His presence when He comes, or goes at once into His presence if
our going precede His coming.

The second is of the love-spirit, how far it has been the very breath of
our life as revealed by the fire of His presence. For the love-spirit
means personal loyalty to Jesus, purity of heart, holiness of life,
steadiness of purpose, and the exquisite gentleness of patience in our
conduct toward all others.

These words of our Lord Jesus are very searching. This Patmos message
must have been a painful one for Him to give John, and painful for John
to repeat. It is painful for any one to repeat when its meaning is
understood. It should send one off into some quiet corner alone on his
knees with that great "search me" prayer of the Psalmist.[82]

Recently I was told a simple incident of one of the truly great
Christian men of our generation. He was at the head of one of the
largest concerns of our country employing thousands of men, but never
knowing any labor troubles. I remember the impression made on me a few
years ago at the time of his death, by the remark made to me by two
different men of this man's city, men that I think did not know each
other, or maybe very slightly. As I spoke of him each man said in a
subdued voice, "Oh, everybody in ---- loved Mr. ----!"

This incident was told by his son. The two were on a train together. The
father rose and went forward to another part of the train. As he went
out a man sitting opposite came over and spoke to the son. His flashy
manner of dress and the fact that he seemed to have been drinking
suggested the sort of man he was. He said to the son:
