All of the Twelve were men of modest means and humble stations in life;
they were men of moderate ability, and most of their names are still
obscure; yet they were the first leaders and the real organizers of the
most important society the world has known, and their names are yet to be
graven on the foundations of the holy city, the light of which is to fill
the earth with glory.



2. The Great Sermon. Ch. 6:20-49


    20 And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed
    _are_ ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 21 Blessed _are_
    ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed _are_ ye that
    weep now: for ye shall laugh. 22 Blessed are ye, when men shall
    hate you, and when they shall separate you _from their company_,
    and reproach you, and cast out your name as evil, for the Son of
    man's sake. 23 Rejoice in that day, and leap _for joy_: for
    behold, your reward is great in heaven; for in the same manner did
    their fathers unto the prophets. 24 But woe unto you that are
    rich! for ye have received your consolation. 25 Woe unto you, ye
    that are full now! for ye shall hunger. Woe _unto you_, ye that
    laugh now for ye shall mourn and weep. 26 Woe _unto you_, when all
    men shall speak well of you! for in the same manner did their
    fathers to the false prophets.


    27 But I say unto you that hear, Love your enemies, do good to
    them that hate you, 28 bless them that curse you, pray for them
    that despitefully use you. 29 To him that smiteth thee on the
    _one_ cheek offer also the other; and from him that taketh away
    thy cloak withhold not thy coat also. 30 Give to every one that
    asketh thee; and of him that taketh away thy goods ask them not
    again. 31 And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to
    them likewise. 32 And if ye love them that love you, what thank
    have ye? for even sinners love those that love them. 33 And if ye
    do good to them that do good to you, what thank have ye? for even
    sinners do the same. 34 And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to
    receive, what thank have ye? even sinners lend to sinners, to
    receive again as much. 35 But love your enemies, and do _them_
    good, and lend, never despairing; and your reward shall be great,
    and ye shall be sons of the Most High: for he is kind toward the
    unthankful and evil. 36 Be ye merciful, even as your Father is
    merciful. 37 And judge not, and ye shall not be judged: and
    condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: release, and ye shall
    be released: 38 give, and it shall be given unto you; good
    measure, pressed down, shaken together, running over, shall they
    give into your bosom. For with what measure ye mete it shall be
    measured to you again.


    39 And he spake also a parable unto them, Can the blind guide the
    blind? shall they not both fall into a pit? 40 The disciple is not
    above his teacher: but every one when he is perfected shall be as
    his teacher. 41 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy
    brother's eye, but considerest not the beam that is in thine own
    eye? 42 Or how canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me cast
    out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not
    the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first
    the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to
    cast out the mote that is in thy brother's eye. 43 For there is no
    good tree that bringeth forth corrupt fruit; nor again a corrupt
    tree that bringeth forth good fruit. 44 For each tree is known by
    its own fruit. For of thorns men do not gather figs, nor of a
    bramble bush gather they grapes. 45 The good man out of the good
    treasure of his heart bringeth forth that which is good; and the
    evil _man_ out of the evil _treasure_ bringeth forth that which is
    evil: for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaketh.


    46 And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
    say? 47 Every one that cometh unto me, and heareth my words, and
    doeth them, I will show you to whom he is like: 48 he is like a
    man building a house, who digged and went deep, and laid a
    foundation upon the rock: and when a flood arose, the stream brake
    against that house, and could not shake it: because it had been
    well builded. 49 But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man
    that built a house upon the earth without a foundation; against
    which the stream brake, and straightway it fell in; and the ruin
    of that house was great.


It might seem difficult to prove that the Sermon on the Mount is the same
as this discourse which has been called by some the Sermon on the Plain.
The exact relation between the sermon reported by Matthew and this great
address recorded by Luke has long been a subject of debate. It is quite
probable, however, that they are identical. After Jesus had chosen the
twelve apostles on the summit of the mountain where he had spent the
night, he descended to a level place on the mountain side and there met
the multitude and delivered the sermon which holds first place among all
the discourses in the world.

If this address is the same as the Sermon on the Mount, it is to be noted
that each account begins with beatitudes and closes with a warning, while
the main body of the discourse differs only in the aspect of truth
emphasized by the two writers. In Matthew the essence of the Christian
life is described as true righteousness in distinction from the formalism
of the Pharisees. In Luke the essence of righteousness is found in love.
Matthew was writing with Jewish Christians in mind. The Gospel of Luke was
for the world and many of his readers would not have appreciated the
distinction which Matthew was emphasizing. The word which would describe
the sermon as recorded by Matthew is spirituality, but the substance of
the Christian life as here indicated by Luke is charity.

The Beatitudes here recorded are four in number, while Matthew mentions
eight or nine; but Luke adds four woes, each one of which is in striking
contrast with the parallel Beatitude, vs. 20-26. The sermon begins,
therefore, by pronouncing blessings upon the followers of Christ and
contrasted woes upon those who reject him. Those who are declared to be
blessed are the poor, the hungry, the mourners, and the despised; while
woes are pronounced upon the rich, the satisfied, the joyous, and the
praised. It is, of course, understood that there are spiritual
implications in these different terms. Poverty, hunger, sorrow, reproach,
have no merit in themselves and issue in present and eternal blessedness
only when accompanied by humility, trust, and patience, and when endured
for the sake of Christ. So, too, there is no wrong in riches and
satisfaction and laughter and praise unless these are accompanied by the
selfishness and greed and frivolity and unworthiness with which they are
so often identified. By these blessings and woes the Master indicated the
real character as well as the abiding blessedness of those who are his
true disciples.

The burden of the discourse, vs. 27-45, sets forth the Christian life as
being in essence a life of love. This sermon on love might be accompanied
properly by the "hymn of love" composed by Paul, 1 Cor., ch. 13, and by
the "Scripture lesson" on love written by John, 1 John 4:7-21.

First then, in place of all revenge, vs. 27-30, Jesus established the
Golden Rule: "As ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise." V. 31. Then, in contrast with the self-interest and desire for
recompense which so often passes among men as charity, vs. 32-34, he
pointed to the perfect example of God and intimated that his mercy should
incline us to kindly judgments of our fellows, assuring us of the
boundless liberality with which our Father will reward our unselfish love.
Vs. 35-38.

The second portion of the main discussion, vs. 39-45, dwells still more
definitely upon the fault of unkindly judgments to which Jesus had just
referred and which constitutes such a common infraction of the law of
love. A man who is unkind in his criticisms and unconscious of his own
faults cannot help his fellow man; he is like a blind man trying to lead
the blind, like one in whose eye there is a beam trying to help one in
whose eye there is a mote. As good fruit is produced only by good trees,
only out of hearts full of love can real helpfulness come.

To warn men against calling themselves Christians while they do not
observe the law of love, and to encourage his disciples in faithfully
keeping his commandments, Jesus concluded this sermon with the familiar
figure of the two houses, founded one upon the sand and the other upon the
rock. Amid the storms and tempests and floods of the time of judgment,
only the latter will stand secure.



3. The Centurion of Capernaum. Ch. 7:1-10


    1 After he had ended all his sayings in the ears of the people, he
    entered into Capernaum.


    2 And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto him, was
    sick and at the point of death. 3 And when he heard concerning
    Jesus, he sent unto him elders of the Jews, asking him that he
    would come and save his servant. 4 And they, when they came to
    Jesus, besought him earnestly, saying, He is worthy that thou
    shouldest do this for him; 5 for he loveth our nation, and himself
    built us our synagogue. 6 And Jesus went with them. And when he
    was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him,
    saying unto him, Lord, trouble not thyself; for I am not worthy
    that thou shouldest come under my roof: 7 wherefore neither
    thought I myself worthy to come unto thee: but say the word, and
    my servant shall be healed. 8 For I also am a man set under
    authority, having under myself soldiers: and I say to this one,
    Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my
    servant, Do this, and he doeth it. 9 And when Jesus heard these
    things, he marvelled at him, and turned and said unto the
    multitude that followed him, I say unto you, I have not found so
    great faith, no, not in Israel. 10 And they that were sent,
    returning to the house, found the servant whole.


No more perfect picture of faith has been recorded than that in which Luke
sketches the centurion of Capernaum who sent to Jesus the request to heal
a favorite servant then lying at the door of death. This military
commander, a heathen by birth, was evidently a man of the same high
character as is attributed in the New Testament to all soldiers of a
similar rank. It may be helpful to notice some features of his faith which
was so great that our Lord "marvelled at him." First of all, the centurion
was confident that Jesus could cure, because of what he had heard
concerning our Lord. This is the very essence of faith, namely belief
founded upon evidence. Faith is not credulity or fancy or caprice; it is a
purely rational exercise of the mind; it is reasoning from the reports of
credible witnesses. The centurion had heard enough of the power and
goodness of Jesus to convince him of his ability to heal. Unbelief in the
face of evidence is stupidity or sin.

Again, the centurion revealed the sincerity of true faith. He had accepted
light as far as this had been revealed. He had been attracted by the pure
worship of Judaism and had shown his sympathy with its adherents by
building for them a synagogue. When one lives in accordance with the light
he has, more light is sure to break.

Then again, he revealed the humility of faith. He regarded himself as
unworthy to come into the presence of Jesus to present his request; and
when Jesus offered to come to his home, he sent word that he was not
worthy to have the Master come under his roof.

Most explicitly of all, he expressed the trust in Christ and the
dependence upon his power which characterize true faith. He said that it
was unnecessary for Jesus to come to his house; as a soldier and an
officer he knew what could be accomplished by a word of command; he knew
what it was to obey and to be obeyed, and he had accredited to Jesus such
control over the unseen powers of disease that he sent his surprising
message, "But say the word, and my servant shall be healed." It was just
this aspect of his faith which so impressed our Lord, and it is such
humble trust that he still regards with favor and is certain to reward. It
is not strange that they "that were sent, returning to the house, found
the servant whole," or that Luke rejoiced to tell this story which reveals
belief in Christ on the part of one who was found outside of Israel, a
belief which was prophetic of the blessings which faith was to bring to
men of all the nations in the world.



4. Jesus Raising the Widow's Son. Ch. 7:11-17


    11 And it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went to a city
    called Nain; and his disciples went with him, and a great
    multitude. 12 Now when he drew near to the gate of the city,
    behold, there was carried out one that was dead, the only son of
    his mother, and she was a widow: and much people of the city were
    with her. 13 And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her,
    and said unto her, Weep not. 14 And he came nigh and touched the
    bier: and the bearers stood still. And he said, Young man, I say
    unto thee, Arise. 15 And he that was dead sat up, and began to
    speak. And he gave him to his mother. 16 And fear took hold on
    all: and they glorified God, saying, A great prophet is arisen
    among us: and, God hath visited his people. 17 And this report
    went forth concerning him in the whole of Judaea, and all the
    region round about.


If it was the purpose of Luke to impress upon his readers the sympathy and
tenderness of the Man Christ Jesus, it is easy to understand why he alone
of all the evangelists records this touching story of the raising from the
dead of the son of the widow of Nain. No picture could be more full of
pity and compassion. Jesus had not been asked to perform the miracle; he
was moved wholly by the mute appeal of human sorrow and distress. As he
drew near to the gate of the little city, he met the sad procession
wending its way out to the place of burial. He was touched by the tears of
the lonely mother who had lost her only son; moved with deep compassion he
spoke to her the word of hope, "Weep not." Then he came near and touched
the bier on which the lifeless body was being borne. It was a sign more
eloquent than a spoken word. Then came the command: "Young man, I say unto
thee, Arise. And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he gave
him to his mother." In view of such miracles, possibly we dwell too
exclusively upon their purpose as authenticating the mission of Jesus, or
as demonstrating his divine message. These purposes are real, but we must
never forget that such works were also manifestations of the nature of the
ministry of Jesus and revelations of the very heart of God. Such recitals
dry the tears of mourners and bind up broken hearts and inspire the
despondent with eternal hope. Surely Jesus is the Lord of life and he will
yet wipe away all tears from the eyes of those that trust him.



5. Jesus Praising John. Ch. 7:18-35


    18 And the disciples of John told him of all these things. 19 and
    John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to the Lord,
    saying, Art thou he that cometh, or look we for another? 20 And
    when the men were come unto him, they said, John the Baptist hath
    sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that cometh, or look we for
    another? 21 In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and
    evil spirits; and on many that were blind he bestowed sight. 22
    And, he answered and said unto them, Go and tell John the things
    which ye have seen and heard; the blind receive their sight, the
    lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead
    are raised up, the poor have good tidings preached to them. 23 And
    blessed is he, whosoever shall find no occasion of stumbling in
    me.


    24 And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to say
    unto the multitudes concerning John, What went ye out into the
    wilderness to behold? a reed shaken with the wind? 25 But what
    went ye out to see? a man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they
    that are gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings'
    courts. 26 But what went ye out to see? a prophet? Yea, I say unto
    you, and much more than a prophet. 27 This is he of whom it is
    written,

      Behold, I send my messenger before thy face,
      Who shall prepare thy way before thee.


    28 I say unto you, Among them that are born of women there is none
    greater than John: yet he that is but little in the kingdom of God
    is greater than he. 29 And all the people when they heard, and the
    publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John.
    30 But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected for themselves the
    counsel of God, being not baptized of him. 31 Whereunto then shall
    I liken the men of this generation, and to what are they like? 32
    They are like unto children that sit in the marketplace, and call
