itself in both religions, but especially in that of Mexico; and convents
that startle us by their resemblance to those of Buddhism and
Christianity rise in either realm. But this mutual interpenetration of
the religious and moral ideas is still quite rudimentary. The prevailing
tone of the religion is given by the self-seeking and purely calculating
principle, aiming no doubt at a certain mystic satisfaction (for at
every stage of religion this moving principle has been most powerful and
fruitful), but likewise seeking material advantages without any scruple
as to the means; and those monstrous forms of transubstantiation which
the Mexican thought he was bringing about when he ate of the same human
flesh which he offered to his gods, are typical of the period in which
religion pursued its purpose of union with the deity, regardless of the
protests of the moral sense and of humanity.

It was reserved for the higher religions, and especially for that of
which our Bible is the monument, to realize the intimate alliance of the
religious and moral sentiments,--that priceless alliance, without which
morals remain for the most part almost barren, and religion falls into
monstrous aberrations. That the roots of religion pierce to the very
cradles of humanity, may now be taken as demonstrated. Its principle is
found in the necessity we feel of surmounting the uncertainties and the
limitations of destiny, by attaching ourselves individually to the
loftier Spirit revealed by nature outside us and within; and this
principle has always remained the same; nor am I one of those who hold
that we must now renounce it in the name of philosophy and science. For
neither philosophy nor science can make us other than the poor creatures
we are, with an unquenchable thirst for blessedness and life, yet
constantly broken, crushed at every moment, by the very elements on the
bosom of which we are forced to live. Philosophy and science may guide
religion, may reveal its true object in ever-growing purity, may cleanse
it from the pollutions in which ignorance and sin still plunge it, but
they cannot replace and they cannot destroy it. There is a Dutch
proverb, the profundity of which it would be difficult to exaggerate,
"De natuur gaat boven de leer"--_Nature is too strong for doctrine._ The
evolutions of philosophy may seem to make the heavens void, and inspire
man with the idea that all is over with the poetic or terrific visions
that rocked the cradle of his infancy. But stay! Nature, human nature,
is still there; and under the impulse of the indestructible thirst for
religion, human nature renews her efforts, looks deeper and looks
higher, and finds her God once more.

    Jerusalem renait plus brillante et plus belle.

But let not this conclusion, confirmed as it seems to me by the whole
history of religion, prevent our boldly declaring how much that is
small, puerile, often even immoral and deplorable, there is in the
religious past of humanity. It is no otherwise with art, with
legislation, with science herself, with all that constitutes the
privilege, the power, the joy of our race. It is just the knowledge of
these aberrations which should serve to keep us from falling back into
the errors and false principles of which they were the consequence. And
in this respect the study of the religions of ancient Mexico and Peru is
profoundly instructive. It teaches us that there is a principle,
bordering closely upon that of religion itself, which must serve as the
torch to guide the religious idea in its development--not to supplant
it, but to direct it to the true path. It is the principle of humanity.
The truer a religion is, the more absolute the homage it will render to
the principle of humanity, and the more will he who lives by its light
feel himself impelled to goodness, loving and loved, trustful and free.
The last word of religious history is, that there exists an affinity, a
mysterious relationship, between our spirit and the Spirit of the
universe; that this nobility of human nature embraces in itself all the
promises, all the hopes, all the latent perfections, all the infinite
ideals of the future; that, in spite of all appearances to the contrary,
the Supreme Will is good to each one of the beings which it summons and
draws to itself; and that man, in spite of his errors, his failures,
his corruptions, his miseries, was never wrong in following the sacred
instinct that raised him slowly from the mire, was always right in
renewing his efforts, so constant, so toilsome--often, too, so woful--to
mount the rounds

    De cette echelle d'or qui va se perdre en Dieu.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, Ladies and Gentlemen, it only remains for me to bid you
farewell, while giving you my warmest thanks for the perseverance, the
encouragement and the sympathy, with which you have supported me. The
reception you have given me has touched me deeply, and my stay in 1884
in your imposing and splendid capital will always remain amongst the
most prized and the pleasantest recollections of my life. You have been
good enough to pardon my linguistic infirmity. You have spared from your
business or pleasure the time needed to listen to a stranger, who has
come to speak to you of matters having no direct utility, and of purely
historical and theoretical interest. This is far more to your honour
than to mine. I thank you, but at the same time I congratulate you; for
it is a trait in the nobleness in our human nature to be able thus to
snatch ourselves from the vulgar pre-occupations of life, to contemplate
the truth on those serene heights where it reveals itself to all who
seek it with an upright heart. Cease not to love these noble studies,
which touch upon all that is most exalted and most precious in us! If we
search history for light in politics and the higher interests of our
fatherlands, and learn thereby to understand, to appreciate, to love
them more, let us turn to history no less for light on the path which we
must tread in that order of sublime realities, necessities and
aspirations, in which the soul of each one of us becomes a temple and a
sanctuary, lying open to the Eternal Spirit that fills the universe.

       *       *       *       *       *

And now to the Eternal, the Invisible, to Him whose name we can but
stammer, whose infinite perfections we can but feel after, be rendered
all our homage and our hearts!




FOOTNOTES:

[1] The second, third and fourth despatches (the first is lost) from
_Fernando Cortes_ to Charles V., written in 1520, 1522 and 1524
respectively. Original editions as follows: "Carta de relacio_n_
e_m_biada a su S. majestad del e_m_p_er_ador n_ues_tro senor ... por el
capita_n_ general de la nueva spana: Llamado ferna_n_do cortes," &c.:
Seville, 1522. "Carta tercera de relacio_n_: embiada por Ferna_n_do
cortes," &c.: Seville, 1523. "La quarta relacion q_ue_ Ferna_n_do cortes
gouernador y capitan general ... embio al muy alto ... rey de Espana,"
&c.: Toledo, 1525. Recent edition, with notes, &c.: "Cartas y Relaciones
de Hernan Cortes al Emperador Carlos V. colegidas e ilustradas por Don
Pascual de Gayangos," &c.: Paris, 1866. English translation: "The
Despatches of Hernando Cortes," &c., translated by George Folsom: New
York and London, 1843.--_Francisco Lopez de Gomara_ (Cortes' chaplain):
"Hispania Victrix. Primera y segunda parte de la historia general de las
Indias co_n_ todo el descubrimiento, y cosas notables que han acaescido
dende que se ganaron hasta el ano de 1551. Con la conquista de Mexico y
dela nueva Espana:" Modina del Campo, 1553. Also printed in Vol. XXII.
of the "Biblioteca de Autores Espanoles:" Madrid, 1852 (to the
pagination of which references in future notes will be made). There is
an old English translation of Part II. of this work, entitled, "The
Pleasant Historie of the Conquest of the Weast India, now called new
Spayne, Atchieved by the worthy Prince Hernando Cortes, Marques of the
Valley of Huaxacac, most delectable to Reade: Translated out of the
Spanishe tongue by T. N. [Thomas Nicholas], Anno 1578:" London.--_Bernal
Diaz_: "Historia Verdadera de la Nueva Espana escrita por el Capitan
Bernal Diaz del Castillo, Uno de sus Conquistadores. Sacada a luz por el
P. M. Fr. Alonso Remon," &c.: Madrid, 1632. English translation: "The
Memoirs of the Conquistador Bernal Diaz del Castillo, written by
Himself," &c.: translated by John Ingram Lockhart, F.R.A.S. 2 vols.:
London, 1844. There is also a good French translation: "Histoire
Veridique de la conquete ... par le Capitaine Bernal Diaz del Castillo,"
&c., by Dr. Jourdanet. Second edition: Paris, 1877.--_Las Casas._
Numerous works collected by Llorente: "Collecion de las obras del
Venerable Obispo de Chiapa, Don Bartolome de las Casas, Defensor de la
Libertad de los Americanos." 2 vols.: Paris, 1822. Also translated into
French, with some additional matter, by the same Llorente, and published
in the same year at Paris. His "Historia de las Crueldades de los
Espanoles," &c., was translated into English in 1655 by J. Phillips,
under the title of "The Tears of the Indians," &c., and dedicated to
Oliver Cromwell. [N.B. Translations in full or epitomized of several of
the above works, together with others, may be found in Vols. III. and
IV. of "Purchas his Pilgimes," &c.: London, 1625-26.]--_Sahagun's_
history of New Spain, a work of the utmost importance for the religious
history of Mexico, remained unpublished till the present century, and
appeared almost simultaneously in Mexico and London: "Historia General
de las Cosas de Nueva Espana ... escribio el R. P. Fr. Bernardino de
Sahagun ... uno de los primeros predicadores del santo evangelio en
aquellas regiones," &c. 3 vols.: Mexico, 1829-30. The same work appeared
in Vols. V. and VII. of Lord Kingsborough's collection. Vid. infr. A
French translation by Jourdanet appeared in 1880.--_Acosta_: "Historia
Natural y Moral de las Indias ... compuesta por el Padre Joseph de
Acosta Religioso de la Campania de Jesus," &c.: Seville, 1590. English
translation: "The Naturall and Morall Historie of the East and West
Indies," &c.: translated by E. G.: London, 1604. E[dward] G[rimstone]'s
translation was edited, with notes, for the Hakluyt Society, by Clements
R. Markham, in 1880.--_Torquemada_: "Los veynte y un libros Rituales y
Monarchia Yndiana ... Compuesto por Fray Ivan de Torquemada," &c. 3
vols.: Seville, 1615. Printed again at Madrid in 1723.--_Herrera_
(official historiographer of Philip II.): "Historia General de los
Hechos de los Castellanos en las Islas i Tierra Firme del mar Oceano,"
&c., by Antonio de Herrera; to which is prefixed, "Descripcion de las
Indias Ocidentales," &c., by the same. 4 vols.: Madrid, 1601. English
translation in epitome by Capt. John Stevens, "The General History of
the vast Continent and Islands of America," &c. 6 vols.: London,
1725-26.

The following native writers may also be consulted. _Ixlilxochitl_
(Fernando de Alva): "Historia Chichimeca" and "Relaciones," in Lord
Kingsborough's "Mexican Antiquities," Vol. IX. (vid. infr.). French
translations in Vols. VIII. XII. and XIII. of H. Ternaux-Compans'
collection: "Voyages, Relations et Memoires originaux pour servir a
l'histoire de la Decouverte de l'Amerique:" Paris, 1837-41.--_Camargo_:
"Histoire de la Republique de Tlaxcallan, par Domingo Munoz Camargo,
Indien, natif de cette ville," translated from the Spanish MS. in Vols.
XCVIII. and XCIX. of the "Nouvelles Annales des Voyages," &c.: Paris,
1843.--_Pomar (J. B. de)_: "Relacion de las Antiquedades de los Indios."
Pomar was a descendant of the royal house of Tezcuco, and his memoirs
were made use of in MS. by Torquemada.

Amongst later authorities may be mentioned (in addition to Prescott's
well-known work, and those cited in the following notes): _W.
Robertson_: "History of America."--_Alx. von Humboldt_: "Vues des
Cordillieres et Monuments des peuples de l'Amerique:" Paris, 1810;
forming the "Atlas Pittoresque" of Part III. of "Voyage de Humboldt et
Bonpland."--_Francesco Saverio Clavigero_: "Storia antica del Messico,"
&c. 4 vols.: Cesena, 1780-81. English translation by Charles Cullen:
"The History of Mexico," &c. 2 vols.: London, 1787.--_Th. Waitz_:
"Anthropologie der Naturvoelker," Vol. IV.: Leipzig, 1864.--_Brasseur de
Bourbourg_: "Histoire des Nations civilisees du Mexique et de
L'Amerique-centrale," &c. 4 vols: Paris, 1857-59.--_Mueller (Joh.
George)_, Professor at Bale: "Geschichte der Amerikanischen
Urreligionen." Second edition: Basel, 1867.--To these should be added
the narratives and works of M. _D. Charnay_, still in the course of
publication.

References will be given to the originals, but in such a form, wherever
possible, as to serve equally well for the English and French
translations. Where, as is not unfrequently the case, the chapters or
sections of the translations do not correspond to the originals, a note
of the vol. and page of the former will generally be added.

[2] The original collection is in seven magnificent folio volumes.
"Antiquities of Mexico: comprising Facsimiles of Ancient Mexican
Paintings and Hieroglyphics ... together with The Monuments of New
Spain, by M. Dupaix ... the whole illustrated by many valuable inedited
Manuscripts by Augustine Aglio:" London, 1830. Two supplementary
volumes, on the title-page of which Lord Kingsborough's own name
appears, were added in 1848, and a tenth volume was projected, but only
a small portion of it (appended to Vol. IX.) was printed.

[3] Five volumes: New York, 1875-76.

[4] See _Bancroft_, Vol. II. pp. 311, 312.

[5] See _Sahagun_, Tom. I. p. 201, Appendix to Lib. ii. (Vol. II. p.
174, in Jourdanet's translation).

[6] The story is given by _Bancroft_, Vol. III. p. 471, on the authority
of _Lopez Medel_.

[7] See _Torquemada_, Lib. viii. cap. xx. at the end. On the Mexican
temples in general, see _Mueller_, pp. 644-646.

[8] On the great temple of Mexico and its annexes, see _Waitz_, IV. 148
sqq., where the scattered data of Sahagun, Acosta, Gomara, Bernal Diaz,
Ixtlilxochitl, Clavigero, &c., are drawn together. See also _Bancroft_,
II. 577-587, III. 430 sq.

[9] Op. cit. cap. xcii.

[10] Compare the German "Schlangenberg" and the old French "Guivremont."

[11] See the legend in _Clavigero_, Lib. vi. Sec. 6.

[12] See _Mueller_, pp. 602 sqq., and _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 1, 237,
sqq., Lib. i. cap. i., and Lib. iii. cap. i., &c.

[13] See _Clavigero_, Lib. vi. Sec. 2. _Acosta_, pp. 324 sqq., Lib. v. cap.
ix. (pp. 353 sq. in E. G.'s translation); _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 2 sq.,
241 sq., Lib. i. cap. iii., Lib. iii. cap. ii. See also
_Ternaux-Compans_, Vol. XII. p. 18.

[14] On Quetzalcoatl, see _Mueller_, pp. 577-590; _Bancroft_, Vol. III.
pp. 239-287; _Torquemada_, Lib. vi. cap. xxiv., Lib. iii. cap. vii.;
_Clavigero_, Lib. vi. Sec. 4; _Ixtlilxochitl_ in _Ternaux-Compans_, Vol.
XII. pp. 5-8 (further, pp. 9-27 of the same volume on the Toltecs);
_Prescott_, Bk. i. chap, iii., Bk. iv. chap, v., and elsewhere;
_Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 3-4, 245-6, 255-259, Lib. i, cap. v., Lib. iii.
cap p. iv. xii.-xiv.

[15] See _Clavigero_, Lib. iv. Sec.Sec. 4, 15, Lib. vii. Sec. 42; _Humboldt_, pp.
319-20, cf. p. 95; _Prescott_, Bk. i. chap. i. and elsewhere;
_Bancroft_, Vol. V. pp. 427-429; _Mueller_, pp. 526 sq.

[16] _Clavigero_, Lib. vi. Sec.Sec. 5, 15, 34; _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 16-19,
Lib. i. cap. xiii.; _Bancroft_, Vol. III. p. 385.

[17] See _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 10-16, Lib. i. cap. xii.

[18] See _Boturini_, "Idea de una nueva historia general de la America
Septentrional," &c.: Madrid, 1746, pp. 63-65.

[19] _Bancroft_, Vol. III. pp. 403-417; _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 22-25,
29-33, Lib. i. capp. xv. xvi. xix.

[20] _Bancroft_, Vol. III. pp. 396-402; _Clavigero_, Lib. vi. Sec.Sec. 1, 5.

[21] _Sahagun_, Tom. I. p. 86 (cf. p. 88), Lib. ii. cap. xx.

[22] _Sahagun_, Tom. I. p. 50, Lib. ii. cap. i.

[23] Compare the detailed description of the festivals of the ancient
religion of Mexico in _Bancroft_, Vol. II. pp. 302-341, Vol. III. pp.
297-300, 330-348, 354-362, 385-396.

[24] Amongst all the indigenous races of North America, prolonged
fasting is regarded as the means _par excellence_ of securing
supernatural inspiration. The Red-skin to become a sorcerer or to secure
a revelation from his _totem_, or the Eskimo to become _Angekok_, will
endure the most appalling fasts.

[25] _Torquemada_, Lib. vi. cap. xxxviii.; cf. _Sahagun_, Tom. I. p.
174, Lib. ii. cap. xxiv.

[26] _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 35--39, Lib. i. cap. xxi.

[27] _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 11-16, Tom. II. pp. 57-64, Lib. i. cap.
xii., Lib. vi. cap. vii.

[28] Elements were not wanting for the formation of a dualistic system
analogous to Mazdeism. The _Tzitzimitles_ nearly corresponded to the
Iranian _Devas_. They were a kind of demon servants of Mictlan, who
delighted in springing upon men to devour them, and the protection of
the celestial gods was needed to escape from their attacks. _Sahagun_,
Tom. II. p. 67, Lib. vi. cap. viii. (in the middle of a prayer to
Tlaloc). Cf. also Tom. II. pp. 14 sqq., Lib. v. capp. xi.-xiii.

[29] On the Mexican priesthood, see _Bancroft_, Vol. II. pp. 200-207,
Vol. III. pp. 430-441; _Clavigero_, Lib. vi. Sec.Sec. 13--17; cf. Lib. iv. Sec.
4; _Humboldt_, pp. 98, 194, 290; _Prescott_, Bk. i. chap. iii.;
_Torquemada_, Lib. ix. capp. i.-xxxiv.

[30] _Camargo_ (in Nouv. An. d. Voy. xcix.), pp. 134-5.

[31] _Bancroft_, Vol. II. pp. 204-206, Vol. III. pp. 435-436;
_Torquemada_, Lib. ix. capp. xiv. xv.; _Sahagun_, Tom. I. pp. 227-8
(last section of Appendix to Lib. ii.); _Acosta_, Lib. v. cap. xvi.;
_Clavigero_, Lib. vi. capp. xvi. xxii.

[32] See the "Cuadro historico-geroglifico," &c., contributed by Don
_Jose Fernando Ramirez_ (curator of the national Museum at Mexico) to
_Garcia y Cubas_, "Altas geographico, estadistico e historico de la
Republica Mexicana," Entrega 29a (1858).

[33] On all that concerns the Mexican cosmogonies, see _Mueller_, pp. 477
sq., 509--519; _Bancroft_, Vol. III. pp. 57--65; _Ixtlilxochitl_,
"Historia Chichimeca," capp. i. ii.; _Kingsborough_, "Mexican
Antiquities," Vol. V. pp. 164-167; _Humboldt_, pp. 202--211.

[34] See _Sahagun_, Tom. II. pp. 281--283, Lib. viii. cap. vi.

[35] The sacerdotal year was lunar. The civil year, which was doubtless
of later origin, and had been adopted as better suited to the purposes
of agriculture, was solar. Every thirteenth year the two coincided. The
number _four_, which plays an important part in Mexican symbolism (cf.
the Mexican cross) gave a kind of cosmic significance to 13 x 4 = 52.

[36] See _Bancroft_, Vol. III. pp. 393-396.

[37] Compare the Appendix to Jourdanet's translation of Bernal Diaz, pp.
912 sqq.

[38] On the conversion of the Mexicans, &c., compare the anonymous
treatise at the end of _Kingsborough's_ "Mexican Antiquities," Vol. IX.
Cf. also _Torquemada,_ Lib. xvii. cap. xx., Lib. xix. cap. xxix.

[39] See _P. Pauke,_ "Reise in d. Missionen von Paraguay:" Vienna, 1829,
p. 111.

[40] In addition to the works of _Acosta_, _Gomara_, _Herrera_,
_Humboldt_, _Waitz_ and _Mueller_, already cited in connection with
Mexico, and _Prescott's_ "Conquest of Peru," we may mention the
following authorities for the political and religious history of Peru:

_Xeres_ (Pizarro's secretary): "Verdadera relacion de la conquista del
Peru y provincia del Cuzco llamada la nueva Castilla ... por Francisco
de Xeres," &c.: Seville, 1534. English translation by Markham in
"Reports on the Discovery of Peru:" printed for the Hakluyt Society,
London, 1872.--_Zarate_ (official Spanish "auditor" in Peru): "Historia
del descubrimiento y conquista del Peru.... La qual escriua Augustin de
Carate," &c.: Antwerp, 1555. English translation: "The strange and
delectable History, &c.: translated out of the Spanish Tongue by T.
Nicholas:" London, 1581.--_Cieza de Leon_ (served in Peru for seventeen
years): "Parte Primera Dela chronica del Peru," &c.: Seville, 1553. The
second and third Parts have never been printed. English translation by
Markham: Hakluyt Society, 1864. [N. B. _Xeres_ (or _Jeres_), _Cieza de
Leon_ and _Zarate_, are all contained in Tom. XXVI. of Aribau's
"Biblioteca de autores Espanoles."]--_Diego Fernandez_ of Palencia
(historiographer of Peru under the vice-royalty of Mendoza): "Primera, y
Segunda Parte, de la Historia del Peru," &c.: Seville, 1571.--_Miguel
Cavello Balboa:_ "Histoire du Perou," in Ternaux-Compans, Vol.
XV.--_Arriaga_: "Extirpacion de la Idolatria del Piru ... Por el Padre
Pablo Joseph de Arriaga de la Compania de Jesus:" Lima, 1621. Extracts
are given in Ternaux-Compans, Vol. XVII.--_Fernando Montesinos_:
"Memoires historiques sur l'Ancien Perou:" translated from the Spanish
MS. in Ternaux-Compans, Vol. XVII. Montesinos rectifies Garcilasso de la
Vega on more points than one.--_Johannes de Laet_: "Novus Orbis," &c.:
Leiden, 1633.--Velasco: "Historia del Reino de Quito," &c.: Quito, 1844.
This work is in three Parts, the second of which, the "Historia
Antigua," is the one referred to in future notes. This second Part is
translated in Ternaux-Compans, Vols. XVIII. XIX.

The Abbe _Raynal's_ "Histoire philosophique et politique des
etablissements ... des Europeens dans les deux Indes" (10 vols.: Geneva,
1770) made a great stir in its time, the English translation by
Justamond reaching a third edition in 1777; but it is now completely
forgotten, and has no real value for our purposes. I cannot refrain from
a passing notice of a romance which is now almost as completely
forgotten as the Abbe Raynal's History, in spite of its long popularity:
I mean _Marmontel's_ "Les Incas et la Destruction de l'empire du Perou:"
Paris, 1777. The author derived his materials from Garcilasso de la
Vega. In spite of the florid style and innumerable offences against
historical and psychological fact which characterize this work, it
cannot be denied that Marmontel has disengaged with great skill the
profound causes of the irremediable ruin of the Peruvian state.

_Lacroix_: "Perou," in Vol. IV. of "L'Amerique" in "L'Univers
Pittoresque."--_Paul Chaix_: "Histoire de l'Amerique meridionale au
XVI^e siecle," Part I.: Geneva, 1853.--_Wuttke_: "Geschichte des
Heidenthums," Theil I., 1852.--_J. J. von Tschudi_: "Peru. Reiseskizzen
aus den Jahren 1838-1842:" St. Gallen, 1846.--_Thos. J. Hutchinson_:
"Two Years in Peru, with explorations of its Antiquities:" London, 1873.
Hutchinson had good reason to point out the exaggerations in which
Garcilasso indulges with reference to his ancestors the Incas, but he
himself speaks too slightingly of their government. Had it not been in
the main beneficent and popular, it could not have left such
affectionate and enduring memories in the minds of the native
population.

For the method of citation, see end of note on p. 18.

[41] This work is in two Parts, the first of which (Lisbon, 1609) gives
an account of the native traditions, customs and history prior to the
Spanish conquest, while the second (published under the separate title
of _Historia General del Peru_: Cordova, 1617) deals with the Spanish
conquest, &c. English translation by Sir Paul Rycaut: London, 1688, not
at all to be trusted; both imperfect (omitting and condensing in an
arbitrary fashion) and incorrect. As it may be in the possession of some
of my readers, however, reference will be made to it in future notes.
The earlier and more important part of Garcilasso's work has recently
been translated for the _Hakluyt Society_ by _Clements R. Markham_, 2
vols.: London, 1869, 1871. References are to the _Commentarios reales_
(Part I.), unless otherwise stated.

[42] _Herrera_, Decada v. Libro iv. cap. ii. (Vol. IV. p. 335, in
Stevens's epitomized translation).

[43] _Garcilasso_, Lib. iv. cap. viii., Lib. v. capp. vi. vii. viii.
xiii.; _Acosta_, Lib. vi. capp. xiii. xvi.; _Montesinos_, p. 57.

[44] _Garcilasso_, Lib. vi. cap. xxxv.

[45] _Garcilasso_, Lib. v. cap. xii.; _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. iv. cap.
iv. (Vol. IV. p. 344, in Stevens's translation). See also _Hazart_,
"Historie van Peru," Part II. chap. iv.; in his "Kerckelijcke Historie
van de Gheheele Wereldt," Vol. I. p. 315: Antwerp, 1682.

[46] See _Gomara_ (in Vol. XXII. of the Bibliotheca de Autores
Espanoles), p. 228a; _Garcillasso_, "Historia General," &c., Lib. i.
cap. xviii.; cf. _Prescott_, Bk. iii. chaps. v. vi., and Appendices
viii. ix.

[47] _Gomara_, p. 232 a.

[48] Cf. _Waitz_, Theil IV. S. 411, 418.

[49] Cf. _Garcilasso_, Lib. v. cap. xiii.; _Prescott_, Bk. i. chap. ii.

[50] _Mueller_, p. 406.

[51] See _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. iv. cap. iii. (Vol. IV. pp. 337 sqq. in
Stevens's translation); _Garcilasso_, Lib. ii. capp. xii. xiii. xiv. (p.
35 of Rycaut's translation, in which the passage is much shortened),
Lib. v. cap. xi.; _Velasco_, Lib. ii. Sec. 6.

[52] _Acosta_, Lib. vi. cap. xviii.; _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. iv. cap. i.
and end of cap. iii. (Vol. IV. pp. 329 sq., 342, in Stevens's
translation).

[53] _Garcilasso_, Lib. iv. cap. vii.; _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. iv. capp.
ii. iii. (Vol. IV. pp. 334, 341, in Stevens's translation); cf.
_Montesinos_, p. 56.

[54] _Garcilasso_, Lib. iv. cap. xix.; cf. Lib. viii. cap. viii. (ad
fin.).

[55] Cf. _Tschudi_, Vol. II. p. 387; _Hutchinson_, Vol. II. pp. 175-6.

[56] _Montesinos_, p. 119, cf. pp. 33, 108.

[57] _Garcilasso_, Lib. v. cap. iii.

[58] _Humboldt_, pp. 108, 294.

[59] _Gomara_, p. 277 b.

[60] _Prescott_, Bk. iii. chap. viii.

[61] Cf. _Garcilasso_, Lib. vi. cap. iv.

[62] _Garcilasso_, Lib. i. capp. ix.-xvii.; cf. Lib. ii. cap. ix., Lib.
iii. cap. xxv.

[63] Such at least is the etymology proposed by Garcilasso (Lib. i. cap.
xviii.). Modern Peruvian scholars rather incline to refer _Cuzco_ to the
same root as _cuzcani_ ("to clear the ground").

[64] See the critical summary of the history of the Incas in _Waitz_,
Theil. IV. S. 396 sq. The following table of the successive Incas
follows Garcilasso:

    Manco Capac,                 died about 1000
    Sinchi Roca,                      "     1091
    Lloque Yupanqui,                  "     1126
    Mayta Capac,                      "     1156
    Capac Yupanqui,                   "     1197
    Inca Roca,                        "     1249
    Yahuar Huacac,                    "     1289
    Viracocha Inca Ripac,             "     1340
    [Inca Urco, who only reigned 11 days, is omitted by Garcilasso]
    Tito Manco Capac Pachacutec,      "     1400
    Yupanqui,                         "     1438
    Tupac Yupanqui,                   "     1475
    Huayna Capac,                     "     1525
    Huascar,  }                       "    {1532
    Atahualpa,}                       "    {1533

[65] _Garcilasso_, Lib. viii. cap. viii. Garcilasso says that he
translates this passage, word for word, from the Latin MS. of the Jesuit
Father, _Blas Valera_.

[66] _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. iv. cap. iv. (Vol. IV. p. 346, in Stevens's
translation).

[67] Lib. ix. cap. x.

[68] _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. i. capp. ii. iii., Lib. iii. cap. xvii.
(Vol. IV. pp. 240 sqq., 325 sqq., in Stevens's translation).

[69] _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. iii. cap. ii. (Vol. IV. p. 266, in
Stevens's translation); _Gomara_, p. 231 a.

[70] In the course of a few months, Pizarro amassed such immense wealth
that, after deducting the _fifth_ for the king and a large sum for the
reinforcements brought him by Almagro, he was still able to give L4000
to each of his foot-soldiers, and double that sum to each horseman. The
calculation is made by Robertson, who estimates the _peso_ at a pound
sterling. To obtain the equivalent purchasing power in our own times,
these sums would have to be more than quadrupled!

[71] _Herrera_, Dec. v. Lib. viii. capp. i. sqq. (Vol. V. pp. 23 sqq. in
Stevens's translation).

[72] See _Alcedo_, "Diccionario Geografico-Historico de las Indias
