earth. These are they who suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. These
are they who are cast down to hell and suffer the wrath of Almighty
God, until the fulness of times when Christ shall have subdued all
enemies under his feet, and shall have perfected his work, when he
shall deliver up the Kingdom, and present it unto the Father spotless,
saying--I have overcome and have trodden the wine-press alone, even
the wine-press of the fierceness of the wrath of Almighty God. Then
shall he be crowned with the crown of His glory, to sit on the throne
of his power to reign for ever and ever. But behold, and lo, we saw
the glory and the inhabitants of the telestial world, that they were
as innumerable as the stars in the firmament of heaven, or as the sand
upon the sea shore, and heard the voice of the Lord saying--these all
shall bow the knee, and every tongue shall confess to him who sits
upon the throne for ever and ever; for they shall be judged according
to their works, and every man shall receive according to his own
works, his own dominion, in the mansions which are prepared, and they
shall be servants of the Most High, but where God and Christ dwell
they cannot come, worlds without end. This is the end of the vision
which we saw, which we were commanded to write while we were yet in
the Spirit.

"But great and marvellous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries
of His kingdom which He showed unto us, which surpasses all
understanding in glory, and in might, and in dominion, which He
commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the Spirit, and
are not lawful for man to utter; neither is man capable to make them
known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the
Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love Him, and purify
themselves before Him; to whom He grants this privilege of seeing and
knowing for themselves; that through the power and manifestation of
the Spirit, while in the flesh, they may be able to bear His presence
in the world of glory. And to God and the Lamb be glory, and honour,
and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."




CHAPTER XVI.

FURTHER REMARKS ON MAN'S PHYSICAL AND INTELLECTUAL
PROGRESS--PHILOSOPHY OF WILL, AS ORIGINATING, DIRECTING, AND
CONTROLLING ALL VOLUNTARY ANIMAL MOTION--ASTOUNDING FACTS IN RELATION
TO THE SPEED, OR VELOCITY OF MOTION, AS ATTAINABLE BY PHYSICAL
MAN--INTERCOMMUNICATION OF THE INHABITANTS OF DIFFERENT AND DISTANT
PLANETS.


    Wide, and more wide, the kindling bosom swells,
    As love inspires, and truth its wonders tells.
    The soul enraptured tunes the sacred lyre.
    And bids a worm of earth to heaven aspire,
    Mid solar systems numberless, to soar,
    The depths of love and science to explore.

As I have before remarked, man is a candidate for a series of
progressive changes, all tending to develop his intellectual and
physical faculties, to expand his mind, and to enlarge his sphere of
action, and consequent usefulness and happiness.

He begins his physical, or rudimental, fleshly career by descending
below all things. He has at his birth less power of locomotion, or
even instinct, than other animals.

His powers of motion are so very limited, that for several months he
is entirely unable to change his locality. Wherever he is placed,
there he must remain until removed by the agency of others. He can
hardly be said to have a will, or, at least, it is so undeveloped, as
scarcely to manifest itself by any effort beyond the movement of some
portion of his members. While he remains in this state of mental
inability and physical helplessness, a casual observer, entirely
unacquainted with his progress and destiny, might very naturally
conclude that this was the climax of his maturity, the natural sphere
of his eternal existence.

A few months, however, develop a marked change--he begins to learn the
use, and put forth the powers of his will. The body, developed in a
commensurate degree, is able to obey that will. Thus commences
locomotion. The child crawls or creeps about the floor; explores the
little world--that is to say, the room where he resides, or the
adjoining apartment--becomes familiar with its dimensions, bearings
and contents, and recognizes his associates or fellow citizens of the
same little world. Then he becomes familiar with the science of
geography and of history, if I may so call it, in his little world.

Prompted by curiosity, he may, perhaps, cast an occasional glance
beyond the limits of his own abode. He may contemplate a building or
landscape on the other side of the street or field, but with much of
the same feeling as a man, more matured, casts his eyes to the distant
planets. He concludes that these distant objects are entirely beyond
the reach of his powers of locomotion.

In a short time, however, his faculties, still expanding, develop new
and increasing energies. He conceives "_big thoughts_." He even thinks
of dispensing with his plodding, creeping manner of locomotion, and of
trying to stand upright, and even make a first step towards walking.
It is a great undertaking. He hesitates, doubts, fears, hopes, till
finally, being cheered onward in his career by his parents or his
nurse, he makes the attempt. After several falls, failures, and
disappointments, he at length succeeds in walking two or three steps.
O what a triumph in his powers of locomotion! He is cheered, embraced,
overwhelmed, by those who have been watching his progress and
encouraging him, until, overcome and carried away by an extasy of
transport, he falls, blushing, smiling and exulting into the arms held
out for his reception. He dreams not of a higher attainment. He is
now, in his own estimation, at the very highest pinnacle of human
development.

Improving in his new mode of locomotion, he soon runs about the yard,
along the street, through the field, makes new discoveries, sees new
habitations, enlarges his geographical knowledge, and begins to
conceive the probability that his views have been too narrow, and that
there may be a bigger world, more people, and more buildings than were
dreamed of in his philosophy.

In a few years he may become familiar with the geography and history
of the island or continent on which he lives. He may even begin to
aspire after the knowledge of other climes, and to conceive or
conjecture that beyond the limits of the almost infinite expanse of
waters, things and beings may exist after the similitude of his own
sphere. He longs to overcome the physical barriers, which confine him
in so limited a sphere, and thus enlarge his acquaintance, his social
feelings, his friendship, his affections and his scientific knowledge.

So boundless and varied is the field, so complicated are the obstacles
to be surmounted, so vast the preparations, improvements and
inventions to be brought into requisition, that, after ages and
generations have exhausted their energies, much is still left to be
done--much which can only be done by the progress and extension of
those modern triumphs of art, by which the elements--the fire, the
wind, the water, the lightning, submit to the control of man, and
become his chariot, his bearer of despatches. By these means the globe
we occupy will soon be explored, the limits, boundaries and resources
of every dark corner be clearly defined and understood.

Man already moves over the surface of the earth at the rate of fifty,
sixty, and even ninety miles per hour, and still he aspires. He
contemplates making the air his chariot, and wafting himself through
the open firmament at the rate of, perhaps, a thousand miles per hour.
Suppose he attains to this, what then? Will the great, the infinite
principle within him be satisfied? No. He lifts his eyes to the
contemplation of those myriads of shining orbs on high. He knows by
actual admeasurement that some of them are much larger than the planet
he occupies. He also knows by analogy that eternal riches are there;
that a boundless store of element and resources is there; that they
are treasured there for the use, comfort, convenience, and enjoyment,
of intellectual and physical beings--beings, for aught he knows, of
his own species, and connected with him by kindred ties, or by the law
of universal sympathy and affection. He has reason to believe that
there is gold and silver, that there are precious stones, and houses,
and cities, and gardens. That there are walks of pleasure, and
fountains, forests, brooks, and rivers of delight; that there are
bosoms fraught with life and joy, and swelling with all the tender
sensibilities of a pure, holy and never-ending affection.

Why, then, should his aspirations not reach forth, his mind expand,
his bosom swell with love, and his heart beat with the boundless,
fathomless infinitude of thought, of feeling, and of love? Why not be
noble and boundless in charity, like the God whom he calls his father?
Why does he not rise from his groveling sphere in this small island,
which floats in the ocean of space, as a small black speck, amid the
numberless shining orbs? The reason is obvious; it is not for the want
of noble aspirations; it is not for the want of grand conceptions; it
is not for the lack of will. It is because the body is chained,
imprisoned, confined here, by the operation or attraction of
surrounding elements, which man has not yet discovered the means to
control. It may be said that the powers of earth enslave him, and
chain him down, beyond the possibility or hope of escape.

Reader, in order to illustrate this subject try an experiment on your
own physical and mental powers. For instance; _will_ your arm to move,
and it will instantly obey you. _Will_ your body to go three miles,
and it will obey you as fast as it can; perhaps in one hour it will
have accomplished the journey assigned to it by your will.

But tie your hand behind you, and then _will_ it to move up and down,
forward and backward, and it will make the effort to obey you, but
cannot, because it is confined. Chain your body in a dungeon, bolt and
bar the door, and will it to go to a certain place, and it will not
obey you, because it is physically incapable.

Unchain this body, provide the means of conveyance at the rate of a
mile per minute, the body, at the bidding of the _will_, will then go
the three miles in three minutes.

Now, if it were possible to overcome the resisting elements, so as to
increase the speed of conveyance for your body--that is, if there were
no resisting element to be overcome, your will might dictate, and your
body would move through actual space with the speed of light, or
electricity. There is no apparent limit to the speed attainable by the
body when unchained, set free from the elements which now enslave it,
and dictated by the will.

    "The lightning on its wiry way would lag behind.
    The sun-ray drag its slow length along."

This immense velocity of locomotion, as applied to a body of flesh and
bones, or of material elements, may at first thought, strike the mind
as being contrary to the known laws of physical motion.

But let it be recollected that the vast earth on which we dwell, with
all its weight and bulk, its cities, animals and intelligences, moves
through actual space, at the astonishing velocity of eighteen miles
per second, one thousand and eighty miles per minute, or sixty-four
thousand eight hundred miles per hour.

If so vast a bulk of gross, and in a great measure inanimate matter,
can move through space, at a rate of speed so inconceivably great, how
easily we can conceive the probability of vastly increased powers of
locomotion on the part of animate bodies released from their earthly
prison, quickened by superior and celestial element, dictated by an
independent, inherent principle called the will, and urged onward by
the promptings of the eternal, infinite mind and affections, in their
aspirations for knowledge and enjoyment.

A corporeal, human body, raised from the dead, and quickened by
elements so refined, so full of life and motion, so pure, and so free
from the influences control, or attractions of more gross elements,
will, like the risen Jesus, ascend and descend at will, and with a
speed nearly instantaneous.

Let us pause, and contemplate, for a moment, such a being taking leave
of the confines of the earth, and sea, and clouds, and air, with all
their dark and gloomy shadows. Behold him as he speeds his way on the
upper deep, and launches forth in the clear and boundless expanse
bespangled with millions of resplendent orbs.

He calculates his distance, and regulates his course by observing the
relative position of those most familiar to him, and soaring upwards
still, his bosom swells with an unutterable and overwhelming sensation
of the infinitude of his own eternal being, and of all around, above,
below him, till unable to contain his gratitude, and joy, and
exultation, he breaks forth in the language of a celebrated British
poet, and sings as he flies--

    "Heavens broad day hath o'er me broken,
    Far above earth's span of sky!
    Am I dead? Nay, by this token,
    Know that I have ceased to die!"

Planets will be visited, messages communicated, acquaintances and
friendships formed, and the sciences vastly extended and cultivated.

The science of geography will then be extended to millions of worlds,
and will embrace a knowledge of their physical features and
boundaries, their resources, mineral and vegetable; their rivers,
lakes, seas, continents and islands; the attainments of their
inhabitants in the science of government; their progress in revealed
religion; their employments, dress, manners, customs, &c. The science
of astronomy will also be enlarged in proportion to the means of
knowledge. System after system will rise to view in the vast field of
research and exploration! Vast systems of suns and their attendant
worlds, on which the eyes of Adam's race, in their rudimental sphere,
have never gazed, will then be contemplated, circumscribed, weighed in
the balance of human thought, their circumference and diameter be
ascertained, their relative distances understood. Their motions and
revolutions, their times and laws, their hours, days, weeks, sabbaths,
months, years, jubilees, centuries, millenniums and eternities, will
all be told in the volumes of science.

The science of history will embrace the vast "univercoelum" of the
past and present. It will in its vast compilations, embrace and
include all nations, all ages, and all generations; all the planetary
systems in all their varied progress and changes, in all their
productions and attributes.

It will trace our race in all its successive emigrations, colonies,
states, kingdoms and empires; from their first existence on the great,
central, governing planet, or sun, called Kolob, until they are
increased without number, and widely dispersed and transplanted from
one planet to another, until, occupying the very confines of
infinitude, the mind of immortal, eternal man, is absorbed,
overwhelmed, wearied with the vastness, the boundless expanse of
historic fact, and compelled to return and retire within itself for
refreshment, rest and renewed vigour.

Next in order, will be the field of prophetic science. The spirit of
prophecy will be poured upon the immortal mind, till, from seeing in
part, and knowing in part, man will be able to gaze upon a boundless
prospective, a future of still increasing glory, knowledge, light,
love, might, majesty, power and dominion, in which the sons of God-the
kings and priests of heaven and earth, and of the heaven of heavens,
and all their retinue of kingdoms and subjects, will find ample room
for boundless increase and improvement, worlds without end. Amen.




CHAPTER XVII.

LAWS OF MARRIAGE AND PROCREATION.


    Ye kindred spirits, filled with mutual love,
    Pure as the dews descending from above,
    All hail! for you the sacred Keys are given,
    To make you one on earth, and one in heaven.
    Be fruitful then, and let your race extend;
    Fill Earth, the stars, and worlds that never end.

The great science of life consists in the knowledge of ourselves, the
laws of our existence, the relations we sustain to each other, to
things and beings around us, to our ancestry, to our posterity, to
time, to eternity, to our heavenly Father, and to the universe.

To understand these laws, and regulate our actions by them, is the
whole duty of intelligences. It should therefore comprise our whole
study.

This science comprises the fountain of wisdom, the well-springs of
life, the boundless ocean of knowledge, the infinitude of light, and
truth, and love. It penetrates the depths, soars to the heights, and
circumscribes the broad expanse of eternity.

Its pursuit leads to exaltation, glory, immortality, and to an
eternity of life, light, purity, and unity of fellowship with kindred
spirits.

To contemplate man in his true light, we must, as it were, forget that
death is in his path; we must look upon him as an eternal, ever living
being, possessing spirit, flesh and bones, with all the mental and
physical organs, and all the affections and sympathies which
characterise him in this world. Or rather, all his natural affections
and sympathies will be purified, exalted, and immeasurably increased.

Let the candidate for celestial glory forget, for a moment, the
groveling sphere of his present existence, and make the effort to
contemplate himself in the light of eternity, in the higher spheres of
his progressive existence, beyond the grave--a pure spirit, free from
sin and guile, enlightened in the school of heaven, by observation and
experience, and association with the highest order of intelligences,
for thousands of years; and clothed with immortal flesh, in all the
vigour, freshness and beauty of eternal youth; alike free from pain,
disease, death, and the corroding effects of time; looking back
through the vista of far distant years, and contemplating his former
sojourn amid the sorrows and pains of mortal life, his passage through
the dark valley of death, and his sojourn in the spirit world, as we
now contemplate a transient dream, or a night of sleep, from which we
have awakened, renewed and refreshed, to enter again upon the
realities of life.

Let us contemplate, for a moment, such a being, clothed in the finest
robes of linen, pure and white, adorned with precious stones and gold;
a countenance radiant with the effulgence of light, intelligence and
love; a bosom glowing with all the confidence of conscious innocence
dwelling in palaces of precious stones and gold; bathing in the
crystal waters of life; promenading or sitting 'neath the evergreen
bowers and trees of Eden; inhaling the healthful breezes, perfumed
with odours, wafted from the roses and pinks of paradise, or assembled
with the countless myriads of heaven's nobility, to join in songs of
praise and adoration to the Great Parent of every good, to tune the
immortal lyre in strains celestial; or move with grace immortal to the
soul-inspiring measure of music flowing from a thousand instruments,
blending, in harmonious numbers, with celestial voices, in heavenly
song, or mingling in graceful circles with joyous thousands, immersed
in the same spirit, and moving in unison and harmony of motion, as if
one heart, one pulse, one thrill of heavenly melody inspired the
whole.

O candidates for celestial glory! Would your joys be full in the
countless years of eternity without forming the connexions, the
relationship, the kindred ties which concentrate in the domestic
circle, and branch forth, and bud and blossom, and bear the fruits of
eternal increase?

Would that eternal emotion of charity and benevolence which swells
your bosoms be satisfied to enjoy in, "single blessedness," without an
increase of posterity, those exhaustless stores of never-ending riches
and enjoyments? Or, would you, like your heavenly Father, prompted by
eternal benevolence and charity, wish to fill countless millions of
worlds, with your begotten sons and daughters, and to bring them
through all the gradations of progressive being, to inherit immortal
bodies, and eternal mansions in your several dominions?

If such be your aspirations, remember that this present probation is
the world of preparation for joys eternal. This is the place where
family organization is first formed for eternity; and where the
kindred sympathies, relationships, and affections take root, spring
forth, shoot upward, bud, blossom, and bear fruit to ripen and mature
in eternal ages.

_Here_, in the holy temples and sanctuaries of our God, must the
everlasting covenants be revealed, ratified, sealed, bound and
recorded in the holy records, and guarded and preserved in the
archives of God's kingdom, by those who hold the keys of eternal
Apostleship, who have power to bind on earth that which shall be bound
in heaven, and to record on earth that which shall be recorded in the
archives of heaven, in the Lamb's book of life.

_Here_, in the holy sanctuary, must be revealed, ordained and anointed
the kings and queens of eternity.

All vows, covenants, contracts, marriages, of unions, not formed by
revelation, and sealed for time and all eternity, and recorded in the
holy archives of earth and heaven, by the ministration of the holy and
eternal Priesthood, will be dissolved by death, and will not be
recognised by the eternal authorities, after the parties have entered
through the vail into the eternal world.

This is heaven's eternal law, as revealed to the ancients of all ages,
who held the keys of eternal priesthood, after the order of the Son of
God; and, as restored with the priesthood of the Saints of this age.

Again, it was a law of the ancient Priesthood, and is again restored,
that a man who is faithful in all things, may, by the word of the
Lord, through the administration of one holding the keys to bind on
earth and heaven, receive and secure to himself, for time and all
eternity, MORE THAN ONE WIFE.

Thus did Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, the Patriarchs and Prophets of
old.

The principal object contemplated by this law, is the multiplication
of the children of good and worthy fathers, who will teach them the
truth, and train them in the holy principles of salvation. This is far
preferable to sending them into the world in the lineage of an
unworthy or ignorant parentage, to be educated in error, folly,
ignorance and crime.

The peculiar characteristics of the blessings included in the
Everlasting Covenant made with Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their
lineage, was the multiplicity of their seed; and the perpetuity of the
royal, priestly and kingly power in their lineage.

To assist in carrying out and fulfilling this covenant, good and
virtuous women were given to their faithful Prophets, rulers, and wise
and virtuous men; and, as it was said of the four wives of Jacob,
"_These did build the house of Israel_."

While peculiar blessings and encouragements were given to a good and
faithful man, and to his wives and children; while they were honoured
of God, and respected by all who knew them; while the father of a
hundred children was had in greater honour than the hero of a hundred
battles, adultery, fornication, and all unlawful intercourse was
strictly prohibited, and even punished by the strictest laws--the
penalty of which was death.

A daughter of Israel, who, by prostitution, was rendered unworthy, or
unqualified for the duties of a virtuous wife and mother, was
considered unfit to live. While the male who would thus trifle with
the fountain of life, and contribute to render a female unworthy to
answer the end of her creation, was also condemned to death.

Strict laws were also given and diligently taught to both sexes,
regulating the intercourse between husband and wife. All intercourse
peculiar to the sexes was strictly prohibited at certain seasons which
were untimely. Nor were the bonds of wedlock and shield from
condemnation, where the parties, by untimely union, excess, or
voluntary act, prevented propagation, or injured the life or health of
themselves or their offspring.

The object of the union of the sexes is the propagation of their
species, or procreation; also for mutual affection, and the
cultivation of those eternal principles of never-ending charity and
benevolence, which are inspired by the Eternal Spirit; also for mutual
comfort and assistance in this world of toil and sorrow, and for
mutual duties towards their offspring.

Marriage, and its duties, are therefore, not a mere matter of choice,
or of convenience, or of pleasure to the parties; but to marry and
multiply is a positive command of Almighty God, binding on all persons
of both sexes, who are circumstanced and conditioned to fulfil the
same. To marry, propagate our species, do our duty to them, and to
educate them in the light of truth, are among the chief objects of our
existence on the earth. To neglect these duties, is to fail to answer
the end of our creation, and is a a very great sin.

While to pervert our natures, and to prostitute ourselves, and our
strength to mere pleasures, or to unlawful communion of the sexes, is
alike subversive of health, of pure, holy and lasting affection; of
moral and social order; and of the laws of God and nature.

If we except murder, there is scarcely a more damning sin on the earth
than the prostitution of female virtue or chastity at the shrine of
pleasure, or brutal lust; or that promiscuous and lawless intercourse
which chills and corrodes the heart, perverts and destroys the pure
affections, cankers and destroys, as it were, the well-springs, the
fountains, or issues of life.

A man who obeys the ordinances of God, and is without blemish or
deformity, who has sound health and mature age, and enjoys liberty and
access to the elements of life; is designed to be the head of a woman,
a father, and a guide of the weaker sex, and of those of tender age,
to mansions of eternal life and salvation.

A woman, under similar circumstances, is designed to be the glory of
some man in the Lord; to be led and governed by him, as her head in
all things, even as Christ is the head of the man; to honour, obey,
love, serve, comfort and help him in all things; to be a happy wife,
and if blessed with offspring, a faithful and affectionate mother,
devoting her life to the joys, cares and duties of her domestic
sphere.

It frequently happens, in the course of human events, that there is,
in a community, a majority of females. In such cases, human laws have
no right to interfere with the divine eternal laws of nature, or of
nature's God, by suffering females to be prostituted to minister to
the wanton pleasures of the lawless, to become the unlawful,
dishonoured mistress, the illegitimate mother, or the wretched outcast
of shame, disease and crime. Nor yet, on the other hand, have human
laws the right to doom a portion of heaven's fair daughters, to single
wretchedness, loneliness and gloom, without the lawful privilege of
becoming honoured wives and mothers.

A wise legislation, or the law of God, would punish, with just
severity, the crimes of adultery or fornication, and would not suffer
the idiot, the confirmed, irreclaimable drunkard, the man of
hereditary disease, or of vicious habits, to possess or retain a wife;
while, at the same time, it would provide for a good and capable
man, to honourably receive and maintain more wives than one. Indeed, it
should be the privilege of every virtuous female, who has the
requisite capacity and qualifications for matrimony; to demand either
of individuals or government, the privilege of becoming an honoured
and legal wife and mother; even if it were necessary for her to be
married to a man who has several wives; or, as Jesus said in the
parable, to take the one talent from the place where it remains
neglected or unimproved, and give it to him who has ten talents.

The false and corrupt institutions, and still more corrupt practices
of "_Christendom_" have had a downward tendency in the generations of
man for many centuries. Our physical organization, health, vigour,
strength of body, intellectual faculties, inclinations, &c., are
influenced very much by parentage. Hereditary disease, idiocy,
weakness of mind, or of constitution, deformity, tendency to violent
