for them. Of this Christ says, Matthew v: "Do good to them that
despitefully use you. Pray for them that persecute you and revile you."
And Paul, Romans xii: "Bless them which curse you, and by no means
curse them, but do good to them."

II. Behold how this precious, excellent work has been lost among
Christians, so that nothing now everywhere prevails except strife, war,
quarreling, anger, hatred, envy, back-biting, cursing, slandering,
injuring, vengeance, and all manner of angry works and words; and yet,
with all this, we have our many holidays, hear masses, say our prayers,
establish churches, and more such spiritual finery, which God has not
commanded. We shine resplendently and excessively, as if we were the
most holy Christians there ever were. And so because of these mirrors
and masks we allow God's Commandment to go to complete ruin, and no one
considers or examines himself, how near or how far he be from meekness
and the fulfilment of this Commandment; although God has said, that not
he who does such works, but he who keeps His Commandments, shall enter
into eternal life.

Now, since no one lives on earth upon whom God does not bestow an enemy
and opponent as a proof of his own anger and wickedness, that is, one
who afflicts him in goods, honor, body or friends, and thereby tries
whether anger is still present, whether he can be well-disposed toward
his enemy, speak well of him, do good to him, and not intend any evil
against him; let him come forward who asks what he shall do that he may
do good works, please God and be saved. Let him set his enemy before
him, keep him constantly before the eyes of his heart, as an exercise
whereby he may curb his spirit and train his heart to think kindly of
his enemy, wish him well, care for him and pray for him; and then, when
opportunity offers, speak well of him and do good to him.  Let him who
will, try this and if he find not enough to do all his life long, he
may convict me of lying, and say that my contention was wrong. But if
this is what God desires, and if He will be paid in no other coin, of
what avail is it, that we busy ourselves with other great works which
are not commanded, and neglect this? Therefore God says, Matthew v, "I
say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his neighbor, is in danger
of the judgment; but whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool
(that is, all manner of invective, cursing, reviling, slandering), he
shall be in danger of everlasting fire." What remains then for the
outward act, striking, wounding, killing, injuring, etc., if the
thoughts and words of anger are so severely condemned?

III. But where there is true meekness, there the heart is pained at
every evil which happens to one's enemy. And these are the true
children and heirs of God and brethren of Christ, Whose heart was so
pained for us all when He died on the holy Cross.  Even so we see a
pious judge passing sentence upon the criminal with sorrow, and
regretting the death which the law imposes. Here the act seems to be
one of anger and harshness. So thoroughly good is meekness that even in
such works of anger it remains, nay, it torments the heart most sorely
when it must be angry and severe.

But here we must watch, that we be not meek contrary to God's honor and
Commandment. For it is written of Moses that he was the very meekest
man on earth, and yet, when the Jews had worshiped the golden calf and
provoked God to anger, he put many of them to death, and thereby made
atonement before God. Likewise it is not fitting that the magistrates
should be idle and allow sin to have sway, and that we say nothing. My
own possessions, my honor, my injury, I must not regard, nor grow angry
because of them; but God's honor and Commandment we must protect, and
injury or injustice to our neighbor we must prevent, the magistrates
with the sword, the rest of us with reproof and rebuke, yet always with
pity for those who have merited the punishment.

This high, noble, sweet work can easily be learned, if we perform it in
faith, and as an exercise of faith. For if faith does not doubt the
favor of God nor question that God is gracious, it will become quite
easy for a man to be gracious and favorable to his neighbor, however
much he may have sinned; for we have sinned much more against God.
Behold, a short Commandment this, but it presents a long, mighty
exercise of good works and of faith.



Thou shalt not commit adultery.

In this Commandment too a good work is commanded, which includes much
and drives away much vice; it is called purity, or chastity, of which
much is written and preached, and it is well known to every one, only
that it is not as carefully observed and practised as other works which
are not commanded. So ready are we to do what is not commanded and to
leave undone what is commanded. We see that the world is full of
shameful works of unchastity, indecent words, tales and ditties,
temptation to which is daily increased through gluttony and
drunkenness, idleness and frippery. Yet we go our way as if we were
Christians; when we have been to church, have said our little prayer,
have observed the fasts and feasts, then we think our whole duty is
done.

Now, if no other work were commanded but chastity alone, we would all
have enough to do with this one; so perilous and raging a vice is
unchastity. It rages in all our members: in the thoughts of our hearts,
in the seeing of our eyes, in the hearing of our ears, in the words of
our mouth, in the works of our hands and feet and all our body. To
control all these requires labor and effort; and thus the Commandments
of God teach us how great truly good works are, nay, that it is
impossible for us of our own strength to conceive a good work, to say
nothing of attempting or doing it. St. Augustine says, that among all
the conflicts of the Christian the conflict of chastity is the hardest,
for the one reason alone, that it continues daily without ceasing, and
chastity seldom prevails. This all the saints have wept over and
lamented, as St. Paul does, Romans vii: "I find in me, that is in my
flesh, no good thing."

II. If this work of chastity is to be permanent, it will drive to many
other good works, to fasting and temperance over against gluttony and
drunkenness, to watching and early rising over against laziness and
excessive sleep, to work and labor over against idleness. For gluttony,
drunkenness, lying late abed, loafing and being without work are
weapons of unchastity, with which chastity is quickly overcome. On the
other hand, the holy Apostle Paul calls fasting, watching and labor
godly weapons, with which unchastity is mastered; but, as has been said
above, these exercises must do no more than overcome unchastity, and
not pervert nature.

Above all this, the strongest defence is prayer and the Word of God;
namely, that when evil lust stirs, a man flee to prayer, call upon
God's mercy and help, read and meditate on the Gospel, and in it
consider Christ's sufferings. Thus says Psalm cxxxvii: "Happy shall he
be, that taketh and dasheth the little ones of Babylon against the
rock," that is, if the heart runs to the Lord Christ with its evil
thoughts while they are yet young and just beginning; for Christ is a
Rock, on which they are ground to powder and come to naught.

See, here each one will find enough to do with himself, and more than
enough, and will be given many good works to do within himself. But now
no one uses prayer, fasting, watching, labor for this purpose, but men
stop in these works as if they were in themselves the whole purpose,
although they should be arranged so as to fulfil the work of this
Commandment and purify us daily more and more.

Some have also indicated more things which should be avoided, such as
soft beds and clothes, that we should avoid excessive adornment, and
neither associate nor talk with members of the opposite sex, nor even
look upon them, and whatsoever else may be conducive to chastity. In
all these things no one can fix a definite rule and measure. Each one
must watch himself and see what things are needful to him for chastity,
in what quantity and how long they help him to be chaste, that he may
thus choose and observe them for himself; if he cannot do this, let him
for a time give himself up to be controlled by another, who may hold
him to such observance until he can learn to rule himself. This was the
purpose for which the monastic houses were established of old, to teach
young people discipline and purity.

III. In this work a good strong faith is a great help, more noticeably
so than in almost any other; so that for this reason also Isaiah xi.
says that "faith is a girdle of the reins," that is, a guard of
chastity. For he who so lives that he looks to God for all grace, takes
pleasure in spiritual purity; therefore he can so much more easily
resist fleshly impurity: and in such faith the Spirit tells him of a
certainty how he shall avoid evil thoughts and everything that is
repugnant to chastity. For as the faith in divine favor lives without
ceasing and works in all works, so it also does not cease its
admonitions in all things that are pleasing to God or displease Him; as
St. John says in his Epistle: "Ye need not that any man teach you: for
the divine anointing, that is, the Spirit of God, teacheth you of all
things."

Yet we must not despair if we are not soon rid of the temptation, nor
by any means imagine that we are free from it as long as we live, and
we must regard it only as an incentive and admonition to prayer,
fasting, watching, laboring, and to other exercises for the quenching
of the flesh, especially to the practice and exercise of faith in God.
For that chastity is not precious which is at ease, but that which is
at war with unchastity, and fights, and without ceasing drives out all
the poison with which the flesh and the evil spirit attack it. Thus St.
Peter says, "I beseech you, abstain from fleshly desires and lusts,
which war always against the soul." And St. Paul, Romans vi, "Ye shall
not obey the body in its lusts." In these and like passages it is shown
that no one is without evil lust; but that everyone shall and must
daily fight against it. But although this brings uneasiness and pain,
it is none the less a work that gives pleasure, in which we shall have
our comfort and satisfaction.  For they who think they make an end of
temptation by yielding to it, only set themselves on fire the more; and
although for a time it is quiet, it comes again with more strength
another time, and finds the nature weaker than before.



Thou shalt not steal.

This Commandment also has a work, which embraces very many good works,
and is opposed to many vices, and is called in German Mildigkeit,
"benevolence;" which is a work ready to help and serve every one with
one's goods. And it fights not only against theft and robbery, but
against all stinting in temporal goods which men may practise toward
one another: such as greed, usury, overcharging and plating wares that
sell as solid, counterfeit wares, short measures and weights, and who
could tell all the ready, novel, clever tricks, which multiply daily in
every trade, by which every one seeks his own gain through the other's
loss, and forgets the rule which says: "What ye wish that others do to
you, that do ye also to them." If every one kept this rule before his
eyes in his trade, business, and dealings with his neighbor, he would
readily find how he ought to buy and sell, take and give, lend and give
for nothing, promise and keep his promise, and the like. And when we
consider the world in its doings, how greed controls all business, we
would not only find enough to do, if we would make an honorable living
before God, but also be overcome with dread and fear for this perilous,
miserable life, which is so exceedingly overburdened, entangled and
taken captive with cares of this temporal life and dishonest seeking of
gain.

II. Therefore the Wise Man says not in vain: "Happy is the rich man,
who is found without blemish, who does not run after gold, and has not
set his confidence in the treasures of money. Who is he? We will praise
him, that he has done wondrous things in his life." As if he would say:
"None such is found, or very few indeed." Yea, they are very few who
notice and recognise such lust for gold in themselves. For greed has
here a very beautiful, fine cover for its shame, which is called
provision for the body and natural need, under cover of which it
accumulates wealth beyond all limits and is never satisfied; so that he
who would in this matter keep himself clean, must truly, as he says, do
miracles or wondrous things in his life.

Now see, if a man wish not only to do good works, but even miracles,
which God may praise and be pleased with, what need has he to look
elsewhere? Let him take heed to himself, and see to it that he run not
after gold, nor set his trust on money, but let the gold run after him,
and money wait on his favor, and let him love none of these things nor
set his heart on them; then he is the true, generous, wonderworking,
happy man, as Job xxxi says: "I have never yet: relied upon gold, and
never yet made gold my hope and confidence." And Psalm lxii: "If riches
increase, set not your heart upon them." So Christ also teaches,
Matthew vi, that we shall take no thought, what we shall eat and drink
and wherewithal we shall be clothed, since God cares for this, and
knows that we have need of all these things.

But some say: "Yes, rely upon that, take no thought, and see whether a
roasted chicken will fly into your mouth!" I do not say that a man
shall not labor and seek a living; but he shall not worry, not be
greedy, not despair, thinking that he will not have enough; for in Adam
we are all condemned to labor, when God says to him, Genesis iii, "In
the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread." And Job v, "As the birds
to flying, so is man born unto labor." Now the birds fly without worry
and greed, and so we also should labor without worry and greed; but if
you do worry and are greedy, wishing that the roasted chicken fly into
your mouth: worry and be greedy, and see whether you will thereby
fulfil God's Commandment and be saved!

III. This work faith teaches of itself. For if the heart looks for
divine favor and relies upon it, how is it possible that a man should
be greedy and worry? He must be sure beyond a doubt that God cares for
him; therefore he does not cling to money; he uses it also with
cheerful liberality for the benefit of his neighbor, and knows well
that he will have enough, however much he may give away. For his God,
Whom he trusts, will not lie to him nor forsake him, as it is written,
Psalm xxxvii: "I have been young, and now am old; never have I seen a
believing man, who trusts God, that is a righteous man, forsaken, or
his child begging bread." Therefore the Apostle calls no other sin
idolatry except covetousness, because this sin shows most plainly that
it does not trust God for anything, expects more good from its money
than from God; and, as has been said, it is by such confidence that God
is truly honored or dishonored.

And, indeed, in this Commandment it can be clearly seen how all good
works must be done in faith; for here every one most surely feels that
the cause of covetousness is distrust and the cause of liberality is
faith. For because a man trusts God, he is generous and does not doubt
that he will always have enough; on the other hand, a man is covetous
and worries because he does not trust God. Now, as in this Commandment
faith is the master-workman and the doer of the good work of
liberality, so it is also in all the other Commandments, and without
such faith liberality is of no worth, but rather a careless squandering
of money.

IV. By this we are also to know that this liberality shall extend even
to enemies and opponents. For what manner of good deed is that, if we
are liberal only to our friends? As Christ teaches, Luke vi, even a
wicked man does that to another who is his friend. Besides, the brute
beasts also do good and are generous to their kind. Therefore a
Christian must rise higher, let his liberality serve also the
undeserving, evil-doers, enemies, and the ungrateful, even as his
heavenly Father makes His sun to rise on good and evil, and the rain to
fall on the grateful and ungrateful.

But here it will be found how hard it is to do good works according to
God's Commandment, how nature squirms, twists and writhes in its
opposition to it, although it does the good works of its own choice
easily and gladly. Therefore take your enemies, the ungrateful, and do
good to them; then you will find how near you are to this Commandment
or how far from it, and how all your life you will always have to do
with the practice of this work.  For if your enemy needs you and you do
not help him when you can, it is just the same as if you had stolen
what belonged to him, for you owed it to him to help him. So says St.
Ambrose, "Feed the hungry; if you do not feed him, you have, as far as
you are concerned, slain him." And in this Commandment are included the
works of mercy, which Christ will require at men's hands at the last
day.

But the magistrates and cities ought to see to it that the vagabonds,
pilgrims and mendicants from foreign lands be debarred, or at least
allowed only under restrictions and rules, so that knaves be not
permitted to run at large under the guise of mendicants, and their
knavery, of which there now is much, be prohibited. I have spoken at
greater length of this Commandment in the Treatise on Usury.



Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

This Commandment seems small, and yet is so great, that he who would
rightly keep it must risk and imperil life and limb, goods and honor,
friends and all that he has; and yet it includes no more than the work
of that small member, the tongue, and is called in German Wahrheit
sagen, "telling the truth" and, where there is need, gainsaying lies;
so that it forbids many evil works of the tongue. First: those which
are committed by speaking, and those which are committed by keeping
silent. By speaking, when a man has an unjust law-suit, and wants to
prove and maintain his case by a false argument, catch his neighbor
with subtilty, produce everything that strengthens and furthers his own
cause, and withhold and discount everything that furthers his
neighbor's good cause; in doing which he does not do to his neighbor as
he would have his neighbor do to him. This some men do for the sake of
gain, some to avoid loss or shame, thereby seeking their own advantage
more than God's Commandment, and excuse themselves by saying: Vigilanti
jura subveniunt, "the law helps him who watches"; just as if it were
not as much their duty to watch for their neighbor's cause as for their
own. Thus they intentionally allow their neighbor's cause to be lost,
although they know that it is just. This evil is at present so common
that I fear no court is held and no suit tried but that one side sins
against this Commandment. And even when they cannot accomplish it, they
yet have the unrighteous spirit and will, so that they would wish the
neighbor's just cause to be lost and their unjust cause to prosper.
This sin is most frequent when the opponent is a prominent man or an
enemy. For a man wants to revenge himself on his enemy: but the ill
will of a man of prominence he does not wish to bring upon himself; and
then begins the flattering and fawning, or, on the other hand, the
withholding of the truth.  Here no one is willing to run the risk of
disfavor and displeasure, loss and danger for the truth's sake; and so
God's Commandment must perish. And this is almost universally the way
of the world. He who would keep this Commandment, would have both hands
full doing only those good works which concern the tongue.  And then,
how many are there who allow themselves to be silenced and swerved
aside from the truth by presents and gifts! so that in all places it is
truly a high, great, rare work, not to be a false witness against one's
neighbor.

II. There is a second bearing of witness to the truth, which is still
greater, with which we must fight against the evil spirits; and this
concerns not temporal matters, but the Gospel and the truth of faith,
which the evil spirit has at no time been able to endure, and always so
manages that the great among men, whom it is hard to resist, must
oppose and persecute it. Of which it is written in Psalm lxxxii, "Rid
the poor out of the hand of the wicked, and help the forsaken to
maintain his just cause."

Such persecution, it is true, has now become infrequent; but that is
the fault of the spiritual prelates, who do not stir up the Gospel, but
let it perish, and so have abandoned the very thing because of which
such witnessing and persecution should arise; and in its place they
teach us their own law and what pleases them. For this reason the devil
also does not stir, since by vanquishing the Gospel he has also
vanquished faith in Christ, and everything goes as he wishes. But if
the Gospel should be stirred up and be heard again, without doubt the
whole world would be aroused and moved, and the greater portion of the
kings, princes, bishops, doctors and clergy, and all that is great,
would oppose it and rage against it, as has always happened when the
Word of God has come to light; for the world cannot endure what comes
from God. This is proved in Christ, Who was and is the very greatest
and most precious and best of all that God has; yet the world not only
did not receive Him, but persecuted Him more cruelly than all others
who had ever come forth from God.

Therefore, as at that time, so at all times there are few who stand by
the divine truth, and imperil and risk life and limb, goods and honor,
and all that they have, as Christ has foretold: "Ye shall be hated of
all men for My Name's sake." And: "Many of them shall be offended in
Me." Yea, if this truth were attacked by peasants, herdsmen,
stable-boys and men of no standing, who would not be willing and able
to confess it and to bear witness to it? But when the pope, and the
bishops, together with princes and kings attack it, all men flee, keep
silent, dissemble, in order that they may not lose goods, honor, favor
and life.

III. Why do they do this? Because they have no faith in God, and expect
nothing good from Him. For where such faith and confidence are, there
is also a bold, defiant, fearless heart, that ventures and stands by
the truth, though it cost life or cloak, though it be against pope or
kings; as we see that the martyrs did. For such a heart is satisfied
and rests easy because it has a gracious, loving God. Therefore it
despises all the favor, grace, goods and honor of men, lets them come
and go as they please; as is written in Psalm xv: "He contemneth them
that contemn God, and honoreth them that fear the Lord"; that is, the
tyrants, the mighty, who persecute the truth and despise God, he does
not fear, he does not regard them, he despiseth them; on the other
hand, those who are persecuted for the truth's sake, and fear God more
than men, to these he clings, these he defends, these he honors, let it
vex whom it may; as it is written of Moses, Hebrews xi, that he stood
by his brethren, regardless of the mighty king of Egypt.

Lo, in this Commandment again you see briefly that faith must be the
master-workman in this work also, so that without it no one has courage
to do this work: so entirely are all works comprised in faith, as has
now been often said. Therefore, apart from faith all works are dead,
however good the form and name they bear. For as no one does the work
of this Commandment except he be firm and fearless in the confidence of
divine favor; so also he does no work of any other Commandment without
the same faith: thus every one may easily by this Commandment test and
