Huntington; William Tatlock, D.D., Stamford; J. A. Ticknor,
Collinsville; T. O. Tongue, Bloomfield; John Townsend, Middletown;
R. H. Tuttle, Windsor; W. E. Vibbert, D.D., Fair Haven; Millidge
Walker, East Bridgeport; J. H. Watson, Hartford; P. H. Whaley,
Hartford; Elisha Whittlesey, Hartford; J. E. Wildman, Wallingford;
C. E. Woodcock, New Haven.

From other dioceses: The Rt. Rev. Bishop Niles, New Hampshire; the
Rt. Rev. Bishop Paddock, Massachusetts; the Rev. Messrs. G. F.
Flichtner, Thomas Gallaudet, D.D., Joshua Kimber, G. S. Mallory,
D.D., New York City; W. M. Chapin, Barrington, R. I.; F. B.
Chetwood, Elizabeth, N. J.; G. B. Cooke, Petersburg, Va.; E. M.
Gushee, Cambridge, Mass.; W. A, Holbrooke, L. I.; R. M. Kirby,
Potsdam, N. Y.




EXHIBITION OF SEABURY RELICS, ETC.


In one of the parish rooms of Christ Church was a large exhibit of
articles of interest in connection with the centenary commemoration
of the consecration of Bishop Seabury. They were contributed
partly from the archives of the diocese and the library of
Trinity College, and partly from the private collections
of Bishop Williams, the Rev. Dr. Beardsley, the Rev. Professor
Hart, C. J. Hoadly, Esq., Jared Starr, Esq., Mrs. Dr. Starr,
and others. Among those of especial interest were Bishop
Seabury's mitre, of black satin with purple strings, having the
Cross in a glory on the front, and the crown of thorns on the
back, embroidered in gold; the original of the letter on vellum
from the Scotch bishops who consecrated Bishop Seabury to the
clergy of Connecticut, testifying to the fact of the consecration
and commending him to them; fac-similes of his Letters of Orders
and of Consecration and of the Concordate between him and his
consecrators; portraits of Bishop John Skinner, of Bishop Jolly
who held the book, of Bishop Seabury himself, and of one of his
electors, Dr. Mansfield; the manuscript records of ordinations by
Bishops Seabury and Jarvis; the manuscript records of the
convocation of the clergy of Connecticut, open at the vote
accepting the Prayer-Book of 1789; a manuscript fac-simile of a
volume of Bishop Seabury's journal; the sermon preached by Bishop
Skinner at the consecration; a large collection of Bishop
Seabury's works, including one of his loyalist pamphlets which he
wrote at the breaking out of the Revolution under the name of "A.
W. Farmer," his charges, occasional sermons, volumes of
discourses, etc.; one of his manuscript sermons and two or three
letters, copies of his Communion-office, and a copy (in his own
writing) of his Service for the Burial of Infants; a copy of his
edition of the Psalter, etc.; his surplice and two patens left by
him to St. James's Church, New London; his official seal, still
used by his successor; volumes of _The Courant_ and of _The
Gentleman's Magazine_ with notices of Bishop Seabury; sermons
relating to later bishops of Connecticut; the Scotch Prayer-Book
of 1637 (known as Laud's) and its reprint of 1712; Scotch
Communion-offices of 1717, 1774, and later dates; the proposed
American Prayer-Book of 1785 (both American and English editions),
and the first edition of the adopted Prayer-Book of 1789; a Hebrew
Psalter used by the Rev. Dr. Samuel Johnson in conferring degrees
at King's College, New York; a bit of the robe in which Bishop
White was consecrated; a manuscript letter of Bishop Jolly's; two
programmes of Yale College Commencements, in one of which (before
1784) the ministers of the Congregational churches are called
_pastores_, while in the other (of 1785) they are called
_episcopi_; photographs of the clergy present at the late
commemoration in Aberdeen, and programmes, etc., relating to it;
pictures of old churches in Edinburgh and Aberdeen; and other
matters of interest. Bishop Williams's pastoral staff was also
exhibited. The exhibit was under the care of the Registrar of the
Diocese, who was kindly assisted by the Rev. J. H. Barbour,
Librarian of Trinity College.




CENTENARY COMMEMORATION

OF THE RETURN OF

BISHOP SEABURY. 1885

THE RT. REV. SAMUEL SEABURY, D.D.

_FIRST BISHOP OF CONNECTICUT,_

HELD HIS FIRST ORDINATION AT MIDDLETOWN,

AUGUST 3, 1785.


On the ninth day of June, 1885, the Diocesan Convention met in
Hartford. Morning Prayer was read in Christ Church at 9 o'clock by
the Rev. W. E. Vibbert, D.D., Rector of St. James's Church, Fair
Haven, and the Rev. J. E. Heald, Rector of Trinity Church,
Tariffville. The Holy Communion was celebrated in St. John's
Church, the service beginning at 10-1/2 o'clock after the singing
of the 138th Hymn. The Bishop was assisted in the service by the
Rev. Dr. Beardsley of New Haven, the Rev. Dr. Seabury of New York,
the Rev. Dr. Vibbert of Fair Haven, and the Rev. J. W. Bradin,
Rector of the Parish. The sermon was preached by Bishop Williams,
as follows:

THE WISE RULER.

PSALM lxxviii. 72.

"So he fed them according to the integrity of his heart; and
guided them by the skilfulness of his hands."

The seventy-eighth psalm contains a rapid review of the history of
the chosen people from the day when God led them out of Egypt
"with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm," down to the time of
David. The record of provocation and transgression on the side of
Israel, and of mingled mercy and judgment on the side of Jehovah,
ends with the reign of the shepherd-king. He who watched his flock
as, centuries after, other shepherds watched theirs, on the hill-
sides of Bethlehem; he who had risked his own life that he might
deliver his charge "out of the paw of the lion and out of the paw
of the bear," was now called "from among the sheep-folds" to the
throne of Israel and Judah. He who had been "faithful over a few
things" was made "ruler over many things" in a kingdom which was
itself but a type of a mightier Kingdom wherein One who was not
only the Son of David but the Son of God should reign forever and
ever.

In describing the character of David as a ruler, which is done in
the text of this discourse, it will be observed that the same
qualities are emphasized that marked his shepherd-life. What he
was in the narrower field, that he was also in the wider. What he
had been in Bethlehem, that he continued to be in Jerusalem. What
he had done for his flock, that he did for his people. "He fed
them according to the integrity of his heart; and guided them by
the skilfulness of his hands." Integrity in purpose and discretion
in action are the two qualities here emphasized. The former
without the latter makes the impracticable blunderer; the latter
without the former makes the time-serving schemer; the two
together make the wise ruler of men. Unless I greatly err, we
shall see these two qualities strikingly illustrated in the story
of that Episcopate of which I am now to speak to you.

We must still linger for a while with the newly consecrated bishop
in that city on the German ocean where we last beheld him. For his
consecration is not the only thing which occurred there that was
to have an abiding influence on the future of our national Church.
On the day following the consecration (Nov. 15th, 1784), the
Scottish bishops present and their American brother united in
signing the important document known as the "Concordate." While
this is not the place to speak of it at length, some of its
positions and agreements ought not, in view of opinions then
prevalent in Great Britain and of events soon to occur in this
country, to pass unnoticed.

First of all, the document opens with a full and clear statement
of the necessity, "before all things," of holding the "One Faith."
As the Lord declared that on Himself, as confessed by His apostle,
He would build His Church; as St. Paul, when he has spoken of "one
Lord," speaks next of "one faith," so the framers of the
"Concordate"--invoking "the blessing of the great and glorious
Head of the Church"--declare their "earnest and united desire to
maintain the analogy of the faith once delivered to the saints,
and happily preserved in the Church of Christ."

This all-important and fundamental truth having been asserted, the
document proceeds to declare that the Church of Christ is "a
spiritual society," the powers and authority of which come from
God and not from man; and which, as they are not given and cannot
be given by any civil government, so neither can any civil
government take away.

Does this statement seem a truism to us? Then let us remember that
it was no truism in the days when it was made. "The Church as by
law established" was then a phrase on everybody's lips in Great
Britain; and, strangely enough, it meant, and still means, one
thing in England and a very different thing in Scotland. Nor was
that all;--we may well fear that to many minds the weightiest and
most important part of the phrase, lay in the words "by law
established" rather than in the preceding words "the Church"; so
that, in many instances, a mere accident in the Church's history
displaced the remembrance of its divine constitution, and led on
to the folly of supposing that the act of the State, human law,
could create and constitute a Church! To assert the truth against
so patent a delusion was timely, and indeed needful, a century
ago. Would that it were needful nowhere now!

Following this declaration was the agreement that no "communion in
sacred offices" should be held with clergy, of whatever
ordination, who were officiating in Scotland without recognizing,
or being recognized by, the national Episcopate.

Finally, passing from doctrine and organization to worship, the
Scottish bishops, after speaking of the desirableness of "as near
a conformity in worship and discipline between the two Churches as
is consistent with the different circumstances and customs of
nations," go on to say that, inasmuch as "the celebration of the
Holy Eucharist, or the administration of the sacrament of the Body
and Blood of Christ, is the principal bond of union among
Christians, as well as the most solemn act of worship in the
Christian Church,... though they are far from prescribing to their
brethren in this matter, they cannot help ardently wishing that
Bishop Seabury would endeavor all he can, consistently with peace
and prudence, to make the celebration of this venerable Mystery
conformable to the most primitive doctrine and practice." So far
the Scottish bishops. On his part, the newly consecrated bishop
agreed "to take a serious view of the Communion-office recommended
by his brethren, and, if found agreeable to the genuine standards
of antiquity, to give his sanction to it, and by gentle methods of
argument and persuasion to endeavor, as they have done, to
introduce it by degrees into practice, without the compulsion of
authority on the one side or the prejudice of former custom on the
other."

These are all weighty, wise, and noble words. I have quoted them
at some length for two reasons. In the first place, they embody
just those things which come to the front in St. Luke's
description of the Apostolic Church in the full glow of its
Pentecostal life: "They continued steadfastly in the apostles'
doctrine and fellowship, and in the breaking of the bread and in
the prayers." The more carefully the document and the inspired
statement are compared, the more clearly is this remarkable
agreement seen. If this is the result of a conscious reference to
the words of St. Luke, it shows how faithfully the venerable
framers of the Concordate went back to the very sources of the
Church's organic life. If the reference is unconscious, it shows,
even more strikingly, how thoroughly they were imbued with the
spirit of the apostolic age.

In the second place, unless I have greatly misread history, our
first bishop, both in his work in this diocese and also in the
part he took in bringing about for our whole Church the happy
settlement of 1789, followed on the line of action indicated in
the Concordate, patiently and unswervingly; and in following it,
he was guided by that integrity in purpose and discretion in
action which characterize the wise and efficient ruler.

Had Bishop Seabury carried out his original purpose, he would have
sailed for his native land "in the ship _Triumph_, commanded
by Captain Stout." He was, however, detained in London, and from
that city he addressed what has been called "his first pastoral
letter" to the representatives of the clergy of Connecticut. His
detention was largely, probably not wholly, due to the necessity
which came upon him of making, if possible, some provision for the
future maintenance of the clergy. What little property he had
acquired had all been expended in his two years' absence from his
family and his residence in England; and the question whether or
not the Venerable Society for the Propagation of the Gospel would
or could continue the stipends hitherto appropriated to the clergy
in Connecticut was a very pressing one. His admirable letter to
the secretary of the society--a letter which thoroughly reveals
the man--is too long to be given here, while it cannot be
adequately represented by any quotations. He does not attempt to
conceal the fact that the continuance of his own stipend would be
a great relief to his anxieties, but he frankly adds that if it is
"not continued" he "can have no right to complain." And then
putting himself, as he always did, entirely to one side, and
saying, what seems to have been ever in his mind, that "the fate
of individuals is of inferior moment when compared with that of
the whole Church," he draws attention to the calamity it will be
"if proper steps be not taken to secure to the Church various
property of lands, etc., in the different States (now indeed of
small value, but gradually increasing), to which the society alone
has a legal claim."

Under the terms of their charter, the society could employ
missionaries only in "the plantations, colonies, and factories
belonging to the kingdom of Great Britain"; while they seem not to
have been ready to consider the question touching the lands. The
timidity or the lack of appreciation of the purely spiritual and
ecclesiastical character of the Episcopate as such, which then
prevailed, is painfully noticeable in the fact that, in the letter
which communicated the decision of the society, the secretary
addressed the bishop as he would have done before his consecration--
"the Rev. Dr. Seabury."

On other trials and difficulties which he met in London I do not
care to dwell. They all grew out of political jealousies, confused
notions concerning connections of Church and State, or fears,
which proved to be groundless, that the consecration sermon, to
say nothing of the consecration itself, might somehow be
disadvantageous to the Scottish Episcopate. One charge alleged is
to us in this day simply amusing; namely, that the bishop had been
"precipitate" in his application to Scotland. A precipitancy which
patiently waits and labors for more than thirteen months to obtain
the Episcopate in England, and only when all hope of so obtaining
it is at an end applies for it in Scotland, is, to say the least,
a very deliberate sort of precipitancy. And now we may pass from
the old world to the new.

"Bishop Seabury landed at Newport, R. I."--where Berkeley had
landed more than half a century before--"after a voyage of three
months,[Footnote: This period, however, includes some stay in Nova
Scotia.] on Monday, June 20th, 1785, and the next Sunday he
preached in Trinity Church the first sermon of an American bishop
in this country." [Footnote: The text was Heb. xii. 1, 2. The
sermon was afterwards published in the Bishop's _Discourses on
Several Subjects_, vol. ii., serm. xvi., "The Christian Race."
] On the 29th he reached New London, which from that time was to
be his home. While he was still at sea a Boston newspaper, which
had received the intelligence of his consecration, exclaimed: "Two
wonders of the world, a Stamp Act in Boston and a Bishop in
Connecticut!" [Footnote: _Boston Gazette_, May 30, 1785. ]

Two things instantly demanded the most careful attention and most
earnest efforts of the one American bishop: the condition and
needs of his own diocese, and the all-important question as to the
future of the scattered congregations of what had been the Church
of England in the thirteen colonies. The stoutest heart might well
