faith.  Therefore, in those passages that refer to repentance, we
should always understand that not only works, but also faith is
required, as in Matt. 6, 14. For if ye forgive men their trespasses,
your heavenly Father will also forgive you.  Here a work is required,
and the promise of the remission of sins is added which does not
occur on account of the work, but through faith, on account of Christ.
Just as Scripture testifies in many passages: Acts 10, 43: To Him
give all the prophets witness that through His name, whosoever
believeth in Him, shall receive remission of sins; and 1 John 2, 12:
Your sins are forgiven you for His name's sake; Eph. 1, 7: In whom we
have redemption through His blood the forgiveness of sins.  Although
what need is there to recite testimonies?  This is the very voice
peculiar to the Gospel, namely, that for Christ's sake, and not for
the sake of our works, we obtain by faith remission of sins.  Our
adversaries endeavor to suppress this voice of the Gospel by means of
distorted passages which contain the doctrine of the Law, or of works.
For it is true that in the doctrine of repentance works are
required, because certainly a new life is required.  But here the
adversaries wrongly add that by such works we merit the remission of
sins, or justification.  And yet Christ often connects the promise of
the remission of sins to good works not because He means that good
works are a propitiation, for they follow reconciliation; but for two
reasons.  One is, because good fruits must necessarily follow.
Therefore He reminds us that, if good fruits do not follow the
repentance is hypocritical and feigned.  The other reason is, because
we have need of external signs of so great a promise, because a
conscience full of fear has need of manifold consolation.  As,
therefore, Baptism and the Lord's Supper are signs that continually
admonish, cheer, and encourage desponding minds to believe the more
firmly that their sins are forgiven, so the same promise is written
and portrayed in good works, in order that these works may admonish
us to believe the more firmly.  And those who produce no good works
do not excite themselves to believe, but despise these promises.  The
godly on the other hand, embrace them, and rejoice that they have the
signs and testimonies of so great a promise.  Accordingly, they
exercise themselves in these signs and testimonies.  Just as,
therefore, the Lord's Supper does not justify us _ex opere operato_,
without faith, so alms do not justify us without faith, _ex opere
operato_.

So also the address of Tobias, 4, 11, ought to be received: Alms free
from every sin and from death.  We will not say that this is
hyperbole, although it ought thus to be received, so as not to
detract from the praise of Christ, whose prerogative it is to free
from sin and death.  But we must come back to the rule that without
Christ the doctrine of the Law is of no profit.  Therefore those alms
please God which follow reconciliation or justification, and not
those which precede.  Therefore they free from sin and death, not _ex
opere operato_, but, as we have said above concerning repentance,
that we ought to embrace faith and its fruits, so here we must say
concerning alms that this entire newness of life saves [that they
please God because they occur in believers].  Alms also are the
exercises of faith, which receives the remission of sins and
overcomes death, while it exercises itself more and more, and in
these exercises receives strength.  We grant also this, that alms
merit many favors from God [but they cannot overcome death, hell, the
devil, sins, and give the conscience peace (for this must occur alone
through faith in Christ)], mitigate punishments, and that they merit
our defense in the dangers of sins and of death, as we have said a
little before concerning the entire repentance.  [This is the simple
meaning, which agrees also with other passages of Scripture.  For
wherever in the Scriptures good works are praised, we must always
understand them according to the rule of Paul, that the Law and works
must not be elevated above Christ, but that Christ and faith are as
far above all works as the heavens are above the earth.] And the
address of Tobias, regarded as a whole shows that faith is required
before alms, 4, 5: Be mindful of the Lord, thy God, all thy days And
afterwards, v. 19. Bless the Lord, thy God, always, and desire of Him
that thy ways be directed.  This, however, belongs properly to that
faith of which we speak, which believes that God is reconciled to it
because of His mercy, and which wishes to be justified, sanctified,
and governed by God.  But our adversaries, charming men, pick out
mutilated sentences, in order to deceive those who are unskilled.
Afterwards they attach something from their own opinions.  Therefore,
entire passages are to be required, because, according to the common
precept, it is unbecoming, before the entire Law is thoroughly
examined, to judge or reply when any single clause of it is presented.
And passages, when produced in their entirety, very frequently
bring the interpretation with them.

Luke 11, 41 is also cited in a mutilated form, namely: Give alms of
such things as ye have; and, behold, all things are clean unto you.
The adversaries are very stupid [are deaf, and have callous ears;
therefore, we must so often etc.].  For time and again we have said
that to the preaching of the Law there should be added the Gospel
concerning Christ, because of whom good works are pleasing, but they
everywhere teach [without shame] that, Christ being excluded,
justification is merited by the works of the Law.  When this passage
is produced unmutilated, it will show that faith is required.  Christ
rebukes the Pharisees who think that they are cleansed before God i.e.
, that they are justified by frequent ablutions [by all sorts of
_baptismata carnis_, that is, by all sorts of baths, washings, and
cleansings of the body, of vessels, of garments].  Just as some Pope
or other says of the water sprinkled with salt that it sanctifies and
cleanses the people; and the gloss says that it cleanses from venial
sins.  Such also were the opinions of the Pharisees which Christ
reproved, and to this feigned cleansing He opposes a double cleanness,
the one internal, the other external.  He bids them be cleansed
inwardly [(which occurs only through faith)], and adds concerning the
outward cleanness: Give alms of such things as ye have; and, behold,
all things are clean unto you.  The adversaries do not apply aright
the universal particle all things; for Christ adds this conclusion to
both members: "All things will be clean unto you, if you will be
clean within, and will outwardly give alms." For He indicates that
outward cleanness is to be referred to works commanded by God, and
not to human traditions, such as the ablutions were at that time, and
the daily sprinkling of water, the vesture of monks, the distinctions
of food, and similar acts of ostentation are now.  But the
adversaries distort the meaning by sophistically transferring the
universal particle to only one part: "All things will be clean to
those having given alms." [As if any one would infer: Andrew is
present; therefore all the apostles are present.  Wherefore in the
antecedent both members ought to be joined: Believe and give alms.
For to this the entire mission, the entire office of Christ points;
to this end He is come that we should believe in Him.  Now, if both
parts are combined, believing and giving alms, it follows rightly
that all things are clean: the heart by faith, the external
conversation by good works.  Thus we must combine the entire sermon,
and not invert the parts, and interpret the text to mean that the
heart is cleansed from sin by alms.  Moreover, there are some who
think that these words were spoken by Christ against the Pharisees
ironically, as if He meant to say: Aye, my dear lords, rob and steal,
and then go and give alms, and you will be promptly cleansed, so that
Christ would in a somewhat sarcastic and mocking way puncture their
pharisaical hypocrisy.  For, although they abounded in unbelief,
avarice, and every evil work, they still observed their purifications,
gave alms, and believed that they were quite pure, lovely saints.
This interpretation is not contrary to the text.] Yet Peter says,
Acts 15, 9, that hearts are purified by faith.  And when this entire
passage is examined, it presents a meaning harmonizing with the rest
of Scripture, that, if the hearts are cleansed and then outwardly
alms are added, i.e., all the works of love, they are thus entirely
clean i.e. not only within, but also without.  And why is not the
entire discourse added to it?  There are many parts of the reproof,
some of which give commandment concerning faith and others concerning
works.  Nor is it the part of a candid reader to pick out the
commands concerning works, while the passages concerning faith are
omitted.

Lastly, readers are to be admonished of this, namely, that the
adversaries give the worst advice to godly consciences when they
teach that by works the remission of sins is merited, because
conscience, in acquiring remission through works, cannot be confident
that the work will satisfy God.  Accordingly, it is always tormented,
and continually devises other works and other acts of worship until
it altogether despairs.  This course is described by Paul, Rom. 4, 6,
where he proves that the promise of righteousness is not obtained
because of our works, because we could never affirm that we had a
reconciled God.  For the Law always accuses.  Thus the promise would
be in vain and uncertain.  He accordingly concludes that this promise
of the remission of sins and of righteousness is received by faith,
not on account of works.  This is the true, simple, and genuine
meaning of Paul, in which the greatest consolation is offered godly
consciences, and the glory of Christ is shown forth, who certainly
was given to us for this purpose, namely, that through Him we might
have grace, righteousness, and peace.

Thus far we have reviewed the principal passages which the
adversaries cite against us, in order to show that faith does not
justify, and that we merit, by our works, remission of sins and grace.
But we hope that we have shown clearly enough to godly consciences
that these passages are not opposed to our doctrine; that the
adversaries wickedly distort the Scriptures to their opinions; that
the most of the passages which they cite have been garbled; that,
while omitting the clearest passages concerning faith, they only
select from the Scriptures passages concerning works, and even these
they distort; that everywhere they add certain human opinions to that
which the words of Scripture say; that they teach the Law in such a
manner as to suppress the Gospel concerning Christ.  For the entire
doctrine of the adversaries is, in part, derived from human reason,
and is, in part, a doctrine of the Law, not of the Gospel.  For they
teach two modes of justification, of which the one has been derived
from reason and the other from the Law, not from the Gospel, or the
promise concerning Christ.

The former mode of justification with them is, that they teach that
by good works men merit grace both _de congruo and de condigno_.
This mode is a doctrine of reason, because reason, not seeing the
uncleanness of the heart, thinks that it pleases God if it perform
good works, and for this reason other works and other acts of worship
are constantly devised, by men in great peril, against the terrors of
conscience.  The heathen and the Israelites slew human victims, and
undertook many other most painful works in order to appease God's
wrath.  Afterwards, orders of monks were devised, and these vied with
each other in the severity of their observances against the terrors
of conscience and God's wrath.  And this mode of justification,
because it is according to reason, and is altogether occupied with
outward works, can be understood, and to a certain extent be rendered.
And to this the canonists have distorted the misunderstood Church
ordinances, which were enacted by the Fathers for a far different
purpose, namely, not that by these works we should seek after
righteousness, but that, for the sake of mutual tranquillity among
men, there might be a certain order in the Church.  In this manner
they also distorted the Sacraments and most especially the Mass,
through which they seek _ex opere operato_ righteousness, grace, and
salvation.




Part 9


Another mode of justification is handed down by the scholastic
theologians when they teach that we are righteous through a habit
infused by God, which is love, and that, aided by this habit, we
observe the Law of God outwardly and inwardly and that this
fulfilling of the Law is worthy of grace and of eternal life.  This
doctrine is plainly the doctrine of the Law.  For that is true which
the Law says: Thou shalt love the Lord, thy God, etc., Deut. 6, 5.
Thou shalt love thy neighbor Lev. 19, 18. Love is, therefore, the
fulfilling of the Law.

But it is easy for a Christian to judge concerning both modes,
because both modes exclude Christ, and are therefore to be rejected.
In the former, which teaches that our works are a propitiation for
sin, the impiety is manifest.  The latter mode contains much that is
injurious.  It does not teach that, when we are born again, we avail
ourselves of Christ.  It does not teach that justification is the
remission of sins.  It does not teach that we attain the remission of
sins before we love but falsely represents that we rouse in ourselves
the act of love, through which we merit remission of sins.  Nor does
it teach that by faith in Christ we overcome the terrors of sin and
death.  It falsely represents that, by their own fulfilling of the
Law, without Christ as Propitiator, men come to God.  Finally, it
represents that this very fulfilling of the Law, without Christ as
Propitiator, is righteousness worthy of grace and eternal life, while
nevertheless scarcely a weak and feeble fulfilling of the Law occurs
even in saints.

But if any one will only reflect upon it that the Gospel has not been
given in vain to the world, and that Christ has not been promised,
set forth, has not been born, has not suffered, has not risen again
in vain, he will most readily understand that we are justified not
from reason or from the Law.  In regard to justification, we
therefore are compelled to dissent from the adversaries.  For the
Gospel shows another mode; the Gospel compels us to avail ourselves
of Christ in justification, it teaches that through Him we have
access to God by faith; it teaches that we ought to set Him as
Mediator and Propitiator against God's wrath; it teaches that by
faith in Christ the remission of sins and reconciliation are received,
and the terrors of sin and of death overcome.  Thus Paul also says
that righteousness is not of the Law, but of the promise, in which
the Father has promised that He wishes to forgive, that for Christ's
sake He wishes to be reconciled.  This promise, however, is received
by faith alone, as Paul testifies, Rom. 4,13. This faith alone
receives remission of sins, justifies, and regenerates.  Then love
and other good fruits follow.  Thus, therefore, we teach that man is
justified, as we have above said, when conscience, terrified by the
preaching of repentance, is cheered and believes that for Christ's
sake it has a reconciled God.  This faith is counted for
righteousness before God, Rom. 4, 3. 5. And when in this manner the
heart is cheered and quickened by faith, it receives the Holy Ghost,
who renews us, so that we are able to observe the Law; so that we are
able to love God and the Word of God, and to be submissive to God in
afflictions, so that we are able to be chaste, to love our neighbor,
etc. Even though these works are as yet far distant from the
perfection of the Law, yet they please on account of faith, by which
we are accounted righteous, because we believe that for Christ's sake
we have a reconciled God.  These things are plain and in harmony with
the Gospel, and can be understood by persons of sound mind.  And from
this foundation it can easily be decided why we ascribe justification
to faith, and not to love; although love follows faith, because love
is the fulfilling of the Law.  But Paul teaches that we are justified
not from the Law, but from the promise which is received only by
faith.  For we neither come to God without Christ as Mediator, nor
receive remission of sins for the sake of our love, but for the sake
of Christ.  Likewise we are not able to love God while He is angry,
and the Law always accuses us, always manifests to us an angry God.
Therefore, by faith we must first apprehend the promise that for
Christ's sake the Father is reconciled and forgives.  Afterwards we
begin to observe the Law.  Our eyes are to be cast far away from
human reason, far away from Moses upon Christ, and we are to believe
that Christ is given us, in order that for His sake we may be
accounted righteous.  In the flesh we never satisfy the Law.  Thus,
therefore, we are accounted righteous, not on account of the Law but
on account of Christ because His merits are granted us, if we believe
on Him.  If any one, therefore, has considered these foundations,
that we are not justified by the Law because human nature cannot
observe the Law of God and cannot love God, but that we are justified
from the promise, in which, for Christ's sake, reconciliation,
righteousness, and eternal life have been promised, he will easily
understand that justification must necessarily be ascribed to faith,
if he only will reflect upon the fact that it is not in vain that
Christ has been promised and set forth, that He has been born and has
suffered and been raised again; if he will reflect upon the fact that
the promise of grace in Christ is not in vain, that it was made
immediately from the beginning of the world apart from and beyond the
Law; if he will reflect upon the fact that the promise should be
received by faith, as John says, 1 Ep. 5, 10 sq.: He that believeth
not God hath made Him a liar, because he believeth not the record
that God gave of His Son.  And this is the record that God hath given
to us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.  He that hath the
Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life.
And Christ says John 8, 36: If the Son, therefore, shall make you
free, ye shall be free indeed.  And Paul, Rom. 5, 2: By whom also we
have access to God; and he adds: by faith.  By faith in Christ,
therefore, the promise of remission of sins and of righteousness is
received.  Neither are we justified before God by reason or by the
Law.

These things are so plain and so manifest that we wonder that the
madness of the adversaries is so great as to call them into doubt.
The proof is manifest that, since we are justified before God not
from the Law but from the promise, it is necessary to ascribe
justification to faith.  What can be opposed to this proof, unless
some one wish to abolish the entire Gospel and the entire Christ?
The glory of Christ becomes more brilliant when we teach that we
avail ourselves of Him as Mediator and Propitiator.  Godly
consciences see that in this doctrine the most abundant consolation
is offered to them, namely, that they ought to believe and most
firmly assert that they have a reconciled Father for Christ's sake,
and not for the sake of our righteousness, and that, nevertheless,
Christ aids us, so that we are able to observe also the Law.  Of such
great blessings as these the adversaries deprive the Church when they
condemn and endeavor to efface, the doctrine concerning the
righteousness of faith.  Therefore let all well-disposed minds beware
of consenting to the godless counsels of the adversaries.  In the
doctrine of the adversaries concerning justification no mention is
made of Christ, and how we ought to set Him against the wrath of God,
as though, indeed, we were able to overcome the wrath of God by love,
or to love an angry God.  In regard to these things, consciences are
left in uncertainty.  For if they are to think that they have a
reconciled God for the reason that they love, and that they observe
the Law, they must needs always doubt whether they have a reconciled
God, because they either do not feel this love, as the adversaries
acknowledge, or they certainly feel that it is very small; and much
more frequently do they feel that they are angry at the judgment of
God, who oppresses human nature with many terrible evils, with
troubles of this life, the terrors of eternal wrath, etc. When,
therefore, will conscience be at rest, when will it be pacified?
When, in this doubt and in these terrors, will it love God?  What
else is the doctrine of the Law than a doctrine of despair?  And let
any one of our adversaries come forward who can teach us concerning
this love, how he himself loves God.  They do not at all understand
what they say they only echo, just like the walls of a house, the
little word "love," without understanding it.  So confused and
obscure is their doctrine: it not only transfers the glory of Christ
to human works, but also leads consciences either to presumption or
to despair.  But ours, we hope, is readily understood by pious minds,
and brings godly and salutary consolation to terrified consciences.
For as the adversaries quibble that also many wicked men and devils
believe, we have frequently already said that we speak of faith in
Christ, i.e., of faith in the remission of sins, of faith which truly
and heartily assents to the promise of grace.  This is not brought
about without a great struggle in human hearts.  And men of sound
mind can easily judge that the faith which believes that we are cared
for by God, and that we are forgiven and heard by Him, is a matter
above nature.  For of its own accord the human mind makes no such
decision concerning God.  Therefore this faith of which we speak is
neither in the wicked nor in devils.

Furthermore, if any sophist cavils that righteousness is in the will,
and therefore it cannot be ascribed to faith, which is in the
intellect, the reply is easy, because in the schools even such
persons acknowledge that the will commands the intellect to assent to
the Word of God.  We say also quite clearly: Just as the terrors of
sin and death are not only thoughts of the intellect, but also
horrible movements of the will fleeing God's judgment, so faith is
not only knowledge in the intellect, but also confidence in the will,
