must go to Him as a sinful man, or you are shut out from Him
altogether. If you _will_ go to Him as a sinful being, fling
yourself down there, not try to make yourself better, but say, 'I am
full of unrighteousness and transgression; let Thy love fall upon me
and heal me'; you will get the answer, and in your heart there shall
begin to live and grow up a root of love to Him, which shall at last
effloresce into all knowledge and unto all purity of obedience; for
he that hath had much forgiveness, loveth much; and 'he that loveth
knoweth God,' and 'dwelleth in God, and God in Him'!




GO INTO PEACE


    'And He said to the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee:
    go in peace.'--LUKE vii. 50.

We find that our Lord twice, and twice only, employs this form of
sending away those who had received benefits from His hand. On both
occasions the words were addressed to women: once to this woman, who
was a sinner, and who was gibbeted by the contempt of the Pharisee
in whose house the Lord was; and once to that poor sufferer who
stretched out a wasted hand to lay upon the hem of His garment, in
the hope of getting healing--filching it away unknown to the Giver.
In both cases there is great tenderness; in the latter case even
more so than in the present, for there He addressed the tremulous
invalid as 'daughter'; and in both cases there is a very remarkable
connection hinted at between faith and peace; 'Thy faith hath saved
thee, go in peace.'

Now, there are three things that strike me about these words; the
first of them is this--

I. The dismissal of the woman.

One might have expected that our Lord would have flung the shield of
His companionship, for a little while, at any rate, over this
penitent, and so have saved her from the scoffs and sneers of her
neighbours, who knew that she was a sinner. One might have supposed
that the depth of her gratitude, as expressed by her costly offering
and by her tears, would have spoken to His heart, and that He would
have let her stop beside Him for a little while; but no! Jesus said
to her in effect; 'You have got what you wished; go away, and take
care of it.' Such a dismissal is in accordance with the way in which
He usually acted. For very seldom indeed, after He had gathered the
first nucleus of four disciples, do we find that He summoned any
individual to His side. Generally He broke the connection between
Himself and the recipients of His benefits at as early a moment as
possible, and dismissed them. And that was not only because He did
not wish to be surrounded and hampered by a crowd of slightly
attached disciples, but for two other reasons; one, the good of the
people themselves, and the other, that, scattered all over northern
Palestine, they might in their several circles become centres of
light and evangelists for the King. He dispersed them that He might
fling the seed broadcast over the land.

Jesus Christ says to us, if we have been saved by our faith, 'Go!'
And He intends two things thereby. First, to teach us that it is
good for us to stand by ourselves, to feel responsibility for the
ordering of our lives, not to have a visible Presence at our sides
to fall back upon, but to grow by solitude. There is no better way
of growing reliant, of becoming independent of circumstances, and in
the depths of our own hearts being calm, than by being deprived of
visible stay and support, and thus drawing closer and closer to our
unseen Companion, and leaning harder and heavier upon Him. 'It is
expedient for you that I go away.' For solitude and self-reliance,
which is bottomed upon self-distrust and reliance upon Him, are the
things that make men and women strong. So, if ever He carries us
into the desert, if ever He leaves us forsaken and alone, as we
think, if ever He seems--and sometimes He does with some people, and
it is only seeming--to withdraw Himself from us, it is all for the
one purpose, that we may grow to be mature men and women, not always
children, depending upon go-carts of any kind, and nurses' hands and
leading-strings. Go, and alone with Christ realise by faith that you
are not alone. Christian men and women, have you learned that
lesson--to be able to do without anybody and anything because your
whole hearts are filled, and your courage is braced up and
strengthened by the thought that the absent Christ is the present
Christ?

There is another reason, as I take it, for which this separation of
the new disciple from Jesus was so apparently mercilessly and
perpetually enforced. At the very moment when one would have thought
it would have done this woman good to be with the Lord for a little
while longer, she is sent out into the harshly judging world. Yes,
that is always the way by which Christian men and women that have
received the blessing of salvation through faith can retain it, and
serve Him--by going out among men and doing their work there. The
woman went home. I dare say it was a home, if what they said about
her was true, that sorely needed the leavening which she now would
bring. She had been a centre of evil. She was to go away back to the
very place where she had been such, and to be a centre of good. She
was to contradict her past by her present which would explain itself
when she said she had been with Jesus. For the very same reason for
which to one man that besought to be with Him, He said, 'No, no! go
away home and tell your friends what great things God has done for
you,' He said to this woman, and He says to you and me, 'Go, and
witness for Me.' Communion with Him is blessed, and it is meant to
issue in service for Him. 'Let us make here three tabernacles,' said
the Apostle; and there was scarcely need for the parenthetical
comment, 'not knowing what he said.' But there was a demoniac boy
down there with the rest of the disciples, and they had been trying
in vain to free him from the incubus that possessed him, and as long
as that melancholy case was appealing to the sympathy and help of
the transfigured Christ, it was no time to stop on the Mount.
Although Moses and Elias were there, and the voice from God was
there, and the Shechinah cloud was there, all were to be left, to go
down and do the work of helping a poor, struggling child. So Jesus
Christ says to us, 'Go, and remember that work is the end of
emotion, and that to do the Master's will in the world is the surest
way to realise His presence.'

II. Now, the second point I would suggest is--

The region into which Christ admitted this woman. It is remarkable
that in the present case, and in that other to which I have already
referred, the phraseology employed is not the ordinary one of that
familiar Old Testament leave-taking salutation, which was the
'goodbye' of the Hebrews, 'Go in peace.' But we read occasionally in
the Old Testament a slight but eloquent variation. It is not 'Go in
peace,' as our Authorised Version has it, but 'Go into peace,' and
that is a great deal more than the other. 'Go in peace' refers to
the momentary emotion; 'Go into peace' seems, as it were, to open
the door of a great palace, to let down the barrier on the borders
of a land, and to send the person away upon a journey through all
the extent of that blessed country. Jesus Christ takes up this as He
does a great many very ordinary conventional forms, and puts a
meaning into it. Eli had said to Hannah, 'Go into peace.' Nathan had
said to David, 'Go into peace.' But Eli and Nathan could only wish
that it might be so; their wish had no power to realise itself.
Christ takes the water of the conventional salutation and turns it
into the wine of a real gift. When He says, 'Go into peace,' He puts
the person into the peace which He wishes them, and His word is like
a living creature, and fulfils itself.

So He says to each of us: 'If you have been saved by faith, I open
the door of this great palace. I admit you across the boundaries of
this great country. I give you all possible forms of peace for
yours.' Peace with God--that is the foundation of all--then peace
with ourselves, so that our inmost nature need no longer be torn in
pieces by contending emotions, 'I dare not' waiting upon 'I would,'
and 'I ought' and 'I will' being in continual and internecine
conflict; but heart and will, and calmed conscience, and satisfied
desires, and pure affections, and lofty emotions being all drawn
together into one great wave by the attraction of His love, as the
moon draws the heaped waters of the ocean round the world. So our
souls at rest in God may be at peace within themselves, and that is
the only way by which the discords of the heart can be tuned to one
key, into harmony and concord; and the only way by which wars and
tumults within the soul turn into tranquil energy, and into peace
which is not stagnation, but rather a mightier force than was ever
developed when the soul was cleft by discordant desires.

In like manner, the man who is at peace with God, and consequently
with himself, is in relations of harmony with all things and with
all events. 'All things are yours if ye are Christ's.' 'The stars in
their courses fought against Sisera,' because Sisera was fighting
against God; and all creatures, and all events, are at enmity with
the man who is in antagonism and enmity to Him who is Lord of them
all. But if we have peace with God, and peace with ourselves, then,
as Job says, 'Thou shalt make a league with the beasts of the field,
and the stones of the field shall be at peace with thee.' 'Thy faith
hath saved thee; go into peace.'

Remember that this commandment, which is likewise a promise and a
bestowal, bids us progress in the peace into which Christ admits us.
We should be growingly unperturbed and calm, and 'there is no joy
but calm,' when all is said and done. We should be more and more
tranquil and at rest; and every day there should come, as it were, a
deeper and more substantial layer of tranquillity enveloping our
hearts, a thicker armour against perturbation and calamity and
tumult.

III. And now there is one last point here that I would suggest,
namely:

The condition on which we shall abide in the Land of Peace.

Our Lord said to both these women: 'Thy faith hath saved thee.' To
the other one it was even more needful to say it than to this poor
penitent prostitute, because that other one had the notion that,
somehow or other, she could steal away the blessing of healing by
contact of her finger with the robe of Jesus. Therefore He was
careful to lift her above that sensuous error, and to show her what
it was in her that had drawn healing 'virtue' from Him. In substance
He says to her: 'Thy faith, not thy forefinger, has joined thee to
Me; My love, not My garment, has healed thee.'

There have been, and still are, many copyists of the woman's mistake who
have ascribed too much healing and saving power to externals--sacraments,
rites, and ceremonies. If their faith is real and their longing earnest,
they get their blessing, but they need to be educated to understand
more clearly what is the human condition of receiving Christ's saving
power, and that robe and finger have little to do with it.

The sequence of these two sayings, the one pointing out the channel
of all spiritual blessing, the other, the bestowment of the great
blessing of perfect peace, suggests that the peace is conditional on
the faith, and opens up to us this solemn truth, that if we would
enjoy continuous peace, we must exercise continuous faith. The two
things will cover precisely the same ground, and where the one stops
the other will stop. Yesterday's faith does not secure to-day's
peace. As long as I hold up the shield of faith, it will quench all
the fiery darts of the wicked, but if I were holding it up
yesterday, and have dropped it to-day, then there is nothing between
me and them, and I shall be wounded and burned before long. No past
religious experience avails for present needs. If you would have
'your peace' to be 'as the waves of the sea,' your trust in Christ
must be continuous and strong. The moment you cease trusting, that
moment you cease being peaceful. Keep behind the breakwater, and you
will ride smoothly, whatever the storm. Venture out beyond it, and
you will be exposed to the dash of the waves and the howling of the
tempest. Your own past tells you where the means of blessing are. It
was your faith that saved you, and it is as you go on believing that
you 'Go into peace'.




THE MINISTRY OF WOMEN


    'And certain women, which had been healed of evil
    spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene, out
    of whom went seven devils, 3. And Joanna the wife of
    Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others,
    which ministered unto Him of their substance.'
    --LUKE viii. 2,3.

The Evangelist Luke has preserved for us several incidents in our
Lord's life in which women play a prominent part. It would not, I
think, be difficult to bring that fact into connection with the main
characteristics of his Gospel, but at all events it is worth
observing that we owe to him those details, and the fact that the
service of these grateful women was permanent during the whole of
our Lord's wandering life after His leaving Galilee. An incidental
reference to the fact is found in Matthew's account of the
Crucifixion, but had it not been for Luke we should not have known
the names of two or three of them, nor should we have known how
constantly they adhered to Him. As to the women of the little group,
we know very little about them. Mary of Magdala has had a very hard
fate. The Scripture record of her is very sweet and beautiful.
Delivered by Christ from that mysterious demoniacal possession, she
cleaves to Him, like a true woman, with all her heart. She is one of
the little group whose strong love, casting out all fear, nerved
them to stand by the Cross when all the men except the gentle
Apostle of love, as he is called, were cowering in corners, afraid
of their lives, and she was one of the same group who would fain
have prolonged their ministry beyond His death, and who brought the
sweet spices with them in order to anoint Him, and it was she who
came to the risen Lord with the rapturous exclamation, 'Rabboni, my
Master.' By strange misunderstanding of the Gospel story, she has
been identified with the woman who was a sinner in the previous
chapter in this book, and her fair fame has been blackened and her
very name taken as a designation of the class to which there is no
reason whatever to believe she belonged. Demoniacal possession was
neither physical infirmity nor moral evil, however much it may have
simulated sometimes the one or the other.

Then as to Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, old Church
tradition tells us that she was the consort of the nobleman whose
son Christ healed at Capernaum. It does not seem very likely that
Herod's steward would have been living in Capernaum, and the
narrative before us rather seems to show that she herself was the
recipient of healing from His hands. However that may be, Herod's
court was not exactly the place to look for Christian disciples, was
it? But you know they of Caesar's household surrounded with their
love the Apostle whom Nero murdered, and it is by no means an
uncommon experience that the servants' hall knows and loves the
Christ that the lord in the saloon does not care about.

And then as for Susanna, is it not a sweet fate to be known to all
the world for ever more by one line only, which tells of her service
to her Master?

So I will try to take out of these little incidents in our text some
plain lessons about this matter of Christian service and ministry to
Christ, with which it seems to be so full. It will apply to
missionary work and all other sorts of work, and perhaps will take
us down to the bottom of it all, and show us the foundation on which
it should all rest.

Let me ask you for a moment to look with me first of all at the
centre figure, as being an illustration of--what shall I say? may I
venture to use a rough word and say the pauper Christ?--as the great
Pattern and Motive for us, of the love that becomes poor. We very
often cover the life of our Lord with so much imaginative reverence
that we sometimes lose the hard angles of the facts of it. Now, I
want you to realise it, and you may put it into as modern English as
you like, for it will help the vividness of the conception, which is
a simple, prosaic fact, that Jesus Christ was, in the broadest
meaning of the word, a pauper; not indeed with the sodden poverty
that you can see in our slums, but still in a very real sense of the
word. He had not a thing that He could call His own, and when He
came to the end of His life there was nothing for His executioners
to gamble for except His one possession, the seamless robe. He is
hungry, and there is a fig-tree by the roadside, and He comes,
expecting to get His breakfast off that. He is tired, and He borrows
a fishing-boat to lie down and sleep in. He is thirsty, and He asks
a woman of questionable character to give Him a draught of water. He
wants to preach a sermon about the bounds of ecclesiastical and
civil society, and He says, 'Bring Me a penny.' He has to be
indebted to others for the beast of burden on which He made His
modest entry into Jerusalem, for the winding sheet that wrapped Him,
for the spices that would embalm Him, for the grave in which He lay.
He was a pauper in a deeper sense of the word than His Apostle when
he said, 'Having nothing, and yet possessing all things, as poor,
and yet making many rich.' For let us remember that the great
mystery of the Gospel system--the blending together in one act and
in one Person all the extremes of lowliness and of the loftiness
which go deep down into the very profundities of the Gospel, is all
here dramatised, as it were, and drawn into a picturesque form on
the very surface; and the same blending together of poverty and
absolute love, which in its loftiest form is the union in one Person
of Godhead and of manhood, is here for us in this fact, that all the
dark cloud of poverty, if I may so say, is shot through with strange
gleams of light like sunshine caught and tangled in some cold, wet
fog, so that whenever you get some definite and strange mark of
Christ's poverty, you get lying beside it some definite and strange
mark of His absoluteness and His worth. For instance, take the
illustration I have already referred to--He borrows a fishing-boat
and lies down, weary, to sleep on the wooden pillow at the end of
it; aye, but He rises and He says, 'Peace, be still,' and the waves
fall. He borrows the upper room, and with a stranger's wine and
another man's bread He founds the covenant and the sacrament of His
new kingdom. He borrows a grave; aye, but He comes out of it, the
Lord both of the dead and of the living. And so we have to say,
'Consider the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, though He was
rich, yet for our sakes became poor, that we through His poverty
might become rich.'

The noblest life that was ever lived upon earth-I hope you and I
think it is a great deal more than that, but we all think it is that
at any rate--the noblest life that was ever lived upon earth was the
life of a poor man. Remember that pure desires, holy aspirations,
noble purposes, and a life peopled with all the refinement and
charities that belong to the spirit, and that is ever conscious of
the closest presence of God and of the innate union with Him, is
possible under such conditions, and so remember that the pauper
Christ is, at the least, the perfect Man.

But then what I more immediately intended was to ask you to take
that central figure with this external fact of His poverty, of the
depth of His true inanition, the emptying of Himself for our sakes,
as being the great motive, and Oh! thank God that with all humility,
we may venture to say, the great Pattern to which you and I have to
conform. There is the reason why we say, 'I love to speak His name,'
there is the true measure of the devotion of the consecration and
the self-surrender which He requires. Christ gave all for us even to
the uttermost circumference of external possession, and standing in
the midst of those for whose sakes He became poor, He turns to them
with a modest appeal when He says, 'Minister unto Me, for I have
made Myself to need your ministrations for the sake of your
redemption.' So much, then, for the first point which I would desire
to urge upon you from this incident before us.

Now, in the next place, and pursuing substantially the same course
of thought, let me suggest to you to look at the love--the love here
that stoops to be served.

It is a familiar observation and a perfectly true one that we have no
record of our Lord's ever having used miraculous power for the supply
of His own wants, and the reason for that, I suppose, is to be found
not only in that principle of economy and parsimony of miraculous
energy, so that the supernatural in His life was ever pared down to
the narrowest possible limits, and inosculated immediately with the
natural, but it is also to be found in this--let me put it into very
plain words--that Christ liked to be helped and served by the people
that He loved, and that Christ knew that they liked it as well as He.
It delighted Him, and He was quite sure that it delighted them. You
fathers and mothers know what it is when one of your little children
comes, and seeing you engaged about some occupation says, 'Let me
help you.' The little hand perhaps does not contribute much to the
furtherance of your occupation. It may be rather an encumbrance than
otherwise, but is not there a gladness in saying 'Yes, here, take
this and do this little thing for me'? And do not we all know how
maimed and imperfect that love is which only gives, and how maimed
and imperfect that love is which only receives, so that there must
be an assumption of both attitudes in all true commerce of affection,
and that same beautiful flashing backwards and forwards from the two
poles which makes the sweetness of our earthly love find its highest
example there in the heavens. There are the two mirrors facing each
other, and they reverberate rays from one polished surface to another,
and so Christ loves and gives, and Christ loves and takes, and His
servants love and give, and His servants love and take. Sometimes we
are accustomed to speak of it as the highest sign of our Lord's true,
deep conviction that He has given so much to us. It seems to me we may
well pause and hesitate whether the mightiness and the wonderfulness
of His love to us are shown more in that He gives everything to us,
or in that He takes so much from us. It is much to say, 'The Son of
man came not to be ministered unto but to minister'; I do not know
but that it is more to say that the Son of man let this record be
written: 'Certain women also which ministered to Him of their
substance.' At all events there it stands and for us. What although
we have to come and say, 'All that I bring is Thine'; what then?
Does a father like less to get a gift from his boy because he gave
him the shilling to buy it? And is there anything that diminishes
the true sweetness of our giving to Christ, and as we may believe
the true sweetness to Him of receiving it from us, because we have
to herald all our offerings, all our love, aspirations, desires,
trust, conformity, practical service, substantial help, with the
old acknowledgment, 'All things come of Thee, and of Thine own have
we given Thee.'

Now, dear friends, all these principles which I have thus
imperfectly touched upon as to the necessity of the blending of the
two sides in all true commerce of love, the giving and bestowing the
expression of the one affection in both hearts, all bears very
directly upon the more special work of Christian men in spreading
the name of Christ among those who do not know it. You get the same
economy of power there that I was speaking about. The supernatural
is finished when the divine life is cast into the world. 'I am come
to fling fire upon the earth,' said He, 'and oh, that it were
already kindled!' _There_ is the supernatural; after that you
have to deal with the thing according to the ordinary laws of human
history and the ordinary conditions of man's society. God trusts the
spread of His word to His people; there will not be one moment's
duration of the barely, nakedly supernatural beyond the absolute
necessity. Christ comes; after that you and I have to see to it, and
then you say, 'Collections, collections, collections, it is always
collections. This society and that society and the other society,
there is no end of the appeals that are made. Charity sermons--men
using the highest motives of the Gospel for no purpose but to get a
shilling or two out of people's pockets. I am tired of it.' Very
well; all I have to say is, first of all, 'Ye have not resisted unto
blood'; some people have had to pay a great deal more for their
Gospel than you have. And another thing, a man that had lost a great
deal more for his Master than ever you or I will have to do, said,
'Unto me who am less than the least of all saints is this grace
given, that I should preach amongst the heathen the unsearchable
riches of Christ.' Ah! a generous, chivalrous spirit, a spirit
touched to fine issues by the fine touch of the Lord's love, will
feel that it is no burden; or if it be a burden, it is only a burden
as a golden crown heavy with jewels may be a burden on brows that
are ennobled by its pressure. This grace is given, and He has
crowned us with the honour that we may serve Him and do something
for Him.

Dear brethren! of all the gracious words that our Master has spoken
to us, I know not that there is one more gracious than when He said,
'Go into all the world and preach the Gospel to every creature'; and
of all the tender legacies that He has left His Church, though there
be included amongst these His own peace and His own Spirit, I know
not that there is any more tender or a greater sign of His love
towards us and His confidence in us than when departing to the far
country to receive a kingdom and to return, He gave authority to His
servants, and to every man his work.'

And so, in the next place, let me ask you to look for a moment at
the complement to this love that stoops to serve and delights to
serve--the ministry or service of our love. Let me point to two
things.

It seems to me that the simple narrative we have before us goes very
deep into the heart of this matter. It gives us two things--the
foundation of the service and the sphere of the service.

First there is the foundation--'Certain women which had been healed
of evil spirits and infirmities.' Ah, there you come to it! The
consciousness of redemption is the one master touch that evokes the
gratitude which aches to breathe itself in service. There is no
service except it be the expression of love. That is the one great
Christian principle; and the other is that there is no love that
does not rest on the consciousness of redemption; and from these
two--that all service and obedience are the utterance and eloquence
of love, and that all love has its root in the sense of redemption--you
may elaborate all the distinct characteristics and peculiarities
of Christian ethics, whereby duty becomes gladness. 'I will,' and 'I
ought' overlap and cover each other like two of Euclid's triangles;
and whatsoever He commands that I spring to do; and so though the
burden be heavy, considered in regard to its requirements, and
though the yoke do often press, considered _per se_, yet
because the cords that fasten the yoke to our neck are the cords of
love, I can say, 'My burden is light.' One of the old psalms puts it
thus; 'O Lord, truly I am Thy servant; Thou hast loosed my bonds;
and because Thou hast loosed, therefore O hear me; speak, Lord, for
Thy servant heareth.'

So much then for the foundation--now for the sphere. 'Ah,' you say,
'there is no parallel there, at any rate. These women served Him
with personal ministration of their substance.' Well, I think there
is a parallel notwithstanding. If I had time I should like to dwell
upon the side thoughts connected with that sphere of service, and
remind you how very prosaic were their common domestic duties,
looking after the comfort of Christ and the travel-stained Twelve
who were with Him--let us put it into plain English--cooking their
dinners for them, and how that became a religious act. Take the
lesson out of it, you women in your households, and you men in your
counting-houses and behind your counters, and you students at your
dictionaries and lexicons. The commonest things done for the Master
flash up into worship, or as good old George Herbert puts it--

  'A servant with this clause
  Makes drudgery divine;
  Who sweeps a room, as for Thy cause,
  Makes that and th' action fine.'

But then beyond that, is there any personal ministration to do? If
any of you have ever been in St. Mark's Convent at Florence, I dare
say you will remember that in the Guest Chamber the saintly genius
of Fra Angelico has painted, as an appropriate frontispiece, the two
pilgrims on the road to Emmaus, praying the unknown man to come in
and partake of their hospitality; and he has draped them in the
habit of his order, and he has put Christ as the Representative of
all the poor and wearied and wayworn travellers that might enter in
there and receive hospitality, which is but the lesson, 'Inasmuch as
ye have done it unto one of the least of these My brethren, ye have
done it unto Me.'

And there is another thing, dear friends. Do we not minister to Him
best when we do the thing that is nearest His heart and help Him
most in the purpose of His life and in His death? What would you
think of a would-be helper of some great reformer who said: 'I will
give you all sorts of material support; but I have not a grain of
sympathy with the cause to which you have devoted your life. I think
it is madness and nonsense: I will feed you and house you and make
you comfortable, but I do not care one rush for the object for which
you are to be housed and fed and made comfortable.' Jesus Christ let
these poor women help Him that He might live to bear the Cross; He
lets you and me help Him for that for which on the Cross He died;
'This honour have all the saints'; The foundation of our service is
the consciousness of redemption; its sphere is ministering to Him in
that which is nearest His heart.

And then, brethren, there is another thing that does not so
immediately belong to the incident before us, but which suggests
itself to me in connection with it. We have tried to show the motive
and the pattern, the foundation and the sphere, of the service: let
me add a last thought--the remembrance and the record of it.

How strange that is, that just as a beam of light coming into a room
would enable us to see all the motes dancing up and down that lay in
its path, so the beam from Christ's life shoots athwart the society
of His age, and all those little insignificant people come for a
moment into the full lustre of the light. Years before and years
afterward they lived, and we do not know anything about them; but
for an instant they crossed the illuminated track and there they
blazed. How strange Pharisees, officials, and bookmen of all sorts
would have felt if anybody had said to them: 'Do you see that
handful of travel-stained Galileans there, those poor women you have
just passed by the way? Well, do you know that these three women's
names will never perish as long as the world lasts?' So we may learn
the eternity of work done for Him. Ah, a great deal of it may be
forgotten and unrecorded! How many deeds of faithful love and noble
devotion are all compressed into those words, 'which ministered unto
Him'! It is the old story of how life shrinks, and shrinks, and
shrinks in the record. How many acres of green forest ferns in the
long ago time went to make up a seam of coal as thick as a sixpence?
But still there is the record, compressed indeed, but existent.

And how many names may drop out and not be associated with the work
which they did? Do you not think that these anonymous 'many others
which ministered' were just as dear to Jesus Christ as Mary and
Joanna and Susannah? A great many people helped Him whose deeds are
related in the Gospel, but whose names are not recorded. But what
does it matter about that? With many 'others of my fellow-labourers
also,' says St. Paul; 'whose names'--well, I have forgotten them;
but that is of little consequence; they 'are in the Lamb's book of
life.' And so the work is eternal, and will last on in our blessed
consciousness and in His remembrance who will never forget any of
it, and we shall self-enfold the large results, even if the rays of
dying fame may fade.

And there is one other thought on this matter of the eternity of the
work on which I would just touch for an instant.

How strange it must be to these women now! If, as I suppose, you and
I believe, they are living with Christ, they will look up to Him and
think, 'Ah! we remember when we used to find your food and prepare
for your household comforts, and there Thou art on the throne! How
strange and how great our earthly service seems to us now!' So it
will be to us all when we get up yonder. We shall have to say,
'Lord, when saw I Thee?' He will put a meaning into our work and a
majesty into it that we know nothing about at present. So, brethren,
account the name of His slaves your highest honour, and the task
that love gives you your greatest joy. When we have in our poor love
poorly ministered unto Him who in His great love greatly died for
us, then, at the last, the wonderful word will be fulfilled: 'Verily
I say unto you, He shall gird Himself and make them to sit down to
meat and will come forth and serve them.'




ONE SEED AND DIVERSE SOILS


    'And when much people were gathered together, and were
    come to Him out of every city, He spake by a parable:
    5. A sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed,
    some fell by the wayside; and it was trodden down, and
    the fowls of the air devoured it. 6. And some fell upon
    a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it withered
    away, because it lacked moisture. 7. And some fell
    among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and
    choked it. 8. And other fell on good ground, and sprang
    up, and bare fruit an hundredfold. And when He had said
    these things, He cried, He that hath ears to hear, let
    him hear. 9. And His disciples asked Him, saying, What
    might this parable be? 10. And He said, Unto you it is
    given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God: but
    to others in parables; that seeing they might not see,
    and hearing they might not understand. 11. Now the
    parable is this; The seed is the word of God. 12. Those
    by the  way-side are they that hear: then cometh the
    devil, and taketh away the word out of their hearts,
    lest they should believe and be saved. 13. They on the
    rock are they which, when they hear, receive the word
    with joy; and these have no root, which for a while
    believe, and in time of temptation fall away. 14. And
    that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they
    have heard, go forth, and are choked with cares, and
    riches, and pleasures of this life, and bring no fruit
    to perfection. 15. But that on the good ground are
    they, which in an honest and good heart, having heard
    the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.'
    --LUKE viii. 4-16.

Luke is particular in dating this parable as spoken at a time when
crowds resorted to Jesus, and the cities of Galilee seemed emptied
out to hear Him. No illusions as to the depth or worth of this
excitement beset Him. Sadly He looked on the eager multitudes,
because He looked through them, and saw how few of them were
bringing 'an honest and good heart' for the soil of His word. Just
because He saw the shallowness of the momentary enthusiasm, He spoke
this pregnant parable from a heavy heart, and as He tells us in His
explanation of it to the disciples (ver. 10), uses the parabolic
garb as a means of hiding the truth from the unsusceptible, and of
bringing it home to those who were prepared to receive it. Every
parable has that double purpose of obscuring and revealing. The
obscuring is punitive, but the punishment is meant to be remedial.
God never cheats men by a revelation that does not reveal, and the
very hiding is meant to stimulate to a search which cannot be vain.

The broad outstanding fact of the parable is tragic. Three failures
and one success! It may be somewhat lightened by observing that the
proportion which each 'some' bears to the whole seed-basketful is
not told; but with all alleviation, it is sad enough. What a lesson
for all eager reformers and apostles of any truth, who imagine that
they have but to open their mouths and the world will listen! What a
warning for any who are carried off their feet by their apparent
'popularity'! What a solemn appeal to all hearers of God's message!

I. Commentators have pointed out that all four kinds of soil might
have been found close together by the lake, and that there may have
been a sower at work within sight. But the occasion of the parable
lay deeper than the accident of local surroundings. A path through a
cornfield is a prosaic enough thing, but one who habitually holds
converse with the unseen, and ever sees it shining through the seen,
beholds all things 'apparelled in celestial light,' and finds deep
truths in commonplace objects. The sower would not intentionally
throw seed on the path, but some would find its resting-place there.
It would lie bare on the surface of the hard ground, and would not
be there long enough to have a chance of germinating, but as soon as
the sower's back was turned to go up the next furrow, down would
come the flock of thievish birds that fluttered behind him, and bear
away the grains. The soil might be good enough, but it was so hard
that the seed did not get in, but only lay on it. The path was of
the same soil as the rest of the field, only it had been trodden
down by the feet of passengers, perhaps for many years.

A heart across which all manner of other thoughts have right of way
will remain unaffected by the voice of Jesus, if He spoke His
sweetest, divinest tones, still more when He speaks but through some
feeble man. The listener hears the words, but they never get farther
than the drum of his ear. They lie on the surface of his soul, which
is beaten hard, and is non-receptive. How many there are who have
been listening to the preaching of the Gospel, which is in a true
sense the sowing of the seed, all their lives, and have never really
been in contact with it! Tramp, tramp, go the feet across the path,
heavy drays of business, light carriages of pleasure, a never-ending
stream of traffic and noise like that which pours day and night
through the streets of a great city, and the result is complete
insensibility to Christ's voice.

If one could uncover the hearts of a congregation, how many of them
would be seen to be occupied with business or pleasures, or some
favourite pursuit, even while they sit decorously in their pews! How
many of them hear the preacher's voice without one answering thought
or emotion! How many could not for their lives tell what his last
sentence was! No marvel, then, that, as soon as its last sound has
ceased, down pounce a whole covey of light-winged fancies and
occupations, and carry off the poor fragments of what had been so
imperfectly heard. One wonders what percentage of remembrances of a
sermon is driven out of the hearers' heads in the first five minutes
of their walk home, by the purely secular conversation into which
they plunge so eagerly.

II. The next class of hearers is represented by seed which has had
somewhat better fate, inasmuch as it has sunk some way in, and begun
to sprout. The field, like many a one in hilly country, had places
where the hard pan of underlying rock had only a thin skin of earth
over it. Its very thinness helped quick germination, for the rock
was near enough to the surface to get heated by the sun. So, with
undesirable rapidity, growth began, and shoots appeared above ground
before there was root enough made below to nourish them. There was
only one possible end for such premature growth--namely, withering
in the heat. No moisture was to be drawn from the shelf of rock, and
the sun was beating fiercely down, so the feeble green stem drooped
and was wilted.

It is the type of emotional hearers, who are superficially touched
by the Gospel, and too easily receive it, without understanding what
is involved. They take it for theirs 'with joy,' but are strangers
to the deep exercises of penitence and sorrow which should precede
the joy. 'Lightly come, lightly go,' is true in Christian life as
elsewhere. Converts swiftly made are quickly lost. True, the most
thorough and permanent change may be a matter of a moment; but, if
so, into that moment emotions will be compressed like a great river
forced through a mountain gorge, which will do the work of years.

Such surface converts fringe all religious revivals. The crowd
listening to our Lord was largely made up of them. These were they
who, when a ground of offence arose, 'went back, and walked no more
with Him.' They have had their successors in all subsequent times of
religious movement. Light things are caught up by the wind of a
passing train, but they soon drop to the ground again. Emotion is
good, if there are roots to it. But 'these have no root.' The Gospel
has not really touched the depths of their natures, their wills,
their reason, and so they shrivel up when they have to face the toil
and self-sacrifice inherent in a Christian life.

III. The third parcel of seed advanced still farther. It rooted and
grew. But the soil had other occupants. It was full of seeds of
weeds and thorns (not thorn _bushes_). So the two crops ran a
race, and as ill weeds grow apace, the worse beat, and stifled the
green blades of the springing corn, which, hemmed in and shut out
from light and air, came to nothing.

The man represented has not made clean work of his religion. He has
received the good seed, but has forgotten that something has to be
grubbed up and cast out, as well as something to be taken in, if he
would grow the fair fruits of Christian character. He probably has
cut down the thorns, but has left their roots or seeds where they
were. He has fruit of a sort, but it is scanty, crude, and green.
Why? Because he has not turned the world out of his heart. He is
trying to unite incompatibles, one of which is sure to kill the
other. His 'thorns' are threefold, as Luke carefully distinguishes
them into 'cares and riches and pleasures,' but they are one in
essence, for they are all 'of this life.' If he is poor, he is
absorbed in cares; if rich, he is yet more absorbed in wealth, and
his desires go after worldly pleasures, which he has not been
taught, by experience of the supreme pleasure of communion with God,
to despise.

Mark that this man does not 'fall away.' He keeps up his Christian
name to the end. Probably he is a very influential member of the
church, universally respected for his wealth and liberality, but his
religion has been suffocated by the other growth. He has fruit, but
it is not to 'perfection.' If Jesus Christ came to Manchester, one
wonders how many such Christians He would discover in the chief
seats in the synagogues.

IV. The last class avoids the defects of the three preceding. The
soil is soft, deep, and clean. The seed sinks, roots, germinates,
has light and air, and brings forth ripened grain. The 'honest and
good heart' in which it lodges has been well characterised as one
'whose aim is noble, and who is generously devoted to his aim'
(Bruce, _The Parabolic Teaching of Christ_, p. 33). Such a soul
Christ recognises as possible, prior to the entrance into it of the
word. There are dispositions which prepare for the reception of the
truth. But not only the previous disposition, but the subsequent
attitude to the word spoken, is emphasised by our Lord. 'They having
heard the word, hold it fast.' Docilely received, it is steadily
retained, or held with a firm grip, whoever and whatever may seek to
pluck it from mind or heart.

Further, not only tenacity of grasp, but patient perseverance of
effort after the fruit of Christian character, is needed. There must
be perseverance in the face of obstacles within and without, if
there is to be fruitfulness. The emblem of growth does not suffice
to describe the process of Christian progress. The blade becomes the
ear, and the ear the full corn, without effort. But the Christian
disciple has to fight and resist, and doggedly to keep on in a
course from which many things would withdraw him. The nobler the
result, the sorer the process. Corn grows; character is built up as
the result, first of worthily receiving the good seed, and then of
patient labour and much self-suppression.

These different types of character are capable of being changed. The
path may be broken up, the rock blasted and removed, the thorns
stubbed up. We make ourselves fit or unfit to receive the seed and
bear fruit. Christ would not have spoken the parable if He had not
hoped thereby to make some of His hearers who belonged to the three
defective classes into members of the fourth. No natural,
unalterable incapacity bars any from welcoming the word, housing it
in his heart, and bringing forth fruit with patience.




SEED AMONG THORNS


    'And that which fell among thorns are they, which,
    when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with
    cares, and riches, and pleasures of this life, and
    bring no fruit to perfection.'--Luke viii. 14.

No sensible sower would cast his seed among growing thorn-bushes,
and we must necessarily understand that the description in this
verse is not meant to give us the picture of a field in which these
were actually growing, but rather of one in which they had been
grubbed up, and so preparation been made for the sowing of the seed.
They had been grubbed up, but they had not been grubbed out. The
roots were there, although the branches and the stems had been cut
down, or if the roots were not there, abundant seeds were lying
buried, and when the good seed was sown it went into ground full of
them--and that was the blunder out of which all the mischief came.

I. These three different instances of failure in this parable
represent to us, first, the seed carried off at the very beginning,
before it has sunk into the ground and before it has had time to
germinate. It lies on the surface and it goes at once. But suppose
it is safely piloted past that first danger, then comes another
peril. It gets a little deeper into the ground, but there is a shelf
of rock an inch or two below the skin of soil, and the poor little
rootlets cannot get through that, and so when the hot Syrian sun
shines down upon the field, there is an unnatural heat, and a swift
vegetation. There is growth, but the same sun that at first
stimulated the unnaturally rapid growth, gets a little hotter or
continues to pour down during the fervid summer and dries up the
premature vegetation which it had called into feeble life. That
second seed went further on the road towards fruit.

But suppose a seed is piloted past that second risk, there comes
this third one. This seed gets deeper still, and does take root, and
does grow, and does bear fruit. That is to say, this is a picture of
a real Christian, in whom the seed of the kingdom, which is the word
of God, has taken root, and to whom there has been the communication
of the divine life that is in the seed; and yet that, too, comes to
grief, and our parable tells us how--by three things, the thorns,
the growth of the thorns, and the choking of the word.
