this world cast out'; sometimes in metaphor, as 'I beheld Satan as
lightning fall from heaven,' 'First bind the strong man and then spoil
his house.' We do not know how far-reaching the influences of the Cross
may be, and what they may have done in those dark regions, but we know
that since that Cross, the power of evil in the world has been broken
in its centre, that God has been disclosed, that new forces have been
lodged in the heart of humanity, which only need to be developed in
order to overcome the evil. We know that since that auspicious day when
'He spoiled principalities and powers, making a show of them openly and
leading them in triumph,' even when He was nailed upon the Cross, the
history of the world has been the judgment of the world. Hoary
iniquities have toppled into the ceaseless washing sea of divine love
which has struck against their bases. Ancient evils have vanished, and
more are on the point of vanishing. A loftier morality, a higher notion
of righteousness, a deeper conception of sin, new hopes for the world
and for men, have dawned upon mankind; and the prince of the world is
led bound, as it were, at the victorious chariot wheels. The central
fortress has been captured, and the rest is an affair of outposts.

My text has for its last word this--the prince's judgment prophesies
the world's future judgment. The process which began when Jesus Christ
died has for its consummation the divine condemnation of all the evil
that still afflicts humanity, and its deprivation of authority and
power to injure. A final judgment will come, and that it will is
manifested by the fact that Christ, when He came in the form of a
servant and died upon the Cross, judged the prince. When He comes in
the form of a King on the great White Throne He will judge the world
which He has delivered from its prince.

That thought, my brother, ought to be a hope to us all. Are you glad
when you think that there is a day of judgment coming? Does your heart
leap up when you realise the fact that the righteousness, which is in
the heavens, is sure to conquer and coerce and secure under the hatches
the sin that is riding rampant through the world? It was a joy and a
hope to men who did not know half as much of the divine love and the
divine righteousness as we do. They called upon the rocks and the hills
to rejoice, and the trees of the forest to clap their hands before the
Lord, 'for He cometh to judge the world.' Does your heart throb a glad
Amen to that?

It ought to be a hope; it is a fear; and there are some of us who do
not like to have the conviction driven home to us, that the end of the
strife between sin and righteousness is that Jesus Christ shall judge
the world and take unto Himself His eternal kingdom.

But, my friends, hope or fear, it is a fact, as certain in the future,
as the Cross is sure in the past, or the Throne in the present. Let me
ask you this question, the question which Christ has sent all His
servants to ask--Have you loathed your sin? have you opened your heart
to Christ's righteousness? If you have, when men's hearts are failing
them for fear, and they 'call on the rocks and the hills to cover them
from the face of Him that sitteth upon the Throne,' you will 'have a
song as in the night when a holy solemnity is kept,' and lift up your
heads, 'for your redemption draweth nigh.' 'Herein is our love made
perfect, that we may have boldness before Him in the day of judgment.'



THE GUIDE INTO ALL TRUTH

'I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.
Howbeit when He, the Spirit of truth, is come, He will guide you into
all truth: for He shall not speak of Himself; but whatsoever He shall
hear, that shall He speak: and He will show you things to come. He
shall glorify Me: for He shall receive of Mine, and shall show it unto
you. All things that the Father hath are Mine: therefore said I, that
He shall take of Mine, and shall show it unto you.'--JOHN xvi. 12-15.

This is our Lord's last expansion, in these discourses, of the great
promise of the Comforter which has appeared so often in them. First, He
was spoken of simply as dwelling in Christ's servants, without any more
special designation of His work than was involved in the name. Then,
His aid was promised, to remind the Apostles of the facts of Christ's
life, especially of His words; and so the inspiration and authority of
the four Gospels were certified for us. Then He was further promised as
the witness in the disciples to Jesus Christ. And, finally, in the
immediately preceding context, we have His office of 'convincing,' or
convicting, 'the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment.'
And now we come to that gracious and gentle work which that divine
Spirit is declared by Christ to do, not only for that little group
gathered round Him then, but for all those who trust themselves to His
guidance. He is to be the 'Spirit of truth' to all the ages, who in
simple verity will help true hearts to know and love the truth. There
are three things in the words before us--first, the avowed
incompleteness of Christ's own teaching; second, the completeness of
the truth into which the Spirit of truth guides; and, last, the unity
of these two.

I. First, then, we have here the avowed incompleteness of Christ's own
teaching.

'I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.'
Now in an earlier portion of these great discourses, we have our Lord
asserting that '_all_ things whatsoever He had heard of the Father He
had made known' unto His servants. How do these two representations
harmonise? Is it possible to make them agree? Surely, yes. There is a
difference between the germ and the unfolded flower. There is a
difference between principles and the complete development of these. I
suppose you may say that all Euclid is in the axioms and definitions. I
suppose you may also say that when you have learned the axioms and
definitions, there are many things yet to be said, of which you have
not grown to the apprehension. And so our Lord, as far as His frankness
was concerned, and as far as the fundamental and seminal principles of
all religious truth were concerned, had even then declared all that He
had heard of the Father. But yet, in so far as the unfolding of these
was concerned, the tracing of their consequences, the exhibition of
their harmonies, the weaving of them into an ordered whole in which a
man's understanding could lodge, there were many things yet to be said,
which that handful of men were not able to bear. And so our Lord
Himself here declares that His words spoken on earth are not His
completed revelation.

Of course we find in them, as I believe, hints profound and pregnant,
which only need to be unfolded and smoothed out, as it were, and their
depths fathomed, in order to lead to all that is worthy of being called
Christian truth. But upon many points we cannot but contrast the
desultory, brief, obscure references which came from the Master's lips
with the more systematised, full, and accurate teaching which came from
the servants. The great crucial instance of all is the comparative
reticence which our Lord observed in reference to His sacrificial
death, and the atoning character of His sufferings for the world. I do
not admit that the silence of the Gospels upon that subject is fairly
represented when it is said to be absolute. I believe that that silence
has been exaggerated by those who have no desire to accept that
teaching. But the distinction is plain and obvious, not to be ignored,
rather to be marked as being fruitful of blessed teaching, between the
way in which Christ speaks about His Cross, and the way in which the
Apostles speak about it after Pentecost.

What then? My text gives us the reason. 'You cannot bear them now.' Now
the word rendered 'bear' here does not mean 'bear' in the sense of
endure, or tolerate, or suffer, but 'bear' in the sense of carry. And
the metaphor is that of some weight--it may be gold, but still it is a
weight--laid upon a man whose muscles are not strong enough to sustain
it. It crushes rather than gladdens. So because they had not strength
enough to carry, had not capacity to receive, our Lord was lovingly
reticent.

There is a great principle involved in this saying--that revelation is
measured by the moral and spiritual capacities of the men who receive
it. The light is graduated for the diseased eye. A wise oculist does
not flood that eye with full sunshine, but he puts on veils and
bandages, and closes the shutters, and lets a stray beam, ever growing
as the curve is perfected, fall upon it. So from the beginning until
the end of the process of revelation there was a correspondence between
men's capacity to receive the light and the light that was granted; and
the faithful use of the less made them capable of receiving the
greater, and as soon as they were capable of receiving it, it came. 'To
him that hath shall be given.' In His love, then, Christ did not load
these men with principles that they could not carry, nor feed them with
'strong meat' instead of 'milk,' until they were able to bear it.
Revelation is progressive, and Christ is reticent, from regard to the
feebleness of His listeners.

Now that same principle is true in a modified form about us. How many
things there are which we sometimes feel we should like to know, that
God has not told us, because we have not yet grown up to the point at
which we could apprehend them! Compassed with these veils of flesh and
weakness, groping amidst the shadows of time, bewildered by the
cross-lights that fall upon us from so many surrounding objects, we
have not yet eyes able to behold the ineffable glory. He has many
things to say to us about that blessed future, and that strange and
awful life into which we are to step when we leave this poor world, but
'ye cannot bear them now.' Let us wait with patience until we are ready
for the illumination. For two things go to make revelation, the light
that reveals and the eye that beholds.

Now one remark before I go further. People tell us, 'Your modern
theology is not in the Gospels.' And they say to us, as if they had
administered a knockdown blow, 'We stick by Jesus, not Paul.' Well, as
I said, I do not admit that there is no 'Pauline' teaching in the
Gospels, but I do confess there is not much. And I say, 'What then?'
Why, this, then--it is exactly what we were to expect; and people who
reject the apostolic form of Christian teaching because it is not found
in the Gospels are flying in the face of Christ's own teaching. You say
you will take His words as the only source of religious truth. You are
going clean contrary to His own words in saying so. Remember that He
proclaimed their incompleteness, and referred us, for the fuller
knowledge of the truth of God, to a subsequent Teacher.

II. So, secondly, mark here the completeness of the truth into which
the Spirit guides.

I must trouble you with just a word or two of remark as to the language
of our text. Note the personality, designation, and office of this new
Teacher. 'He,' not '_it_,' He, is the Spirit of truth whose
characteristic and weapon is truth. 'He will guide you'--suggesting a
loving hand put out to lead; suggesting the graciousness, the
gentleness, the gradualness of the teaching. 'Into all truth '--that is
no promise of omniscience, but it is the assurance of gradual and
growing acquaintance with the spiritual and moral truth which is
revealed, such as may be fitly paralleled by the metaphor of men
passing into some broad land, of which there is much still to be
possessed and explored. Not to-day, nor to-morrow, will all the truth
belong to those whom the Spirit guides; but if they are true to His
guidance, 'to-morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant,' and
the land will all be traversed at the last. 'He shall not speak of
Himself, but whatsoever He shall hear that shall He speak.' Mark the
parallel between the relation of the Spirit-Teacher to Jesus, and the
relation of Jesus to the Father. Of Him, too, it is said by Himself,
'All things whatsoever I have heard of the Father I have declared unto
you.' The mark of Satan is, 'He speaketh of his own'; the mark of the
divine Teacher is, 'He speaketh not of Himself, but whatsoever things,'
in all their variety, in their continuity, in their completeness, 'He
shall hear,'--where? yonder in the depths of the Godhead--'whatsoever
things He shall hear there,' He shall show to you, and especially, 'He
will show you the things that are to come.' These Apostles were living
in a revolutionary time. Men's hearts were 'failing them for fear of
the things that were coming on the earth.' Step by step they would be
taught the evolving glory of that kingdom which they were to be the
instruments in founding; and step by step there would be spread out
before them the vision of the future and all the wonder that should be,
the world that was to come, the new constitution which Christ was to
establish.

Now, if that be the interpretation, however inadequate, of these great
and wonderful words, there are but two things needful to say about
them. One is that this promise of a complete guidance into truth
applies in a peculiar and unique fashion to the original hearers of it.
I ventured to say that one of the other promises of the Spirit, which I
quoted in my introductory remarks, was the certificate to us of the
inspiration and reliableness of these Four Gospels. And I now remark
that in these words, in their plain and unmistakable meaning, there lie
involved the inspiration and authority of the Apostles as teachers of
religious truth. Here we have the guarantee for the authority over our
faith, of the words which came from these men, and from the other who
was added to their number on the Damascus road. They were guided 'into
_all_ the truth,' and so our task is to receive the truth into which
they were guided.

The Acts of the Apostles is the best commentary on these words of my
text. There you see how these men rose at once into a new region; how
the truths about their Master which had been bewildering puzzles to
them flashed into light; how the Cross, which had baffled and dispersed
them, became at once the centre of union for themselves and for the
world; how the obscure became lucid, and Christ's death and the
resurrection stood forth to them as the great central facts of the
world's salvation. In the book of the Apocalypse we have part of the
fulfilment of this closing promise: 'He will show you things to come';
when the Seer was 'in the Spirit on the Lord's Day,' and the heavens
were opened, and the history of the Church (whether in chronological
order, or in the exhibition of symbols of the great forces which shall
be arrayed for and against it, over and over again, to the end of time,
does not at present matter), was spread before Him as a scroll.

Now, dear friends, this great principle of my text has a modified
application also to us all. For that divine Spirit is given to each of
us if we will use Him, is given to any and every man who desires Him,
does dwell in Christian hearts, though, alas! so many of us are so
little conscious of Him, and does teach us the truth which Christ
Himself left incomplete.

Only let me make one remark here. We do not stand on the same level as
these men who clustered round Christ on His road to Gethsemane, and
received the first fruits of the promise--the Spirit. They, taught by
that divine Guide and by experience, were led into the deeper
apprehension of the words and the deeds, of the life and the death, of
Jesus Christ our Lord. We, taught by that same Spirit, are led into a
deeper apprehension of the words which they spake, both in recording
and interpreting the facts of Christ's life and death.

And so we come sharp up to this, 'If any man thinketh himself to be a
prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things which I
speak unto him are the commandments of the Lord.' That is how an
Apostle put his relation to the other possessors of the divine Spirit.
And you and I have to take this as the criterion of all true possession
of the Spirit of God, that it bows in humble submission to the
authoritative teaching of this book.

III. Lastly, we have here our Lord pointing out the unity of these two.

In the verse on which I have just been commenting He says nothing about
Himself, and it might easily appear to the listeners as if these two
sources of truth, His own incomplete teaching, and the full teaching of
the divine Spirit, were independent of, if not opposed to, one another.
So in the last words of our text He shows us the blending of the two
streams, the union of the two beams.

'He shall glorify Me.' Think of a _man_ saying that! The Spirit who
will come from God and 'guide men into all truth' has for His
distinctive office the glorifying of Jesus Christ. So fair is He, so
good, so radiant, that to make Him known _is_ to glorify Him. The
glorifying of Christ is the ultimate and adequate purpose of everything
that God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit has done, because the
glorifying of Christ is the glorifying of God, and the blessing of the
eyes that behold His glory.

'For He shall take of Mine, and show it unto you.' All which that
divine Spirit brings is Christ's. So, then, there is no new revelation,
only the interpretation of the revelation. The text is given, and its
last word was spoken, when 'the cloud received Him out of their sight,'
and henceforward all is commentary. The Spirit takes of Christ's;
applies the principles, unfolds the deep meaning of words and deeds,
and especially the meaning of the mystery of the Cradle, and the
tragedy of the Cross, and the mystery of the Ascension, as declaring
that Christ is the Son of God, the Sacrifice for the world. Christ
said, 'I am the Truth.' Therefore, when He promises, 'He will guide you
into all the truth,' we may fairly conclude that 'the truth' into which
the Spirit guides is the personal Christ. It is the whole Christ, the
whole truth, that we are to receive from that divine Teacher; growing
up day by day into the capacity to grasp Christ more firmly, to
understand Him better, and by love and trust and obedience to make Him
more entirely our own. We are like the first settlers upon some great
island-continent. There is a little fringe of population round the
coast, but away in the interior are leagues of virgin forests and
fertile plains stretching to the horizon, and snow-capped summits
piercing the clouds, on which no foot has ever trod. 'He will guide you
into all truth'; through the length and breadth of the boundless land,
the person and the work of Jesus Christ our Lord.

'All things that the Father hath are Mine, therefore said I that He
shall take of Mine and show it unto you.' What awful words! A divine,
teaching Spirit can only teach concerning God. Christ here explains the
paradox of His words preceding, in which, if He were but human, He
seems to have given that teaching Spirit an unworthy office, by
explaining that whatsoever is His is God's, and whatsoever is God's is
His.

My brother! do you believe that? Is that what you think about Jesus
Christ? He puts out here an unpresumptuous hand, and grasps all the
constellated glories of the divine Nature, and says, 'They are Mine';
and the Father looks down from heaven and says, 'Son! Thou art ever
with Me, and all that I have is Thine.' Do you answer, 'Amen! I believe
it?'

Here are three lessons from these great words which I leave with you
without attempting to unfold them. One is, Believe a great deal more
definitely in, and seek a great deal more consciously and earnestly,
and use a great deal more diligently and honestly, that divine Spirit
who is given to us all. I fear me that over very large tracts of
professing Christendom to-day men stand up with very faltering lips and
confess, 'I believe in the Holy Ghost.' Hence comes much of the
weakness of our modern Christianity, of the worldliness of professing
Christians, 'and when for the time they ought to be teachers, they have
need that one teach them again which be the first principles of the
oracles of God.' 'Quench not, grieve not, despise not the Holy Spirit.'

Another lesson is, Use the Book that He uses--else you will not grow,
and He will have no means of contact with you.

And the last is, Try the spirits. If anything calling itself Christian
teaching comes to you and does not glorify Christ, it is
self-condemned. For none can exalt Him highly enough, and no teaching
can present Him too exclusively and urgently as the sole Salvation and
Life of the whole earth, And if it be, as my text tells us, that the
great teaching Spirit is to come, who is to 'guide us into all truth,'
and therein is to glorify Christ, and to show us the things that are
His, then it is also true, 'Hereby know we the Spirit of God. Every
spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of
God; and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh is not of God. And this is the spirit of Antichrist.'



CHRIST'S 'LITTLE WHILES'

'A little while, and ye shall not see Me: and again, a little while,
and ye shall see Me, because I go to the Father. Then said some of His
disciples among themselves, What is this that He saith unto us, A
little while, and ye shall not see Me: and again, a little while, and
ye shall see Me: and, Because I go to the Father? They said therefore,
What is this that He saith, A little while? we cannot tell what He
saith. Now Jesus knew that they were desirous to ask Him, and said unto
them, Do ye inquire among yourselves of that I said, A little while,
and ye shall not see Me: and again a little while, and ye shall see
Me?'--JOHN xvi. 16-19.

A superficial glance at the former part of these verses may fail to
detect their connection with the great preceding promise of the Spirit
who is to guide the disciples 'into all truth.' They appear to stand
quite isolated and apart from that. But a little thought will bring out
an obvious connection. The first words of our text are really the
climax and crown of the promise of the Spirit; for that Spirit is to
'guide into all the truth' by declaring to the disciples the things
that are Christ's, and in consequence of that ministration, they are to
be able to see their unseen Lord. So this is the loftiest thought of
what the divine Spirit does for the Christian heart, that it shows Him
a visible though absent Christ.

Then we have in the subsequent part of our text the blundering of the
bewildered disciples and the patient answer of the long-suffering
Teacher. So that there are these three points to take up: the times of
disappearance and of sight; the bewildered disciples; and the patient
Teacher.

I. First of all, then, note the deep teaching of our Lord here, about
the times of disappearance and of Sight.

The words are plain enough; the difficulty lies in the determination of
the periods to which they refer. He tells us that, after a brief
interval from the time at which He was speaking, there would come a
short parenthesis during which He was not to be seen; and that upon
that would follow a period of which no end is hinted at, during which
He is to be seen. The two words employed in the two consecutive
clauses, for 'sight,' are not the same, and so they naturally suggest
some difference in the manner of vision.

But the question arises, Where are the limits of these times of which
the Lord speaks? Now it is quite clear, I suppose, that the first of
the 'little whiles' is the few hours that intervened between His
speaking and the Cross. And it is equally clear that His death and
burial began, at all events, the period during which they were not to
see Him. But where does the second period begin, during which they are
to see Him? Is it at His resurrection or at His ascension, when the
process of 'going to the Father' was completed in all its stages; or at
Pentecost, when the Spirit, by whose ministration He was to be made
visible, was poured out? The answer is, perhaps, not to be restricted
to any one of these periods; but I think if we consider that all
