rest and all the various trades be suspended on the venerable day of
the Sun. Those who live in the country, however, may freely and without
fault attend to the cultivation of their fields lest, with the loss of
favorable opportunity, the commodities offered by Divine Providence
shall be destroyed." Thus we see that the primary movement towards
enforcing the observance of Sunday, or Lord's Day, as the Sabbath, did
not originate in a Divine command, but in the edict of an earthly
potentate.

This edict was ratified at the third council of Orleans, in the year
538; and in order, "that the people might not be prevented from
attending church, and saying their prayers," a resolution was adopted
at the same time recommending the observance of the day by all classes.
From merely "recommending," the Church of Rome soon began to enforce
the observance of the day; but, in spite of all her efforts, it was not
until the 12th century that its observance had become so universal as
to receive the designation of "The Christian Sabbath."

Cognizant of the manner in which Sunday was made the Sabbath, Luther
issued for the government of the Protestant communion the following
mandate: "As for the Sabbath, or Sunday, there is no necessity for
keeping it;" see Michelet's Life of Luther, Book IV., chapter 2. Luther
also said, as recorded in Table Talk, "If anywhere the day (Sunday) is
made holy for the mere day's sake; if anywhere anyone sets up its
observance upon a Jewish foundation, then I order you to work on it, to
dance on it, to ride on it, to feast on it, and to do anything that
shall reprove this encroachment on the Christian spirit of liberty."
Melancthon, Luther's chief coadjutor in the work of Reformation,
denied, in the most emphatic language, that Sunday was made the Sabbath
by Divine ordainment; and in reference thereto John Milton, in reply to
the Sunday Sabbatarians, makes the pertinent inquiry: "If, on a plea of
Divine command, you impose upon us the observance of a particular day,
how do you presume, without the authority of a Divine command, to
substitute another in its place?"

During the reign of Elizabeth, Queen of England, a sect of fanatics,
known as Dissenters or Nonconformists, basing their action upon the
fallacious arguments derived from the fourth commandment, and upon the
plea that the Saviour was raised from the dead on the first day of the
week, inaugurated what is known as the Puritan Sabbath, which having
been transferred to our shores by the voyagers in the Mayflower, and
enforced by those statutory enactments known as Blue Laws, caused the
people of New England to have a blue time of it while the delusion
lasted; and now a large body of Protestant clergy perverting the
teachings of scripture, and, ignoring the authority of the Reformers,
are disturbing the peace of society by their efforts to enforce the
code of sundry laws, which were enacted through their connivance. Thus
have we shown that, originating with the Catholics and adopted by the
Protestants, the Sunday Sabbath is purely and entirely a human
institution, and, being such, we must recognize all Sunday laws as
grave encroachments upon constitutional liberty; and it behooves the
advocates of individual rights to demand their immediate repeal; for
unless a vigilant watch is kept upon the conspirators who secured their
enactment, our fair land will soon be cursed by a union of church and
State, the tendency in that direction having been indicated by the
unprecedented opinion recently handed down by one of the Justices of
the United States Supreme Court that this is a Christian Government.



PIOUS FRAUDS.

By claiming to be divinely appointed for the propagation of a divinely
authenticated religion, the priesthood of all forms of worship have
ever labored to deceive and enslave the ignorant multitude; and in
support of these fallacious assumptions have resorted to all manner of
pious frauds, in reference to which we quote from both Pagan and
Christian sources with the view to showing that the moderns have
faithfully followed the ancient example. Euripedes, an Athenian writer,
who flourished about 450 years before the beginning of our era,
maintained that, "in the early state of society, some wise men insisted
on the necessity of darkening truth with falsehood and of persuading
men that there is an immortal deity who hears and sees and understands
our actions, whatever we may think of that matter ourselves." Strabo,
the famous geographer and historian of Greek extraction, who flourished
about the beginning of the Christian era, wrote that "It is not
possible for a philosopher to conduct by reasoning a multitude of women
and the low vulgar, and thus to invite them to piety, holiness and
faith; but the philosopher must make use of superstition and not omit
the invention of fables and the performance of wonders. For the
lightning and the aegis and the trident are but fables, and so all
ancient theology. But the founders of states adopted them as bugbears
to frighten the weak-minded." Varro, a learned Roman scholar, who also
flourished about the beginning of our era, wrote that "There are many
truths which it is useless for the vulgar to know, and many falsehoods
which it is fit that the people should not know are falsehoods."

So much from Pagan authorities relative to the necessity of deceiving
the ignorant masses. We will now present some Christian authorities
upon the same subject; and first from Christ himself, who in addressing
his disciples is made to say, in Mark iv, 11, 12, "Unto you it is given
to know the mystery of the kingdom of God; but unto them that are
without all these things are done in parables, that seeing they may see
and not perceive; and hearing they may hear and not understand." Paul,
in his fourteen Epistles, inculcates and avows the principle of
deceiving the common people. He speaks of having been upbraided by his
own converts with being crafty and catching them with guile and of his
known and wilful lies abounding to the glory of God. See Romans iii. 7,
and II. Cor. xii. 16. If Christ and Paul were guilty of deception,
their followers had good excuse for the same course of conduct. Upon
this subject Beausobre, a very learned ecclesiastical writer, who
flourished about the beginning of the 18th century, says: "We see in
the history which I have related a sort of hypocrisy that has been,
perhaps, but too common at all times; that churchmen not only do not
say what they think, but they do say the direct contrary of what they
think. Philosophers in their cabinets; out of them they are content
with fables, though they well know that they are fables." Historie de
Manichee, vol. 2, page 568. Bishop Synesius, the distinguished author
of religious literature and Christian father of the 5th century, said:
"I shall be a philosopher only to myself, and I shall always be a
bishop to the people." Mosheim, the distinguished author of
Ecclesiastical History, Vol. I., page 120, says: "The authors who have
treated of the innocence and sanctity of the primitive Christians have
fallen into the error of supposing them to have been unspotted models
of piety and virtue, and a gross error indeed it is, as the strongest
testimonies too evidently prove." The same author, in Vol. I., page.
198, says in the fourth century "it was an almost universally adopted
maxim that it was an act of virtue to deceive and lie, when by such
means the interest of the church might be promoted." In his
Ecclesiastical History, Vol. II., page 11, he says that "as regards the
fifth century, the simplicity and ignorance of the generality in those
times furnished the most favorable occasion for the exercise of fraud;
and the impudence of impostors in contriving false miracles was
artfully proportioned to the credulity of the vulgar; while the
sagacious and the wise, who perceived these cheats, were overawed into
silence by the dangers that threatened their lives and fortunes if they
should expose the artifice." Thomas Burnet, D.D., who flourished about
the beginning of the 18th century, in his treatise entitled De Statu
Mortuorum, purposely written in Latin that it might serve for the
instruction of the clergy only, and not come to the knowledge of the
laity, because, as he says, "too much light is hurtful for weak eyes,"
not only justifies, but recommends the practice of the most consummate
hypocrisy, and that, too, on the most awful of all subjects; and would
have his, clergy seriously preach and maintain the reality and eternity
of hell torments, even though they should believe nothing of the sort
themselves. See page 304. Hugo Grotius, the eminent writer of Holland
in the 17th century, says in his 22d Epistle: "He that reads
ecclesiastical history, reads nothing but the roguery and folly of
bishops, and churchmen." In the language of Robert Taylor, from whom we
have taken most of the quotations under this heading, we assert that
"no man could quote higher authorities," to prove "the roguery and
folly of bishops and churchmen."



CONCLUSION.

Having presented the evidences in support of the apparently untenable
assertion that, notwithstanding the numerous modes in which man has
manifested his devotional proclivities, the world has virtually had but
the one religion founded in the worship of personified nature, we are
necessitated to recognize the facts that the Christian Scriptures like
the sacred records of other forms of nature worship are, but a
collection of astronomical allegories; that the gospel story is truly
"the old, old story" which had been told of a thousand other Saviours
before it was applied to the Christian Messiah; that Jesus is but one
of the many names given to imaginary incarnations of the mythical
genius of the sun; and that the Disciples and Evangelists are but the
genii of the months and the seasons. Such being the facts, which cannot
be successfully refuted, we must believe that the Christian religion,
instead of being of Divine authenticity, as popularly claimed, is
purely and entirely of human origin, and that all its teachings
relative to a future state are but priestly inventions, concocted for
the purpose of enslaving the ignorant masses.

When we think of the thousand millions of dollars invested in church
properties, and estimate the cost of maintaining more than a hundred
thousand priests and ministers, in supporting foreign and domestic
missions and in publishing religious literature; besides the taxes
applied to the care of the religious insane, and realize the fact that
all of this vast sum of money is abstracted from the resources of the
people, we would not have to go outside of our own country to
appreciate the fact that religion is the burden of all burdens to
society; and when we contemplate the great disturbance to the social
relation, resulting from sectarian strife, and the almost universal
disposition of Christians to persecute and ostracize those who differ
with them in opinion, we can readily subscribe to the sentiment
accredited to one of our revolutionary sires, that "this would be a
good world to live in if there was no religion in it."

If the clergy had been laboring as faithfully to impress the observance
of ethical principles as they have to indoctrinate the people with the
superstitions of religion, we would not now be deploring the great
demoralization of society. It is a grave arraignment of the clericals
to charge them with being, indirectly, the cause of this lamentable
state of things; but it is a condition that might have been expected,
for, when entering the ministry, they engaged themselves, not so much
to teach ethics as to propagate faith in the doctrines of their
respective sects. Thus hampered they cannot do the good to society
their better natures might desire. Hence the only hope for improvement
is for the people to wholly ignore the dogmatic element of religion,
and refusing to longer support it, demand that moral training shall be
the grand essential of education. If this course were adopted and
persistently followed, it would be but a question of time when mankind
would come into being with such a benign heredity that crime would be
almost impossible.

Then, since religion inculcates a salvation that does not save, let us
rise superior to its false teachings and, accepting science as the true
saviour of mankind, find our whole duty in the code of natural
morality, the spirit of which is embodied in that comprehensive precept
known as the golden rule, which, being the outgrowth of the discovered
necessities of association, without which society could not exist, it
necessarily constituted man's sole rule and guide long before priest or
temple; and founded in the eternal principles of right, truth and
justice must remain as man's sole rule and guide when priest and church
are numbered among the things that were. Spirit of progress! speed the
day when all mankind, redeemed from the bondage of superstition, will
recognize the great truth that nature, governed by her own inherent
forces, is all that has been, all that is and all that shall be; and
that, ceasing to indulge in the vain hope of a blissful immortality in
a paradise beyond the stars, will make a real paradise of this old
earth of ours.


----------------------------

[1](Editorial note: the original text erroneously attributed this
quote to Genesis 20:8-11; actually it is from Exodus 20:8-11.)









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Astral Worship, by J. H. Hill

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ASTRAL WORSHIP ***

***** This file should be named 8855.txt or 8855.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/8/8/5/8855/

Produced by David Deley

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
