not the man.'  No wonder that when Jesus turned and looked on him,
Peter went out and wept bitterly, as bitter tears of shame as ever
were shed on earth.  For he knew, he was sure, that he loved his
Lord all along:  and now he had denied him.  He who was so bold and
confident, to fall thus! and into the very sins most contrary to his
nature! the very sins in which he would have expected least of all
to fall!  He, so frank and honest and brave--He to turn coward.  He
to tell a base lie!  I dare say, that for the moment he could hardly
believe himself to be himself.

But so it is, my friends.  If we forget that all which is good and
strong in us comes from God, and not from ourselves; if we are
conceited, and confident in ourselves; then we cut ourselves off
from God's grace, and give place to Satan the Devil, that he may
sift us like wheat, as he did St. Peter; and then in some shameful
hour, we may find ourselves saying and doing things which we would
never have believed we could have done.  God grant, that if ever we
fall into such unexpected sin, it may happen to us as it did to St.
Peter.  For Satan gained little by sifting St. Peter.  He sifted out
the chaff:  but the wheat was left behind safe for God's garner.
The chaff was St. Peter's rashness and self-conceit, which came from
his own sinful nature; and that went, and St. Peter was rid of it
for ever.  The wheat was St. Peter's courage, and faith, and honour,
which came from God; and that remained, and St. Peter kept them for
ever.  That, we read, was St. Peter's conversion; that worked the
thorough and complete change in his character, and made him a new
man from that day forth.  And then, after that terrible and fiery
trial, St. Peter was ready to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit,
which gave him courage with fervent zeal to preach the gospel of his
Crucified Lord, and at last to be crucified himself for that Lord's
sake; and so fulfil the Lord's words to him.  'When thou wast young,
thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest:  but when
thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another
shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not.'  By that
our Lord seems to have meant, 'You were strong and proud and self-
willed enough in your youth.  The day will come when you will be
tamed down, ready and willing to suffer patiently, even agony from
which your flesh and blood may shrink;' and the Lord's words came
true.  For, say the old stories, when St. Peter was led to be
crucified, he refused to be crucified upright, as the Lord Jesus had
been, saying, 'That it was too great an honour for him, who had once
denied his Lord, to die the same death as his Lord died.'  So he was
crucified, they say, with his head downward; and ended a glorious
life in a humble martyrdom.

And what may we learn from St. Peter's character?  I think we may
learn this.  Frankness, boldness, a high spirit, a stout will, and
an affectionate heart; these are all God's gifts, and they are
pleasant in his eyes, and ought to be a blessing to the man who has
them.  Ought to be a blessing to him, because they are the stuff out
of which a good, and noble, and useful Christian man may be made.
But they need not be a blessing to a man; they are _excellent_
gifts:  but they will not of themselves make a man an _excellent_
man, who _excels_; that is, surpasses others in goodness.  We may
see that ourselves, from experience.  We see too many brave men,
free-spoken men, affectionate men, who come to shame and ruin.

How then can we become excellent men, like St. Peter?  By being
baptised, as St. Peter was, with the Holy Ghost and with fire.

Baptized with the Holy Ghost, to put into our hearts good desires;
to make us see what is good, and love what is good, long to do good:
but baptized with fire also.  'He shall baptize you,' John the
Baptist said, 'with the Holy Ghost and with fire.'

Does that seem a hard saying?  Do not some at least of you know what
that means?  Some know, I believe.  All will know one day; for it is
true for all.  To all, sooner or later, Christ comes to baptise them
with fire; with the bitter searching affliction which opens the very
secrets of their hearts, and shows them what their souls are really
like, and parts the good from the evil in them, the gold from the
rubbish, the wheat from the chaff.  'And he shall gather the wheat
into his garner, but the chaff he shall burn up with unquenchable
fire.'  God grant to each of you, that when that day comes to you,
there may be something in you which will stand the fire; something
worthy to be treasured up in God's garner, unto everlasting life.

But do not think that the baptism of fire comes only once for all to
a man, in some terrible affliction, some one awful conviction of his
own sinfulness and nothingness.  No; with many--and those, perhaps,
the best people--it goes on month after month, year after year:  by
secret trials, chastenings which none but they and God can
understand, the Lord is cleansing them from their secret faults, and
making them to understand wisdom secretly; burning out of them the
chaff of self-will and self-conceit and vanity, and leaving only the
pure gold of his righteousness.  How many sweet and holy souls look
cheerful enough before the eyes of man, because they are too humble
and too considerate to intrude their secret sorrows upon the world.
And yet they have their secret sorrows.  They carry their cross
unseen all day long, and lie down to sleep on it at night:  and they
will carry it for years and years, and to their graves, and to the
Throne of Christ, before they lay it down:  and none but they and
Christ will ever know what it was; what was the secret chastisement
which he sent to make that soul better, which seemed to us to be
already too good for earth.  So does the Lord watch his people, and
tries them with fire, as the refiner of silver sits by his furnace,
watching the melted metal, till he knows that it is purged from all
its dross, by seeing the image of his own face reflected in it.  God
grant that our afflictions may so cleanse our hearts, that at the
last Christ may behold himself in us, and us in himself; that so we
may be fit to be with him where he is, and behold the glory which
his Father gave him before the foundation of the world.



SERMON XIX.  ELIJAH



(Tenth Sunday after Trinity.)

1 Kings xxi. 19, 20.  And thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus
saith the Lord, Hast thou killed, and also taken possession? and
thou shalt speak unto him, saying, Thus saith the Lord, In the place
where dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lick thy blood,
even thine.  And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine
enemy?  And he answered, I have found thee:  because thou hast sold
thyself to work evil in the sight of the Lord.

Of all the grand personages in the Old Testament, there are few or
none, I think, grander than the prophet Elijah.  Consider his
strange and wild life, wandering about in forests and mountains,
suddenly appearing, and suddenly disappearing again, so that no man
knew where to find him; and, as Obadiah said when he met him, 'If I
tell my Lord, Behold, Elijah is here; then, as soon as I am gone
from thee, the Spirit of the Lord shall carry thee whither I know
not.'  Consider, again, his strange activity and strength, as when
he goes, forty days and forty nights, far away out of Judea, over
the waste wilderness, to Horeb the mount of God; or, as again, when
he girds up his loins, and runs before Ahab's chariot for many miles
to the entrance of Jezreel.  One can fancy him from what the Bible
tells us of him, clearly enough; as a man mysterious and terrible,
not merely in the eyes of women and children, but of soldiers and of
kings.

He seems to have been especially a countryman; a mountaineer; born
and bred in Gilead, among the lofty mountains and vast forests, full
of wild beasts, lions and bears, wild bulls and deer, which stretch
for many miles along the further side of the river Jordan, with the
waste desert of rocks and sand beyond them.  A wild man, bred up in
a wild country, he had learnt to fear no man, and no thing, but God
alone.  We do not know what his youth was like; we do not know
whether he had wife, or children, or any human being who loved him.
Most likely not.  He seems to have lived a lonely life, in sad and
bad times.  He seems to have had but one thought, that his country
was going to ruin, from idolatry, tyranny, false and covetous ways;
and one determination; to say so; to speak the truth, whatever it
cost him.  He had found out that the Lord was God, and not Baal, or
any of the idols; and he would follow the Lord; and tell all Israel
what his own heart had told him, 'The Lord, he is God,' was the one
thing which he had to say; and he said it, till it became his name;
whether given him by his parents, or by the people, his name was
Elijah, 'The Lord is God.'  'How long halt ye between two opinions?'
he cries, upon the greatest day of his life.  'If the Lord be God,
then follow him; but if Baal, then follow him.'  How grand he is, on
Carmel, throughout that noble chapter which we read last Sunday.
There is no fear in him, no doubt in him.  The poor wild peasant out
of the savage mountains stands up before all Israel, before king,
priests, nobles, and people, and speaks and acts as if he, too, were
a king; because the Spirit of God is in him:  and he is right, and
he knows that he is right.  And they obey him as if he were a king.
Even before the fire comes down from heaven, and shows that God is
on his side, from the first they obey him.  King Ahab himself obeys
him, trembles before him--'And it came to pass, when Ahab saw
Elijah, that Ahab said unto him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel?
And he answered, I have not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy
father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of the
Lord, and thou hast followed Baalim.  Now therefore send, and gather
to me all Israel unto mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four
hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the groves four hundred,
which eat at Jezebel's table.  So Ahab sent unto all the children of
Israel, and gathered the prophets together unto mount Carmel.'  The
tyrant's guilty conscience makes a coward of him:  and he quails
before the wild man out of the mountains, who has not where to lay
his head, who stands alone against all the people, though Baal's
prophets are four hundred and fifty men, and the prophets of the
groves four hundred, and they eat at the queen's table; and he only
is left and they seek his life:--yet no man dare touch him, not even
the king himself.  Such power is there, such strength is there, in
being an honest and a God-fearing man.

Yes, my friends, this was the secret of Elijah's power.  This is the
lesson which Elijah has to teach us.  Not to halt between two
opinions.  If a thing be true, to stand up for it; if a thing be
right, to do it, whatsoever it may cost us.  Make up your minds
then, my friends, to be honest men like Elijah the prophet of old.

For your own sake, for your neighbour's sake, and for God's sake, be
honest men.

For your own sake.  If you want to be respected; if you want to be
powerful--and it is good to be powerful sometimes--if God has set
you to govern people, whether it be your children and household,
your own farm, your own shop, your own estate, your own country or
neighbourhood--Do you want to know the great secret of success?--Be
honest and brave.  Let your word be as good as your thought, and
your deed as good as your word.  Who is the man who is respected?
Who is the man who has influence?  The complaisant man--the cringing
man--the man who cannot say No, or dare not say No?  Not he.  The
passionate man who loses his temper when anything goes wrong, who
swears and scolds, and instead of making others do right, himself
does wrong, and lowers himself just when he ought to command
respect?  My experience is--not he:  but the man who says honestly
and quietly what he thinks, and does fearlessly and quietly what he
knows.  People who differ from him will respect him, because he acts
up to his principles.  When they are in difficulty or trouble, they
will go and ask his advice, just because they know they will get an
honest answer.  They will overlook a little roughness in him; they
will excuse his speaking unpleasant truths:  because they can trust
him, even though he is plain-spoken.

For your neighbour's sake, I say; and again, for your children's
sake; for the sake of all with whom you have to do, be honest and
brave.  For our children--O my friends, we cannot do a crueller
thing by them than to let them see that we are inconsistent.  If
they hear us say one thing and do another--if, while we preach to
them we do not practice ourselves, they will never respect us, and
never obey us from love and principle.  If they do obey us, it will
be only before our faces, and from fear.  If they see us doing only
what we like, when our backs are turned they will do what they like.

And worse will come than their not respecting us--they will learn
not to respect God.  If they see that we do not respect truth and
honesty, they will not respect truth and honesty; and he who does
not respect them, does not respect God.  They will learn to look on
religion as a sham.  If we are inconsistent, they will be profane.

But some may say--'I have no power; and I want none.  I have no
people under me for whom I am responsible.'

Then, if you think that you need not be honest and brave for your
own sake, or for other peoples' sake, be honest and brave for God's
sake.

Do you ask what I mean?  I mean this.  Recollect that truth belongs
to God.  That if a thing is true, it is true because God made it so,
and not otherwise; and therefore, if you deny truth, you fight
against God.  If you are honest, and stand up for truth, you stand
up for God, and what God has done.

And recollect this, too.  If a thing be right for you to do, God has
made it right, and God wills you to do it; and, therefore, if you do
not do your duty, you are fighting against God; and if you do your
duty, you are a fellow-worker with God, fulfilling God's will.
Therefore, I say, Be honest and brave for God's sake.  And in this
way, my friends, all may be brave, all may be noble.  Speak the
truth, and do your duty, because it is the will of God.  Poor, weak
women, people without scholarship, cleverness, power, may live
glorious lives, and die glorious deaths, and God's strength may be
made perfect in their weakness.  They may live, did I say?  I may
say they have lived, and have died, already, by thousands.  When we
read the stories of the old martyrs who, in the heathen persecution,
died like heroes rather than deny Christ, and scorned to save
themselves by telling what they knew to be a lie, but preferred
truth to all that makes life worth having:--how many of them--I may
say the greater part of them--were poor creatures enough in the eyes
of man, though they were rich enough, noble enough, in the eyes of
God who inspired them.  'Few rich and few noble,' as the apostle
says, 'were called.'  It was to poor people, old people, weak women,
ill-used and untaught slaves, that God gave grace to defy all the
torments which the heathen could heap on them, and to defy the
scourge and the rack, the wild beasts and the fire, sooner than foul
their lips and their souls by denying Christ, and worshipping the
idols which they knew were nothing, and worth nothing.

And so it may be with any of you here; whosoever you may be, however
poor, however humble.  Though your opportunities may be small, your
station lowly, your knowledge little; though you may be stupid in
mind, slow of speech, weakly of body, yet if you but make up your
mind to say the thing which is true, and to do the thing which is
right, you may be strong with the strength of God, and glorious with
the glory of Christ.

It is a grand thing, no doubt, to be like Elijah, a stern and bold
prophet, standing up alone against a tyrant king and a sinful
people; but it is even a greater thing to be like that famous martyr
in old time, St. Blandina, who, though she was but a slave, and so
weakly, and mean, and fearful in body, that her mistress and all her
friends feared that she would deny Christ at the very sight of the
torments prepared for her, and save herself by sacrificing to the
idols, yet endured, day after day, tortures too horrible to speak
of, without cry or groan, or any word, save 'I am a Christian;' and,
having outlived all her fellow-martyrs, died at last victorious over
pain and temptation, so that the very heathen who tortured her broke
out in admiration of her courage, and confessed that no woman had
ever endured so many and so grievous torments.  So may God's
strength be made perfect in woman's weakness.

You are not called to endure such things.  No:  but you, and I, and
every Christian soul are called on to do what we know to be right.
Not to halt between two opinions:  but if God be God, to follow Him.
If we make up our minds to do that, we shall be sure to have our
trials:  but we shall be safe, because we are on God's side, and God
on ours.  And if God be with us, what matter if the whole world be
against us?  For which is the stronger of the two, the whole world,
or God who made it, and rules it, and will rule it for ever?



SERMON XX.  THE LOFTINESS OF HUMILITY



1 Peter v. 5.  Be clothed with humility:  for God resisteth the
proud, and giveth grace to the humble.

This is St. Peter's command.  Are we really inclined to obey it?
For, if we are, there is nothing more easy.  There is no vice so
easy to get rid of as pride:  if one wishes.  Nothing so easy as to
be humble:  if one wishes.

That may seem a strange saying, considering that self-conceit is the
vice of all others to which man is most given; the first sin, and
the last sin, and that which is said to be the most difficult to
cure.  But what I say is true nevertheless.

Whosoever wishes to get rid of pride may do so.  Whosoever wishes to
be humble need not go far to humble himself.

But how?  Simply by being honest with himself, and looking at
himself as he is.

Let a man recollect honestly and faithfully his past life; let him
recollect his sayings and doings for the past week; even for the
past twenty-four hours:  and I will warrant that man that he will
recollect something, or, perhaps, many things which will not raise
him in his own eyes; something which he had sooner not have said or
done; something which, if he is a foolish man, he will try to
forget, because it makes him ashamed of himself; something which, if
he is a wise man, he will not try to forget, just because it makes
him ashamed of himself; and a very good thing for him that he should
be so.  I know that it is so for me; and therefore I suppose it is
so for every man and woman in this Church.

I am not going to give any examples.  I am not going to say,--
'Suppose you thought this and this about yourself, and were proud of
it; and then suppose that you recollected that you had done that and
that:  would you not feel very much taken down in your own conceit?'

I like that personal kind of preaching less and less.  Those random
shots are dangerous and cruel; likely to hit the wrong person, and
hurt their feelings unnecessarily.  It is very easy to say a hard
thing:  but not so easy to say it to the right person and at the
right time.

No.  The heart knoweth its own bitterness.  Almost every one has
something to be ashamed of, more or less, which no one but himself
and God knows of; and which, perhaps, it is better that no one but
he and God should know.

I do not mean any great sin, or great shame--God forbid; but some
weak point, as we call it.  Something which he had better not say or
do; and yet which he is in the habit of saying and doing.  I do not
ask what it is.  With some it may be a mere pardonable weakness;
with others it may be a very serious and dangerous fault.  All I ask
now is, that each and every one of us should try and find it out,
and feel it, and keep it in mind; that we may be of a humble spirit
with the lowly, which is better than dividing the spoil with the
proud.

But why better?

The world and human nature look up to the proud successful man.  One
is apt to say, 'Happy is the man who has plenty to be proud of.
Happy is the man who can divide the spoil of this world with the
successful of this world.  Happy is the man who can look down on his
fellow-men, and stand over them, and manage them, and make use of
them, and get his profit out of them.'

But that is a mistake.  That is the high-mindedness which goes
before a fall, which comes not from above, but is always earthly,
often sensual, and sometimes devilish.  The true and safe high-
mindedness, which comes from above, is none other than humility.
For, if you will look at it aright, the humble man is really more
high-minded than the proud man.  Think.  Suppose two men equal in
understanding, in rank, in wealth, in what else you like, one of
them proud, the other humble.  The proud man thinks--'How much
better, wiser, richer, more highly born, more religious, more
orthodox, am I than other people round me.'  Not, of course, than
all round him, but than those whom he thinks beneath him.  Therefore
he is always comparing himself with those below himself; always
watching those things in them in which he thinks them worse, meaner
than himself; he is always looking down on his neighbours.

Now, which is more high-minded; which is nobler; which is more fit
for a man; to look down, or to look up?  At all events the humble
man _looks up_.  He thinks, 'How much worse, not how much better, am
I than other people.'  He looks at their good points, and compares
them with his own bad ones.  He admires them for those things in
which they surpass him.  He thinks of--perhaps he loves to read of--
men superior to himself in goodness, wisdom, courage.  He pleases
himself with the example of brave and righteous deeds, even though
he fears that he cannot copy them; and so he is always looking up.
His mind is filled with high thoughts, though they be about others,
not about himself.  If he be a truly Christian man, his thoughts
rise higher still.  He thinks of Christ and of God, and compares his
weakness, ignorance, and sinfulness with their perfect power,
wisdom, goodness.  Do you not see that this man's mind is full of
higher, nobler thoughts than that of the proud man?  Is he not more
high-minded who is looking up, up to God himself, for what is good,
noble, heavenly?  Even though it makes him feel small, poor, weak,
and sinful in comparison, still his mind is full of grace, and
wisdom, and glory.  The proud man, meanwhile, for the sake of
feeding his own self-conceit at other men's expense, is filling his
mind with low, mean, earthly thoughts about the weaknesses, sins,
and follies, of the world around him.  Is not he truly low-minded,
thinking about low things?

Now, I tell you, my friends, that both have their reward.  That the
humble man, as years roll on, becomes more and more noble, and the
proud man becomes more and more low-minded; and finds that pride
goes before a fall in more senses than one.  Yes.  There is nothing
more hurtful to our own minds and hearts than a domineering,
contemptuous frame of mind.  It may be pleasant to our own self-
conceit:  but it is only a sweet poison.  A man lowers his own
character by it.  He takes the shape of what he is always looking
at; and, if he looks at base and low things, he becomes base and low
himself; just as slave-owners, all over the world, and in all time,
sooner and later, by living among slaves, learn to copy their own
slaves' vices; and, while they oppress and look down on their
fellow-man, become passionate and brutal, false and greedy, like the
poor wretches whom they oppress.

Better, better to be of a lowly spirit.  Better to think of those
who are nobler than ourselves, even though by so doing we are
ashamed of ourselves all day long.  What loftier thoughts can man
have?  What higher and purer air can a man's soul breathe?  Yes, my
friends; believe it, and be sure of it.  The truly high-minded man
is not the proud man, who tries to get a little pitiful satisfaction
from finding his brother men, as he chooses to fancy, a little
weaker, a little more ignorant, a little more foolish, a little more
ridiculous, than his own weak, ignorant, foolish, and, perhaps,
ridiculous self.  Not he; but the man who is always looking upwards
to goodness, to good men, and to the all-good God:  filling his soul
with the sight of an excellence to which he thinks he can never
attain; and saying, with David, 'All my delight is in the saints
that dwell in the earth, and in those who excel in virtue.'

