
A VERY PRESENT HELP IN TROUBLE.

"At one time, during a season of adversity, there was urgent occasion
for a certain sum beyond the income of the family, and there was no way
of borrowing it. I took the matter to the Lord in prayer, asking Him, if
the money were really needed, as it appeared to be, to send it, and, if
it were not, to remove the distressing circumstances. The answer came in
a sum five times the amount asked for, and in a manner totally
unexpected."

       *       *       *       *       *

"At another time, the mother of the family was very ill, and, when
apparently near death, the physicians had ordered a remedy which was to
be constantly employed, as her life, so far as they could judge,
depended on its use. One night, her symptoms became so alarming as to
compel the writer (who had charge of the nursing) to use this remedy
more freely than ever, and, about midnight the supply was exhausted.
There was no possibility of obtaining any more before morning, and the
rest of that night, while attending to the other directions of the
doctors, I spent in one earnest, agonizing prayer that God would so
overrule natural causes that death would not occur in consequence of
what I felt to be my own culpable carelessness in not having provided a
larger quantity of an article so necessary. In His great mercy, He
granted the prayer, the dangerous symptoms did not increase during the
seven or eight hours that intervened before the remedy could be
procured. One proof that it was a special mercy, is found in the fact
that there was no other such standing still of the disease, either
before this or afterward. And the doctors were astonished when they saw
that the disease had made no progress, under conditions that rendered
that progress inevitable in the usual law of cause and effect. And when,
on her final recovery, Doctor Parker told her that she owed her life to
the good care I had taken of her, my thoughts went back to the long
hours of that night of anguish, and I said, 'It was the Lord that took
care of her.' 'I meant your care, under Providence,' was the reply."


HE SHALL DIRECT THY PATHS

"I am a teacher by profession, and, a few years ago, I found myself
placed in a school whose every surrounding was utterly repugnant to my
tastes, and to all my ideas of right and wrong and what good teaching
should be. At first, I kept hoping that things would grow better, and
that I should, at least, be able to have some influence on the modes of
teaching; but I soon found that everything connected with the
establishment was directed by the iron will of an unscrupulous and
tyrannical woman, whose laws were as irrevocable as those of the Medes
and Persians. I at once decided I could not stay there long, but I had
no other position in view, and it was not easy to secure one in the
middle of the term. As usual, I made it a subject of prayer, and the
result was that, in a short time, I was most unexpectedly, and without
the least solicitation on my part, offered a much better position, in
every respect, which, of course, I was only too thankful to accept. That
is only one instance, out of thousands I could name, where God has heard
and answered my prayers, and I believe He will do so to the end."


HOW THE LORD IS CONSTANTLY CARING FOR HIS TRUSTING POOR.


A city missionary recently found, in this city on the streets, a refined
Englishwoman with her children, who had been turned out of her home for
non-payment of rent. With the aid of a few friends he installed her in a
new domicile, and procured work for her. From time to time he visited
her, and rejoiced with her that God had sent him to her in the hour of
extremity. At length, pressure of business kept him away for some time,
until, one evening, he started out to look up a few dollars owing him,
in order to procure some delicacies for a sick wife. One dollar was all
he could procure, and with that in his pocket he was returning homeward,
when he became so impressed with the idea that he should visit the
Englishwoman that he turned aside and did so. He found her in tears, and
asking the cause, heard the sorrowful tale of no work, no food in the
house for to-morrow, which was Sunday. He was in doubt whether to give
her the dollar and suffer his sick wife to go without something
palatable, but in a moment, "Blessed is he that considereth the poor;
the Lord will deliver him in time of trouble," presented itself to his
mind, and--the dollar dried the widow's tears.

Upon reaching his home he found a lady had called on his wife and
brought with her three or four kinds of jellies, fruit, home-made
biscuit, various relishing things; three times more than the dollar
would have purchased.

The same gentleman, while calling on a poor family one day, discovered a
little house in the rear, which he visited, finding a neat, cleanly
room, occupied by an old lady, crippled with rheumatism. He found she
had no one in the world but a sister, a monthly nurse, to care for her.
When first setting out on his tour that morning, the missionary had
fifty cents given him by a gentleman, who expressed the hope that "it
might do some good during the day." Although a number of visits had been
made, he had not felt called upon to bestow it until then, nor could he
tell why he should want to put it in the old lady's hand at parting, but
he did so.

She was too much overcome by her emotions to speak, but she took his
hand and led him to a little table, on which lay a Bible, opened at the
passage, "Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, He will give it
you." She said, "Please tell me if any one sent you here?" "No." "Did
you ever hear that I lived here?" "I did not." "Then the Lord sent you
in answer to my prayer this morning. For the first time in my life, I am
without food. My sister was to have come home yesterday, but has not. I
was just asking the Lord to provide for me when you knocked at the
door."

Such scenes as these amply repay our missionaries for all the toils and
weariness, all the anxieties and perplexities of the work.


A PRAYER FOR BREAD.


"Washington Allston, who stood at the head of American artists a half
century ago, was, at one time, so reduced by poverty, that he locked his
studio, in London, one day, threw himself on his knees and prayed for a
loaf of bread for himself and wife. While thus engaged, a knock was
heard at the door, which the artist hastened to open. A stranger
inquired for Mr. Allston, and was anxious to know who was the fortunate
purchaser of the painting of the 'Angel Uriel,' which had won the prize
at the exhibition of the Royal Academy. He was told that it was not
sold. 'Where is it to be found?' 'In this very room,' said Allston,
producing a painting from a corner and wiping off the dust. 'It is for
sale, but its value has not been adequately appreciated, and I would not
part with it.' 'What is its price?' 'I have done affixing any nominal
sum. I have always so far exceeded any offers, I leave it to you to name
the price.' 'Will four hundred pounds be an adequate recompense?' 'It is
more than I ever asked for it.' 'Then the painting is mine,' said the
stranger, who introduced himself as the Marquis of Stafford, and, from
that time, became one of Mr. Allston's warmest friends and patrons."


THE DAUGHTER'S PRAYER.


The late Doctor Krummacher, chaplain to the king of Prussia, in
referring to faith and prayer, writes as follows:

"A little incident occurs to me which I can hardly withhold, on account
of its simplicity and beauty. The mother of a little girl, only four
years of age, had been, for some time, most dangerously ill. The
physician had given her up. When the little girl heard this, she went
into an adjoining room, knelt down, and said: 'Dear Lord Jesus, O make
my mother well again.'

"After she had thus prayed, she said, as though in God's name, with as
deep a voice as she could: 'Yes, my dear child, I will do it gladly!'
This was the little girl's amen. She rose up, joyfully ran to her
mother's bed, and said: 'Mother, you will get well!'

"And she recovered, and is in health to this day. Is it, then, always
permitted for me to pray thus unconditionally respecting temporal
concerns? No; thou must not venture to do so, if, whilst you ask, you
doubt. But shouldst thou ever be inclined by God's Spirit to pray thus,
without doubt or scruple, in a filial temper, and with simplicity of
heart, resting on the true foundation, and in genuine faith, then pray
thus by all means! None dare censure thee; God will accept thee."


THE LORD WILL PROVIDE.


"A city missionary, one Saturday night, was going home with a basket of
provisions on his arm. Meeting a policeman, he asked him if there had
any families moved in the bounds of his beat during the week. He
answered, 'Yes,' and, pointing to a building up an alley, said, 'a woman
and some children are living there now.'

"The missionary went to the house, rapped at the door, and was admitted.
The woman was sitting by a small light, sewing. In the corner of the
room, were two little girls, apparently from nine to twelve years of
age, playing.

"The missionary said, 'Madam, I am here to see if you will allow your
girls to attend Sunday-school to-morrow morning.' 'I would, sir; but
what you see on them is all the clothing they have, and you would not
wish them to go as they are now.' 'The Lord will provide, madam. Have
you no money?' 'Not yet, but I have committed my case into the hands of
the Lord.' 'Have you anything to eat?' 'Nothing, sir!' 'What will you do
for breakfast?' 'O, sir, I once had a husband; he provided when he
could. These children had a father; he supplied their wants; but he is
dead now. Yet my Maker, even God, is my husband, and He has promised to
be a father to the fatherless. We have committed all to Him, have called
upon Him in this our day of trouble. I am trusting in God to take care
of a poor widow and her children in a strange place, and I know He will
provide.' 'Thank God for such faith,' said the missionary; and, handing
her the basket, said 'here is your breakfast, and you shall have the
clothing for your children.' With tears streaming down her face, she
replied: 'Oh, thank God for his faithfulness! He heareth and answereth
prayer. May He bless you!' And, said our dear brother to us, 'I felt the
promise was sure, for she was blessed in receiving, I was more so in
giving.'"


A PRAYER FOR A LOAD OF WOOD.


Here is an illustration of the way in which God sends relief in trouble.
The story is told by the Christian woman to whom it happened, in her own
language:

"About the month of January, 1863, I was living in Connecticut, alone
with two little boys, one of them four years old, and the other about a
year and a half old. My husband was away in the service of his country.
When the coldest weather came, I was nearly out of wood. I went down
into the village, one day, to try and get some, but tried in vain; so
many men were away in the army that help was scarce. Very little wood
was brought into market, and those living on the main street, got all
that came, while those who lived outside the village could get none. I
tried to buy a quarter of a cord from two or three merchants, but could
not get any. One of them told me he could not get what he wanted for his
own family. Another said he wasn't willing to yoke up his team for so
small a quantity; but, as I only had a dollar and seventy-five cents, I
could not buy any more, and so I was obliged to go home without any. I
went back to my little ones, feeling very sad. But while I sat there,
almost ready to cry, the words of Abraham came into my mind, 'Jehovah-
Jireh, the Lord will provide.' Then I went up to my chamber. There I
knelt down and told God of my trouble, and asked him to help me and send
the relief that we needed. Then I went to the window and waited, looking
down the street, expecting to see the wood coming. After waiting a
while, without seeing any come, my faith began to fail. I said to
myself, 'The Lord did provide for Abraham, but He won't provide for me.'
Our last stick of wood was put in the stove. It was too cold to keep the
children in the house without fire. I got the children's clothes out,
and thought I would take them to the house of a kind neighbor, where I
knew they could stay till we got some wood. But, just as I was going out
with the children, in passing by the window, I saw the top of a great
load of wood coming up the road towards our little house. Can that be
for us? I asked myself. Presently I saw the wagon turn off the road and
come up towards our door. Then I was puzzled to know how to pay for it.
A dollar and seventy-five cents I knew would only go a little way
towards paying for all that wood. The oxen came slowly on, dragging the
load to our door. I asked the man if there wasn't same mistake about it.
'No, ma'am,' said he, 'there's no mistake.' 'I did not order it, and I
cannot pay for it,' was my reply. 'Never mind, ma'am,' said he, 'a
friend ordered it, and it is all paid for.' Then he unhitched the oxen
from the wagon, and gave them some hay to eat. When this was done, he
asked for a saw and ax, and never stopped till the whole load was cut
and split and piled away in the woodshed.

"This was more than I could stand. My feelings overcame me, and I sat
down and cried like a child. But these were not bitter tears of sorrow.
They were tears of joy and gladness, of gratitude and thankfulness. I
felt ashamed of myself for doubting God's word, and I prayed that I
might never do so again. What pleasure I had in using that wood! Every
stick of it, as I took it up, seemed to have a voice with which to say
'Jehovah-Jireh.' As Abraham stood on the top of Mount Moriah he could
say, 'The Lord _will_ provide.' But every day, as I went into our
woodshed, I could point to that blessed pile of wood sent from heaven,
and say, 'The Lord _does_ provide.'"


A REFRACTORY MAN COMPELLED TO PAY A DEBT.


A refractory man who owed a small debt of about $43, refused to pay it
all, but offered to do so if ten dollars was taken off. His creditor,
feeling that it was just, declined to abate the amount.

For more than a year the creditor waited, after having no attention paid
to his correspondence or, claim by the debtor, who exhibited
unmistakable obstinacy and want of courtesy. At last it was put into the
hands of a lawyer. The lawyer, too, was fairly provoked at the
faithlessness of the debtor in his promises or his attention to the
subject; thus matters dragged wearily for months, yet exercised leniency
in pressing the claim.

The creditor, whose forbearance had now reached the extremity of
endurance, at last was led to take it to the Lord in prayer; saying he
would "willingly forgive the whole debt if in anything he was wrong, but
if the Lord thought it was right, hoped that his debtor _might be
compelled to pay the amount he so obstinately withheld_."

To the astonishment of all, a letter received from the lawyer four days
after, informed him _that his debtor had called and paid the claim in
full_ with interest to date. "In doing so, he said he paid it _under
protest_," thus showing he was _compelled by something he could not
resist to pay it all_.


A HURRICANE PASSES AROUND A SHIP.


A Sea Captain relates to the editor of the _Christian_, a remarkable
incident, whereby in one of his voyages his ship was unaccountably held
still, and thereby saved from sailing directly into the midst of a
terrible hurricane:--"We sailed from the Kennebec on the first of
October, 1876. There had been several severe gales, and some of my
friends thought it hardly safe to go, but after considerable prayer I
concluded it was right to undertake the voyage. On the 19th of October
we were about one hundred and fifty miles west of the Bahamas, and we
encountered very disagreeable weather. _For five or six days we seemed
held by shifting currents, or some unknown power, in about the same
place. We would think we had sailed thirty or forty miles_, when on
taking our observations we would find we _were within three or four
miles of our position the day before_. This circumstance occurring
repeatedly proved a trial to my faith, and I said within my heart,
'_Lord, why are we so hindered, and kept in this position_?' Day after
day we were held as if by an unseen force, until at length a change took
place, and we went on our way. Reaching our port they inquired, 'Where
have you been through the gale?' '_What gale_?' we asked. '_We have seen
no gale_.' We then learned that a terrible hurricane had swept through
that region, and that all was desolation. We afterwards learned that
_this hurricane had swept around us, and had almost formed a circle
around the place occupied by us during the storm. A hundred miles in one
direction all was wreck and ruin, fifty miles in the opposite direction
all was desolation; and while that storm was raging in all its fury, we
were held in perfect safety, in quiet waters_, and in continual anxiety
to change our position and pursue our voyage _One day of ordinary
sailing would have brought us into the track of the storm, and sent us
to the bottom of the sea._ We were anxious to sail on, but some unseen
power held us where we were, and we escaped."

The Captain was a prayerful man, trusting in his Lord, though his faith
was tried, and he thought the Lord was not helping him. Yet the Lord was
keeping his promise to him, "_The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in
safety by him, and the Lord shall cover him all the day long_."


RECOVERY FROM SPINAL DISEASE.


"Miss M---- is the daughter of a respectable farmer, an elder in a
Presbyterian church in Western Pennsylvania. When a young girl her spine
was injured while nursing her aged and helpless grandmother, and she has
been a great sufferer for many years. For eleven years she has not been
able to attend church nor to go from home, and for a long time was
unable to leave her chamber or her bed. Two years ago she was so ill
that hopes of her recovery were abandoned, her mind was thought to be
seriously, even hopelessly impaired. Her physician acknowledged that her
disease baffled his skill.

"A few months ago, being near her residence and hearing that her health
was better, I called on her, and to my surprise, found her able to sew,
walk about, and even go down stairs. She informed me that she suffered
so intensely from the remedies used for her cure, and constantly grew
worse, that she determined to do nothing more; it seemed like fighting
against God; she would put herself into His hands to do with her as He
pleased. Then it seemed to her that the Saviour came to her and said,
'M----, what aileth thee?' She told Him all her case, and He soothed and
comforted her. From that time she began to improve; the paroxysms of
pain grew less, and disappeared; her nervousness was relieved, she could
sleep, her mind was full of peace. She said, 'I am not cured, and do not
expect to be well, but I can bear what I have to suffer, and am willing
to depart whenever it is the Lord's will to take me away to himself.'"


PRAYER FOR A PAIR OF BOOTS.


In the Fall of 1858, H----, a student in the Theological Seminary at
Princeton, N.J., was in great need of a new pair of boots. His toes were
sticking out of his old ones, and he had no money to purchase new ones.
All the money he could command was barely enough to pay his fare to his
home, where be had promised a dear friend to be present on the
approaching communion Sabbath.

H---- was a man of great faith, and was accustomed to carry all his
wants to God in prayer. To God he carried the present emergency, and
earnestly importuned Him, that He would send him a pair of boots, and
that He would do it before the approaching Sabbath. He was persuaded
that God heard, and would answer his petition, yet his faith was sorely
tried. Saturday morning came and still there was no answer; he resolved,
however, to go to his home, fully persuaded that God would in good time
grant his request. He took the morning train at the Princeton depot, and
reached home about eleven o'clock. It was a hard trial for him to go to
"Preparatory Lecture" with his boots in the condition they were in; yet
at two o'clock he went, still praying that God would send him a new pair
of boots. During the service, a merchant in the town took a seat in the
same pew with him, and at the close of the service, without a word being
spoken on the subject, the merchant, after shaking hands with H---- and
inquiring of his welfare, asked him if he would do him the favor of
going down town to a certain boot and shoe store and select from the
stock as good a pair of boots as he could find, and, said the merchant,
"have them charged to me." It was, as, H---- said to me on his return to
the seminary, a direct answer to prayer. Indeed, it might be said of
H---- that he went through college and seminary _on prayer_. He laid all
his plans before God, pleaded his promises, and never was disappointed.


UNDER GARMENTS IN ANSWER TO PRAYER.


Among the students in the Theological Seminary at Princeton, N.J., in
1860, was my intimate friend L----. He was at the time poorly clad, but
was a devoted Christian, and is at present a successful foreign
missionary.

One day when on the Seminary campus, I heard two of the students very
thoughtlessly criticising the exceeding shabbiness of L----'s wearing
apparel, his short pants, old shoes, and socks with no heels in them. At
almost every step L---- took when playing ball, his bare heels could be
seen. That day, after evening prayers, I took L---- by the arm, for a
walk to "Orthodox point," a tree about a mile distant from the Seminary.
During our walk, I gently told him of the criticisms I had heard, and
learned more fully than I had ever done of his destitution of wearing
apparel, especially of under garments. I offered him a share of mine, or
the loan of money, so as to meet his present wants, but this he declined
to receive, saying, that he "would take it to the Lord in prayer," and
that God would in good time supply all his wants. I, too, bore his case
to the throne of grace. The next day after this, on going into his room,
he laid before me an empty envelope, and a five dollar bill, and asked
me the question, "Did you throw that envelope with that bill in it,
through that ventilator?" I assured him that I did not. "Well," said he,
"when I came in from recitation a short time ago, I found this envelope
on the floor and that five dollar bill in it. It has evidently been
thrown in through the ventilator." We both recognized God's hand in the
provision made and mentally gave thanks to our Heavenly Father. Soon
after this, "a missionary box" was sent to the Seminary, and my friend
was therefrom well supplied with under garments. Frequently afterward
did he say to me, in substance, "Prayer is the key to God's treasury.
Trust in Him and the Lord will provide."


UNEXPECTED RELIEF.


Henry Badgerow was a man about seventy years of age at the time of the
incident, and a resident of Steuben county, State of New York. This was
in the year about A.D. 1830-31. He had been for many years an invalid--
so much so that he couldn't walk--the result of a horse running away
with him. In a forest, isolated from neighbors, the old man resided
alone with an aged wife. They were quite poor, and wholly dependent upon
the labor of a son who worked away from home for others. This son was at
length taken sick with a fever, and unable to minister to his parents'
wants. This was in mid-winter, when storms were frequent and the snows
deep and lasting. One evening when the storm was at its highest, this
old couple found themselves without a particle of food in the house.
Matters were desperate with them. They could see but starvation staring
them in the face. They resolved upon prayer, having a firm trust in
their Heavenly Father, whom for many years they had been humbly serving.
They did not retire, but continued in fervent prayer that God would send
them food. About two and a half miles distant lived a young married man
in comfortable circumstances, by the name of Joseph Clason (the author
of the story). He was not at this time a Christian, although it was not
long after this he was converted, and has since lived an eminently
active and godly life. About 12 o'clock on the night of the snow storm
above mentioned, young Clason awoke. His first thoughts were of old Mr.
Badgerow and his condition in that storm. His mind became so impressed
with the thought of him, and so wrought upon that he could not again go
to sleep, although trying so to do. At length he awakened his wife, told
her that he was in trouble about Mr. B., for fear he and his wife were
starving. She replied that if he would get right up and make a light,
she would prepare something, and that he had better take it right down.
Young C. did so, taking with him a pail of provisions. After a jaunt
through the storm and snow in the dead hour of night, he reached the old
man's cabin. There he found a light burning. He knocked; the door was
opened by the wife. The old man was fervently praying; but when he saw
young C. with the pail of provisions, he held up both hands and said,
"Now I know that God heareth prayer. Not one mouthful have we in the
house to eat. I know that God sent you here." Young C. staid with the
old couple until daylight. The conversation revealed that about midnight
the old man perceiving that a storm had arisen, and that unless relief
came, which was not likely, they would starve, resolved to appeal to his
Heavenly Father, saying that God who sent the ravens to feed Elijah
would feed him if he went to him in faith, and now God had heard his
