"After these words had been spoken, the Kuru prince Arjuna endued with
great strength, duly received from Kuvera that celestial weapon. Then
the chief of the celestials addressing Pritha's son of ceaseless deeds
in sweet words, said, in a voice deep as that the clouds or the
kettle-drum, 'O thou mighty-armed son of Kunti, thou art an ancient god.
Thou hast already achieved the highest success, and acquired the stature
of a god. But, O represser of foes, thou hast yet to accomplish the
purposes of the gods. Thou must ascend to heaven. Therefore prepare thou
O hero of great splendour! My own car with Matali as charioteer, will
soon descend on the earth. Taking thee, O Kaurava, to heaven, I will
grant thee there all my celestial weapons.'

"Beholding those protectors of the worlds assembled together on the
heights of Himavat, Dhananjaya, the son of Kunti, wondered much. Endued
with great energy, he then duly worshipped the assembled _Lokapalas_,
with words, water, and fruits. The celestials then returning that
worship, went away. And the gods capable of going everywhere at will,
and endued with the speed of the mind, returned to the places whence
they had come.

"That bull among men--Arjuna--having obtained weapons thus, was filled
with pleasure. And he regarded himself as one whose desires had been
fulfilled and who was crowned with success."


SECTION XLII

(Indralokagamana Parva)

Vaisampayana said, "After the _Lokapalas_ had gone away, Arjuna--that
slayer of all foes--began to think, O monarch, of the car of Indra! And
as Gudakesa gifted with great intelligence was thinking of it, the car
endued with great effulgence and guided by Matali, came dividing the
clouds and illuminating the firmament and filling the entire welkin with
its rattle deep as the roar of mighty masses of clouds. Swords, and
missiles of terrible forms and maces of frightful description, and
winged darts of celestial splendour and lightnings of the brightest
effulgence, and thunderbolts, and propellors furnished with wheels and
worked with atmosphere expansion and producing sounds loud as the roar
of great masses of clouds, were on that car. And there were also on that
car fierce and huge-bodied _Nagas_ with fiery mouths, and heaps of
stones white as the fleecy clouds. And the car was drawn by ten
thousands of horses of golden hue, endued with the speed of the wind.
And furnished with prowess of illusion, the car was drawn with such
speed that the eye could hardly mark its progress. And Arjuna saw on
that car the flag-staff called _Vaijayanta_, of blazing effulgence,
resembling in hue the emerald or the dark-blue lotus, and decked with
golden ornaments and straight as the bamboo. And beholding a charioteer
decked in gold seated on that car, the mighty-armed son of Pritha
regarded it as belonging to the celestials. And while Arjuna was
occupied with his thoughts regarding the car, the charioteer Matali,
bending himself after descending from the car, addressed him, saying, 'O
lucky son of Sakra! Sakra himself wisheth to see thee. Ascend thou
without loss of time this car that hath been sent by Indra. The chief of
the immortals, thy father--that god of a hundred sacrifices--hath
commanded me, saying, _Bring the son of Kunti hither. Let the gods
behold him._ And Sankara himself, surrounded by the celestials and
Rishis and Gandharvas and Apsaras, waiteth to behold thee. At the
command of the chastiser of Paka, therefore, ascend thou with me from
this to the region of the celestials. Thou wilt return after obtaining
weapons.'

"Arjuna replied, 'O Matali, mount thou without loss of time this
excellent car, a car that cannot be attained even by hundreds of
_Rajasuya_ and horse sacrifices. Even kings of great prosperity who have
performed great sacrifices distinguished by large gifts (to Brahmanas),
even gods and Danavas are not competent to ride this car. He that hath
not ascetic merit is not competent to even see or touch this car, far
less to ride on it. O blessed one, after thou hast ascended it, and
after the horses have become still, I will ascend it, like a virtuous
man stepping into the high-road of honesty.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Matali, the charioteer of Sakra, hearing these
words of Arjuna, soon mounted the car and controlled the horses. Arjuna
then, with a cheerful heart, purified himself by a bath in the Ganges.
And the son of Kunti then duly repeated (inaudibly) his customary
prayers. He then, duly and according to the ordinance, gratified the
_Pitris_ with oblations of water. And, lastly, he commenced to invoke
the Mandara--that king of mountains--saying, 'O mountain, thou art ever
the refuge of holy, heaven-seeking _Munis_ of virtuous conduct and
behaviour. It is through thy grace, O mountain, that Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas attain heaven, and their anxieties gone, sport
with the celestials. O king of mountains, O mountain, thou art the
asylum of _Munis_, and thou holdest on thy breast numerous sacred
shrines. Happily have I dwelt on thy heights. I leave thee now, bidding
thee farewell. Oft have I seen thy tablelands and bowers, thy springs
and brooks, and the sacred shrines on thy breast. I have also eaten the
savoury fruits growing on thee, and have slated my thirst with draughts
of perfumed water oozing from thy body. I have also drunk the water of
thy springs, sweet as _amrita_ itself. O mountain, as a child sleepeth
happily on the lap of his father, so have I, O king of mountains, O
excellent one, sported on thy breast, echoing with the notes of Apsaras
and the chanting of the Vedas. O mountain, every day have I lived
happily on thy tablelands.' Thus having bidden farewell to the mountain,
that slayer of hostile heroes--Arjuna--blazing like the Sun himself,
ascended the celestial car. And the Kuru prince gifted with great
intelligence, with a glad heart, coursed through the firmament on that
celestial car effulgent as the sun and of extra-ordinary achievements.
And after he had become invisible to the mortals of the earth, he beheld
thousands of cars of extra-ordinary beauty. And in that region there was
no sun or moon or fire to give light, but it blazed in light of its own,
generated by virtue of ascetic merit. And those brilliant regions that
are seen from the earth in the form of stars, like lamps (in the
sky)--so small in consequence of their distance, though very large--were
beheld by the son of Pandu, stationed in their respective places, full
of beauty and effulgence and blazing with splendour all their own. And
there he beheld royal sages crowned with ascetic success, and heroes who
had yielded up their lives in battle, and those that had acquired heaven
by their ascetic austerities, by hundreds upon hundreds. And there were
also Gandharvas, of bodies blazing like the sun, by thousands upon
thousands, as also Guhyakas and Rishis and numerous tribes of Apsaras.
And beholding those self-effulgent regions, Phalguna became filled with
wonder, and made enquiries of Matali. And Matali also gladly replied
unto him, saying, 'These, O son of Pritha, are virtuous persons
stationed in their respective places. It is these whom thou hast seen, O
exalted one, as stars, from the earth.' Then Arjuna saw standing at the
gates (Indra's region) the handsome and ever victorious
elephant--Airavata--furnished with four tusks, and resembling the
mountain of Kailasa with its summits. And coursing along that path of
the _Siddhas_, that foremost of the Kurus and the son of Pandu, sat in
beauty like Mandhata--that best of kings. Endued with eyes like lotus
leaves, he passed through the region set apart for virtuous kings. And
the celebrated Arjuna having thus passed through successive regions of
heaven at last beheld _Amaravati_, the city of Indra."


SECTION XLIII

Vaisampayana said, "And the city of Indra which Arjuna saw was
delightful and was the resort of _Siddhas_ and _Charanas_. And it was
adorned with the flowers of every season, and with sacred trees of all
kinds. And he beheld also celestial gardens called _Nandana_--the
favourite resort of Apsaras. And fanned by the fragrant breezes charged
with the scent of sweet-scented flowers, the trees with their load of
celestial blossoms seemed to welcome him amongst them. And the region
was such that none could behold it who had not gone through ascetic
austerities, or who had not poured libations on fire. It was a region
for the virtuous alone, and not for those who had turned their back on
the field of battle. And none were competent to see it who had not
performed sacrifices or observed rigid vows, or who were without a
knowledge of the Vedas, or who had not bathed in sacred waters, or who
were not distinguished for sacrifices and gifts. And none were competent
to see it who were disturbers of sacrifices, or who were low, or who
drank intoxicating liquors, or who were violators of their preceptors'
bed, or who were eaters of (unsanctified) meat, or who were wicked. And
having beheld those celestial gardens resounding with celestial music,
the strong-armed son of Pandu entered the favourite city of Indra. And
he beheld there celestial cars by thousands, capable of going everywhere
at will, stationed in proper places. And he saw tens of thousands of
such cars moving in every direction. And fanned by pleasant breezes
charged with the perfumes of flowers, the son of Pandu was praised by
Apsaras and Gandharvas. And the celestials then, accompanied by the
Gandharvas and Siddhas and great Rishis, cheerfully reverenced Pritha's
son of white steeds. Benedictions were poured upon him, accompanied by
the sounds of celestial music. The strong-armed son of Pritha then heard
around him the music of conchs and drums. And praised all around, the
son of Pritha then went, at the command of Indra, to that large and
extensive starry way called by the name of _Suravithi_. There he met
with the _Sadhyas_, the _Viswas_, the _Marutas_, the twin _Aswins_, the
_Adityas_, the _Vasus_, the _Rudras_, the _Brahmarshis_ of the great
splendour, and numerous royal sages with Dilipa at their head, and
Tumvura and Narada, and that couple of Gandharvas known by the names of
Haha and Huhu. And the Kuru prince--that chastiser of foes--having met
and duly saluted them, last of all beheld the chief of the
celestials--the god of a hundred sacrifices. Then the strong-armed son
of Pritha, alighting from the car approached the lord himself of the
gods--his father--that chastiser of Paka. And a beautiful white umbrella
furnished with a golden staff was held over the chief of the celestials.
And he was fanned with a _Chamara_ perfumed with celestial scents. And
he was eulogised by many Gandharvas headed by _Viswavasu_ and others, by
bards and singers, and by foremost Brahmanas chanting _Rik_ and _Yajus_
hymns. And the mighty son of Kunti, approaching Indra, saluted him by
bending his head to the ground. And Indra thereupon embraced him with
his round and plump arms. And taking his hand, Sakra made him sit by him
on a portion of his own seat, that sacred seat which was worshipped by
gods and Rishis. And the lord of the celestials--that slayer of hostile
heroes--smelt the head of Arjuna bending in humility, and even took him
upon his lap. Seated on Sakra's seat at the command of that god of a
thousand eyes, Pritha's son of immeasurable energy began to blaze in
splendour like a second Indra. And moved by affection, the slayer of
Vritra, consoling Arjuna, touched his beautiful face with his own
perfumed hands. And the wielder of the thunderbolt, patting and rubbing
gently again and again with his own hands which bore the marks of the
thunderbolt the handsome and huge arms of Arjuna which resembled a
couple of golden columns and which were hard in consequence of drawing
the bowstring, the god of a thousand eyes eying his son of curly locks
smilingly and with eyes expanded with delight, seemed scarcely to be
gratified. The more he gazed, the more he liked to gaze on. And seated
on one seat, the father and son enhanced the beauty of the assembly,
like the sun and moon beautifying the firmament together on the
fourteenth day of the dark fortnight. And a band of Gandharvas headed by
Tumvuru skilled in music sacred and profane, sang many verses in
melodious notes. And Ghritachi and Menaka and Rambha and Purvachitti and
Swayamprabha and Urvasi and Misrakesi and Dandagami and Varuthini and
Gopali and Sahajanya and Kumbhayoni and Prajagara and Chitrasena and
Chitralekha and Saha and Madhuraswana, these and others by thousands,
possessed of eyes like lotus leaves, who were employed in enticing the
hearts of persons practising rigid austerities, danced there. And
possessing slim waists and fair large hips, they began to perform
various evolutions, shaking their deep bosoms, and casting their glances
around, and exhibiting other attractive attitude capable of stealing the
hearts and resolutions and minds of the spectators."


SECTION XLIV

Vaisampayana said, "The gods and the Gandharvas then, understanding the
wishes of Indra, procured an excellent _Arghya_ and reverenced the son
of Pritha in a hurry. And giving water to wash both his feet and face,
they caused the prince to enter the palace of Indra. And thus
worshipped, Jishnu continued to live in the abode of his father. And the
son of Pandu continued all the while to acquire celestial weapons,
together with the means of withdrawing them. And he received from the
hands of Sakra his favourite weapon of irresistible force, _viz_., the
thunder-bolt and those other weapons also, of tremendous roar, _viz_.,
the lightnings of heaven, whose flashes are inferable from the
appearance of clouds and (the dancing of) peacocks. And the son of
Pandu, after he had obtained those weapons, recollected his brothers.
And at the command of Indra, however, he lived for full five years in
heaven, surrounded by every comfort and luxury.

"After some time, when Arjuna had obtained all the weapons, Indra
addressed him in due time, saying, 'O son of Kunti, learn thou music and
dancing from Chitrasena. Learn the instrumental music that is current
among the celestials and which existeth not in the world of men, for, O
son of Kunti, it will be to thy benefit.' And Parandana gave Chitrasena
as a friend unto Arjuna. And the son of Pritha lived happily in peace
with Chitrasena. And Chitrasena instructed Arjuna all the while in
music; vocal and instrumental and in dancing. But the active Arjuna
obtained no peace of mind, remembering the unfair play at dice of
Sakuni, the son of Suvala, and thinking with rage of Dussasana and his
death. When however, his friendship with Chitrasena had ripened fully,
he at times learned the unrivalled dance and music practised among the
Gandharvas. And at last having learnt various kinds of dance and diverse
species of music, both vocal and instrumental, that slayer of hostile
heroes obtained no peace of mind remembering his brothers and mother
Kunti."


SECTION XLV

Vaisampayana said, "One day, knowing that Arjuna's glances were cast
upon Urvasi, Vasava, calling Chitrasena to himself, addressed him in
private saying, 'O king of Gandharvas, I am pleased; go thou as my
messenger to that foremost of Apsaras, Urvasi, and let her wait upon
that tiger among men, Phalguna. Tell her, saying these words of mine,
'As through my instrumentality Arjuna hath learnt all the weapons and
other arts, worshipped by all, so shouldst thou make him conversant with
the arts of acquitting one's self in female company.' Thus addressed by
Indra, the chief of the Gandharvas in obedience to that command of
Vasava, soon went to Urvasi that foremost of Apsaras. And as he saw her,
she recognised him and delighted him by the welcome she offered and the
salutation she gave. And seated at ease he then smilingly addressed
Urvasi, who also was seated at ease, saying, 'Let it be known, O thou of
fair hips, that I come hither despatched by the one sole lord of heaven
who asketh of thee a favour. He who is known amongst gods and men for
his many inborn virtues, for his grace, behaviour, beauty of person,
vows and self-control; who is noted for might and prowess, and respected
by the virtuous, and ready-witted; who is endued with genius and
splendid energy, is of a forgiving temper and without malice of any
kind; who hath studied the four Vedas with their branches, and the
_Upanishads_, and the Puranas also; who is endued with devotion to his
preceptors and with intellect possessed of the eight attributes, who by
his abstinence, ability, origin and age, is alone capable of protecting
the celestial regions like Mahavat himself; who is never boastful; who
showeth proper respect to all; who beholdeth the minutest things as
clearly as if those were gross and large; who is sweet-speeched; who
showereth diverse kinds of food and drink on his friends and dependents;
who is truthful, worshipped of all, eloquent, handsome, and without
pride; who is kind to those devoted to him, and universally pleasing and
dear to all; who is firm in promise; who is equal to even Mahendra and
Varuna in respect of every desirable attribute, _viz_., Arjuna, is known
to thee. O Urvasi, know thou that hero is to be made to taste the joys
of heaven. Commanded by Indra, let him today obtain thy feet. Do this, O
amiable one, for Dhananjaya is inclined to thee.'

"Thus addressed, Urvasi of faultless features assumed a smiling face,
and receiving the words of the Gandharva with high respect, answered
with a glad heart, saying, 'Hearing of the virtues that should adorn
men, as unfolded by thee, I would bestow my favours upon any one who
happened to possess them. Why should I not then, choose Arjuna for a
lover? At the command of Indra, and for my friendship for thee, and
moved also by the numerous virtues of Phalguna, I am already under the
influence of the god of love. Go thou, therefore, to the place thou
desirest. I shall gladly go to Arjuna.'"


SECTION XLVI

Vaisampayana said, "Having thus sent away the Gandharva successful in
his mission, Urvasi of luminous smiles, moved by the desire of
possessing Phalguna, took a bath. And having performed her ablutions,
she decked herself in charming ornaments and splendid garlands of
celestial odour. And inflamed by the god of love, and her heart pierced
through and through by the shafts shot by Manmatha keeping in view the
beauty of Arjuna, and her imagination wholly taken up by the thoughts of
Arjuna, she mentally sported with him on a wide and excellent bed laid
over with celestial sheets. And when the twilight had deepened and the
moon was up, that Apsara of high hips set out for the mansions of
Arjuna. And in that mood and with her crisp, soft and long braids decked
with bunches of flowers, she looked extremely beautiful. With her beauty
and grace, and the charm of the motions of her eye-brows and of her soft
accents, and her own moon-like face, she seemed to tread, challenging
the moon himself. And as she proceeded, her deep, finely tapering
bosoms, decked with a chain of gold and adorned with celestial unguents
and smeared with fragrant sandal paste, began to tremble. And in
consequence of the weight of her bosoms, she was forced to slightly
stoop forward at every step, bending her waist exceedingly beautiful
with three folds. And her loins of faultless shape, the elegant abode of
the god of love, furnished with fair and high and round hips and wide at
their lower part as a hill, and decked with chains of gold, and capable
of shaking the saintship of anchorites, being decked with thin attire,
appeared highly graceful. And her feet with fair suppressed ankles, and
possessing flat soles and straight toes of the colour of burnished
copper and high and curved like tortoise back and marked by the wearing
of ornaments furnished with rows of little bells, looked exceedingly
handsome. And exhilarated with a little liquor which she had taken, and
excited by desire, and moving in diverse attitudes and expressing a
sensation of delight, she looked more handsome than usual. And though
heaven abounded with many wonderful objects, yet when Urvasi proceeded
in this manner, the _Siddhas_ and _Charanas_ and _Gandharvas_ regarded
her to be the handsomest object they had cast their eyes upon. And the
upper half of her body clad in an attire of fine texture and cloudy
hues, she looked resplendent like a digit of the moon in the firmament
shrouded by fleecy clouds. And endued with the speed of the winds or the
mind, she of luminous smiles soon reached the mansion of Phalguna, the
son of Pandu. And, O best of men, Urvasi of beautiful eyes, having
arrived at the gate of Arjuna's abode, sent word through the keeper in
attendance. And (on receiving permission), she soon entered that
brilliant and charming palace. But, O monarch, upon beholding her at
night in his mansion, Arjuna, with a fearstricken heart, stepped up to
receive her with respect and as soon as he saw her, the son of Pritha,
from modesty, closed his eyes. And saluting her, he offered the Apsara
such worship as is offered unto a superior. And Arjuna said, 'O thou
foremost of the Apsaras, I reverence thee by bending my head down. O
lady, let me know thy commands. I wait upon thee as thy servant.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing these words of Phalguna, Urvasi became
deprived of her senses. And she soon represented unto Arjuna all that
had passed between her and the Gandharva, Chitrasena. And she said, 'O
best of men, I shall tell thee all that hath passed between me and
Chitrasena, and why I have come hither. On account of thy coming here, O
Arjuna, Mahendra had convened a large and charming assembly, in which
celestial festivities were held. Unto that assembly came, O best of men,
the Rudras and the Adityas and the Aswins and the Vasus. And there came
also numbers of great Rishis and royal sages and Siddhas and Charanas
and Yakshas and great Nagas. And, O thou of expansive eyes, the members
of the assembly resplendent as fire or the sun or the moon, having taken
their seats according to rank, honour, and prowess, O son of Sakra, the
Gandharvas began to strike the _Vinas_ and sing charming songs of
celestial melody. And, O perpetuator of the Kuru race, the principal
Apsaras also commenced to dance. Then, O son of Pritha, thou hadst
looked on me only with a steadfast gaze. When that assembly of the
celestials broke, commanded by thy father, the gods went away to their
respective places. And the principal Apsaras also went away to their
abodes, and others also, O slayer of foes, commanded by thy father and
obtaining his leave. It was then that Chitrasena sent to me by Sakra,
and arriving at my abode, O thou of eyes like lotus leaves, he addressed
me, saying, "O thou of the fairest complexion, I have been sent unto
thee by the chief of the celestials. Do thou something that would be
agreeable to Mahendra and myself and to thyself also. O thou of fair
hips, seek thou to please Arjuna, who is brave in battle even like Sakra
himself, and who is always possessed of magnanimity." Even these, O son
of Pritha, were his words. Thus, O sinless one, commanded by him and thy
father also, I come to thee in order to wait upon thee, O slayer of
foes. My heart hath been attracted by thy virtues, and am already under
the influence of the god of love. And, O hero, even this is my wish, and
I have cherished it for ever!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "While in heaven, hearing her speak in this
strain, Arjuna was overcome with bashfulness. And shutting his ears with
his hands, he said, 'O blessed lady, fie on my sense of hearing, when
thou speakest thus to me. For, O thou of beautiful face, thou art
certainly equal in my estimation unto the wife of a superior. Even as
Kunti of high fortune or Sachi the queen of Indra, art thou to me, O
auspicious one, of this there is no doubt! That I had gazed particularly
at thee, O blessed one, is true. There was a reason for it. I shall
truly tell it to thee, O thou of luminous smiles! In the assembly I
gazed at thee with eyes expanded in delight, thinking, _Even this
blooming lady is the mother of the Kaurava race._ O blessed Apsara, it
behoveth thee not to entertain other feelings towards me, for thou art
superior to my superiors, being the parent of my race.'

"Hearing these words of Arjuna, Urvasi answered, saying, 'O son of the
chief of the celestials, we Apsaras are free and unconfined in our
choice. It behoveth thee not, therefore, to esteem me as thy superior.
The sons and grandsons of Puru's race, that have come hither in
consequence of ascetic merit do all sport with us, without incurring any
sin. Relent, therefore, O hero, it behoveth thee not to send me away. I
am burning with desire. I am devoted to thee. Accept me, O thou giver of
proper respect.'

"Arjuna replied, 'O beautiful lady of features perfectly faultless,
listen. I truly tell thee. Let the four directions and the transverse
directions, let also the gods listen. O sinless one, as Kunti, or Madri,
or Sachi, is to me, so art thou, the parent of my race, an object of
reverence to me. Return, O thou of the fairest complexion: I bend my
head unto thee, and prostrate myself at thy feet. Thou deservest my
worship as my own mother; and it behoveth thee to protect me as a son.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by Partha, Urvasi was deprived
of her senses by wrath. Trembling with rage, and contracting her brows,
she cursed Arjuna, saying, 'Since thou disregardest a woman come to thy
mansion at the command of thy father and of her own motion--a woman,
besides, who is pierced by the shafts of _Kama_, therefore, O Partha,
thou shalt have to pass thy time among females unregarded, and as a
dancer, and destitute of manhood and scorned as a eunuch.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Having cursed Arjuna thus, Urvasi's lips still
quivered in anger, herself breathing heavily all the while. And she soon
returned to her own abode. And that slayer of foes, Arjuna also sought
Chitrasena without loss of time. And having found him, he told him all
that had passed between him and Urvasi in the night. And he told
Chitrasena everything as it had happened, repeatedly referring to the
curse pronounced upon him. And Chitrasena also represented everything
unto Sakra. And Harivahana, calling his son unto himself in private, and
consoling him in sweet words, smilingly said, 'O thou best of beings,
having obtained thee, O child, Pritha hath to-day become a truly blessed
mother. O mighty-armed one, thou hast now vanquished even Rishis by the
patience and self-control. But, O giver of proper respect, the curse
that Urvasi hath denounced on thee will be to thy benefit, O child, and
stand thee in good stead. O sinless one, ye will have on earth to pass
the thirteenth year (of your exile), unknown to all. It is then that
thou shalt suffer the curse of Urvasi. And having passed one year as a
dancer without manhood, thou shalt regain thy power on the expiration of
the term.'

"Thus addressed by Sakra, that slayer of hostile heroes, Phalguna,
experienced great delight and ceased to think of the curse. And
Dhananjaya, the son of Pandu, sported in regions of heaven with the
Gandharva Chitrasena of great celebrity.

"The desires of the man that listeneth to this history of the son of
Pandu never run after lustful ends. The foremost of men, by listening to
this account of the awfully pure conduct of Phalguna, the son of the
lord of the celestials, become void of pride and arrogance and wrath and
other faults, and ascending to heaven, sport there in bliss."


SECTION XLVII

Vaisampayana said, "One day, the great _Rishi_ Lomasa in course of his
wanderings, went to the abode of Indra, desirous of beholding the lord
of the celestials. And the great Muni, having approached the chief of
the gods, bowed to him respectfully. And he beheld the son of Pandu
occupying half of the seat of Vasava. And worshipped by the great
Rishis, that foremost of Brahmanas sat on an excellent seat at the
desire of Sakra. And beholding Arjuna seated on Indra's seat, the Rishi
began to think as to how Arjuna who was a Kshatriya had attained to the
seat of Sakra himself. What acts of merit had been performed by him and
what regions had been conquered by him (by ascetic merit), that he had
obtained a seat that was worshipped by the gods themselves? And as the
Rishi was employed with these thoughts, Sakra, the slayer of Vritra,
came to know of them. And having known them, the lord of Sachi addressed
Lomasa with a smile and said, 'Listen, O _Brahmarshi_, about what is now
passing in thy mind. This one is no mortal though he hath taken his
birth among men. O great Rishi, the mighty-armed hero is even my son
born of Kunti. He hath come hither, in order to acquire weapons for some
purpose. Alas! dost thou not recognise him as an ancient Rishi of the
highest merit? Listen to me, O Brahmana, as I tell thee who is and why
he hath come to me. Those ancient and excellent Rishis who were known by
the names of Nara and Narayana are, know, O Brahmana, none else than
Hrishikesa and Dhananjaya. And those Rishis, celebrated throughout the
three worlds, and known by the names of Nara and Narayana have, for the
accomplishment of a certain purpose, been born on earth--for the
acquisition of virtue. That sacred asylum which even gods and
illustrious Rishis are not competent to behold, and which is known
throughout the world by the name of Vadari, and situate by the source of
the Ganga, which is worshipped by the Siddhas and the Charanas, was the
abode, O Brahmana, of Vishnu and Jishnu. Those Rishis of blazing
