  And so through taking the active part her thighs grew lifeless, and
    languid her vine-like arms, and her heart beat fast, and her eyes
    grew heavy and closed.

  In the morning most wondrous, the heart of her lord was smitten with
    arrows of Love, arrows which went through his eyes,
  Arrows which were her nailed-scratched bosom, her reddened sleep-denied
    eyes, her crimson lips from a bath of kisses, her hair disarranged
    with the flowers awry, and her girdle all loose and slipping.
  With hair knot loosened and stray locks waving, her cheeks perspiring,
    her glitter of lips impaired,
  And the necklace of pearls not appearing fair because of her jar-shaped
    breast being denuded,
  And her belt, her glittering girdle, dimmed in beauty,
  The happy one drank of the face where the lips were washed with the
    juice of his mouth,
  His mouth half open uttering amorous noises, vague and delirious, the
    rows of teeth in the breath of an indrawn sigh delightedly chattering.
  Drank of the face of that deer-eyed woman whose body lay helpless,
    released of excessive delight, the thrilling delight of embraces.

When their passion is at last ended, Radha begs Krishna to help her with
her toilet.

  She said to the joy of her heart,
  Adorn the curl on my brow which puts the lotus to shame, my spotless
    brow,
  Make a beautiful spot on my forehead, a spot with the paste of the
    sandal,
  O giver of pride, on my tresses, untidy now on account of desire, place
    flowers,
  Place on my hips the girdle, the clothes and the jewels,
  Cover my beautiful loins, luscious and firm, the cavern of Love to be
    feared.
  Make a pattern upon my breasts and a picture on my cheeks and fasten over
    my loins a girdle,
  Bind my masses of hair with a beautiful garland and place many bracelets
    upon my hands and jewelled anklets upon my feet.

Krishna does so and with a final celebration of Krishna as God and of the
song itself--its words 'sweeter than sugar, like love's own glorious
flavour'--the poem ends.

[Footnote 51: Note 18.]

[Footnote 52: Plate 20.]

[Footnote 53: Plates 21 and 22.]

[Footnote 54: Note 19.]

[Footnote 55: Plate 23.]

[Footnote 56: Plate 24.]

[Footnote 57: Plate 25.]

[Footnote 58: Plate 26.]

[Footnote 59: Plate 27.]



(iii) Later Poetry


Jayadeva's poem quickly achieved renown in Northern and Western India and
from the early thirteenth century became a leading model for all poets who
were enthralled by Krishna as God and lover. In Western India,
Bilvamangala, a poet of Malabar, composed a whole galaxy of Krishna songs,
his poem, the _Balagopala Stuti_ (The Childhood of Krishna) earning for
him the title 'the Jayadeva of the South.' But it is during the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries that the most important developments occurred. In
Bengal, the poets Vidyapati and Chandi Das flourished in about the year
1420, while in Western India, Mira Bai, a local princess, began a
wide-spread popular movement. Mira Bai was followed by Vallabhacharya
(born 1478) who in turn inspired four poet disciples--Krishna Das, Sur
Das, Parmanand Das and Kumbhan Das. All these were at their height in the
middle of the sixteenth century, writing Hindi poems in which Radha's
adventures with Krishna and their rapturous love-making were devotedly
described.[60]

The work of Sur Das was of special importance for in one of his
compositions he took each of the thirty-six traditional modes of Indian
music-the _Ragas_ and _Raginis_--but instead of celebrating them as
separate 'musical characters,' appended to each a love-poem about Krishna.
Sur Das was followed by Keshav Das of Orchha (fl. 1580), Govind Das (fl.
1590), Bihari Lai (fl. 1650) and Kali Das (fl. 1700)--all poets in whom
religious ecstasy was blended with a feeling for passionate romance. Of
these poets Bihari Lai is famous for the _Sat Sai_ in which he celebrated
Krishna's romance in seven hundred verses.

All this later poetry differed from the _Gita Govinda_ in one important
respect. Instead of dwelling on the temporary rupture in Radha and
Krishna's relationship, it roved freely over the many phases of their
love-making, subjecting every incident to delighted analysis. A poet
thought and felt himself into Radha's mind when as a young girl about to
become a woman she discovered for the first time the exquisite sensations
of awakening love. Or he imagined he was Krishna stumbling on Radha by
accident and being stirred to ecstasy by his first glimpse of her glowing
charms. Sometimes he even became the unseen viewer of their rapturous
exchanges, comforting Radha with sage remarks or egging her on to appease
her hungry lover. In this way many incidents not recorded of any cowgirl
in the _Bhagavata Purana_, though possibly preserved in oral tradition,
came gradually into prominence, thereby confirming Radha as Krishna's
greatest love.

The following incidents will illustrate this process. Radha would be
described as one day taking her curds and milk to a village the farther
side of the river Jumma. Krishna hears of her expedition and along with
other cowherd boys waylays Radha and her friends and claims a toll. Radha
refuses to pay but at last offers to make a token gift provided he ferries
them over. Meanwhile a cowherd boy has hidden the boat and night is coming
on. It is now too late to return so the girls have no alternative but to
stay with Krishna. They lie down by the bank but in the darkness give
Krishna not only the toll but also their souls and bodies.

In another poem, Krishna is shown pestering the cowgirls for curds. Radha
decides to stand this no longer and partly in jest dresses herself up as a
constable. When Krishna next teases the girls, she descends upon him,
catches him by the wrist and 'arrests' him as a thief.[61]

It is in the poems of Chandi Das, however, that Krishna's most daring
ruses are described. Having once gained admittance to Radha's house by
dressing himself as a cowgirl, he is shown pretending to be a
flower-seller. He strings some flowers into a bunch of garlands, dangles
them on his arm and strolls blandly down the village street. When he
reaches Radha's house, he goes boldly in and is taken by Radha into a
corner where she starts to bargain. Krishna asks her to let him first
adorn her with a garland and then she can pay him. Radha agrees and as he
slips a garland over her head, Krishna kisses her. Radha suddenly sees who
it is and holds his hand.

On another occasion, Radha is ill from love and is lying at home on her
bed. Krishna thereupon becomes a doctor and goes from house to house
curing the sick. So successful are his cures that Radha also is tempted to
consult the new doctor and sends a maid to call him, Krishna comes but
before entering adopts a wild disguise--putting his clothes on inside out,
matting his hair with mud, and slinging a bag of roots and plants over his
shoulder. As he enters, he sits on Radha's bed, lifts her veil, gazes
intently at her face and declares that certainly she is very ill indeed.
He then takes her pulse and says, 'it is the water of love that is rotting
her heart like a poison.' Radha is elated at this diagnosis, rouses
herself and stretches her limbs. 'You have understood my trouble,' she
says. 'Now tell me what I am to do.' 'I feel somewhat diffident at
explaining my remedy,' replies the doctor, 'But if I had the time and
place, I could ease your fever and cure you utterly.' As he says this,
Radha knows that he is Krishna and this is only another of his reckless
wiles designed to bring him near her.

But it was less in the recording of new incidents than in lyrical
descriptions of Radha and Krishna, their physical charms and ecstatic
meetings, that the poets excelled.

  i

  Krishna is dancing in a medley of moods and poses.
  His crown sways, his eye-brows move,
  Displaying the arts of a clever dancer.
  The swing of his waist makes his girdle sing
  And the anklets jingle.
  One fancies one is listening to the sweet voice of a pair of geese as
    they touch each other in dalliance.
  The bangles glitter and the rings and armlets shoot their rays.
  When with passion he moves his arms, what grace the movements bless!
  Now he dances after the gait of ladies and now in a manner of his own.
  The poet's lord is the jewel of the passionate
  And builds his dance in the depths of ecstasy.[62]

  (Sur Das)

  ii

  With Krishna in their midst the cowherds come to their homes.
  The calves and cows are ahead, frisking and playing as they go.
  All the pipes and horns go forth, each his own notes playing.
  The sound of the flute moves the cows to low as they raise a cloud of
    dust.
  The crown of peacocks' feathers glistens on the head like a young moon.
  The cowherd boys frolic on the path and Krishna in the centre sings his
    song.
  Ravished by the sight, the cowgirls pour out their minds and bodies,
  Gazing on Krishna, quenching their heart's desire.

  (Sur Das)

  iii

  Radha's glances dart from side to side.
  Her restless body and clothes are heavy with dust.
  Her glistening smile shines again and again.
  Shy, she raises her skirt to her lips.
  Startled, she stirs and once again is calm,
  As now she enters the ways of love.
  Sometimes she gazes at her blossoming breasts
  Hiding them quickly, then forgetting they are there.
  Childhood and girlhood melt in one
  And young and old are both forgotten.
  Says Vidyapati: O Lord of life,
  Do you not know the signs of youth?[63]

  (Vidyapati)

  iv

  Each day the breasts of Radha swelled.
  Her hips grew shapely, her waist more slender.
  Love's secrets stole upon her eyes.
  Startled her childhood sought escape.
  Her plum-like breasts grew large,
  Harder and crisper, aching for love.
  Krishna soon saw her as she bathed
  Her filmy dress still clinging to her breasts,
  Her tangled tresses falling on her heart,
  A golden image swathed in yak's tail plumes.
  Says Vidyapati: O wonder of women,
  Only a handsome man can long for her.

  (Vidyapati)

  v

  There was a shudder in her whispering voice.
  She was shy to frame her words.
  What has happened tonight to lovely Radha?
  Now she consents, now she is scared.
  When asked for love, she closes up her eyes,
  Eager to reach the ocean of desire.
  He begs her for a kiss.
  She turns her mouth away
  And then, like a night lily, the moon seized her.
  She felt his touch startling her girdle.
  She knew her love treasure was being robbed.
  With her dress she covered up her breasts.
  The treasure was left uncovered.
  Vidyapati wonders at the neglected bed.
  Lovers are busy in each other's arms.

  (Vidyapati)

  vi

  Awake, Radha, awake
  Calls the parrot and its love
  For how long must you sleep,
  Clasped to the heart of your Dark-stone?
  Listen. The dawn has come
  And the red shafts of the sun
  Are making us shudder.

  (Vidyapati)

  vii

  Startled, the parrot calls.
  See those young lovers are still asleep.
  On a bed of tender leaves
  His dark figure is lying still.
  She, the fair one,
  Looks like a piece of jewelled gold.
  They have emptied their quivers.
  All their flower-arrows are discharged,
  Drowning each other in the joy of love.
  O lovely Radha, awake.
  Your friends are going to the temple.
  Asks Govind Das:
  Whose business is it
  To interrupt the ways of love?

  (Govind Das)

In another kind of poem, Radha and Krishna are themselves made to
speak--Krishna, for example, describing his first glimpses of Radha and
Radha struggling to evoke in words the ecstasies of their love.

  viii

  Like stilled lightning her fair face.
  I saw her by the river,
  Her hair dressed with jasmine,
  Plaited like a coiled snake.
  O friend, I will tell you
  The secret of my heart.
  With her darting glances
  And gentle smiles
  She made me wild with love.
  Throwing and catching a ball of flowers,
  She showed me to the full
  Her youthful form.
  Uptilted breasts
  Peeped from her dress.
  Her face was bright
  With taunting smiles.
  With anklet bells
  Her feet shone red.
  Says Chandi Das:
  Will you see her again?

  (Chandi Das)

  ix

  Listen, O lovely darling,
  Cease your anger.
  I promise by the golden pitchers of your breasts
  And by your necklace-snake,
  Which now I gather in my hands,
  If ever I touch anyone but you
  May your necklace-snake bite me;
  And if my words do not ring true,
  Punish me as I deserve.
  Bind me in your arms, hit me with your thighs,
  Choke my heart with your milk-swollen breasts,
  Lock me day and night in the prison of your heart.

  (Vidyapati)

  x

  Never have I seen such love nor heard of it.
  Even the eyelids' flutter
  Holds eternity.
  Clasped to my breasts, you are far from me.
  I would keep you as a veil close to my face.
  I shudder with fright when you turn your eyes away,
  As one body, we spend the night,
  Sinking in the deeps of delight.
  As dawn comes, we see with anxious hearts
  Life desert us.
  The very thought breaks my heart.
  Says Chandi Das:
  O sweet girl, how I understand.

  (Chandi Das)

  xi

  O friend, I cannot tell you
  Whether he was near or far, real or a dream.
  Like a vine of lightning,
  As I chained the dark one,
  felt a river flooding in my heart.
