     2. Can you think your class over pupil by pupil and decide which of
     these points in the _code of action_ most needs be stressed in
     individual cases? Do the topics in this code suggest points of
     emphasis which might serve for many different lessons? Is there
     danger of loss in efficiency if we try to stress too many of the
     points at one time?

     3. Are the children of your class interested in keeping up the
     membership and attendance? What specific part and responsibility do
     you give the members in this matter? Is it possible that you could
     plan to use their help more fully and effectively?

     4. Suppose you try making a list of all the different lines of
     participation in religious activities directly opened up to the
     pupils of your class by the church and the church school. Is the
     list as long as it should be? What further provision could be made
     for the children to have definite responsibility and activity?

     5. Do you think that your pupils are becoming increasingly inclined
     to look upon religion as a _mode of living?_ For example, will your
     children be more agreeable, responsive, obedient, and helpful in
     the home next week for the lessons you have been teaching them?
     Will they have higher standards of conduct in the school and on the
     playground?


FOR FURTHER READING

Dewey, Moral Principles in Education.

Sharp, Education for Character.

Partridge, Genetic Philosophy of Education, chapters on "Moral and
Religious Education."

Mumford, The Dawn of Character.

Richardson, The Religious Education of Adolescents.

Alexander, Boy Training.




CHAPTER VII

THE SUBJECT MATTER OF RELIGIOUS EDUCATION


We have seen in an earlier chapter how the subject matter of religious
education must be selected in accordance with the _aims_ we would have
it accomplish in the lives of our pupils. We have also considered in
separate chapters the religious _knowledge_ required, the religious
_attitudes_ demanded and the practical _applications_ of religious
instruction to be made or the _expression_ to be sought in the everyday
life. Let us now examine somewhat more completely the particular phases
of subject matter which should be used to attain these ends--To what
sources shall we go for the material for the religious instruction of
our children? What subject matter shall we put into the curriculum of
religious education? This is a question of supreme importance to the
individual, to the church, and to civilization.


SOURCES OF MATERIAL

First of all we must realize that the sources of religious material are
almost infinitely broad and rich. They are much broader than the Bible.
I would not be misunderstood on this point. I conceive the Bible as the
matchless textbook of religion, the great repository of spiritual wisdom
through the ages. It is the primary source to which we must go for
material for religious instruction, not just because it is the Bible,
but because its truths are the surest guide ever formulated for
spiritual development.

Yet human experience and human problems are broader than the Bible. New
ages bring new conditions and new needs. Eternal truths may take on new
forms to meet new problems. God inspired the writers of his Word, but he
also inspires other writers, whose works are not included in the canon.
He echoed in the voice of Isaiah and Jeremiah, but he also touches with
the flame of eloquence other lips than those of the prophets. He spoke
to the child Samuel, but he also speaks to-day to every heart that will
hear his voice. He flamed from the burning bush for Moses, but in like
manner he shines from every glowing sunset for those whose eyes can
there behold his glory.

Breadth and richness of religious material.--The sources of material
available for the religious education of childhood are therefore as
broad as the multiform ways in which God speaks to men, and as rich as
all the great experiences of men which have left their impress upon
civilization. Besides the beautiful story of God creating the earth, we
have the wonderful miracle of constant re-creation going on before our
eyes in the succession of generations of all living things.

Besides the deathless accounts of the heroism of such men as Elijah,
Daniel, and Paul, we have the immortal deeds of Livingstone, Taylor, and
Luther. Besides the womanly courage and strength of Esther and Ruth, we
have the matchless devotion of Florence Nightingale, Frances Willard,
Alice Freeman Palmer, and Jane Addams. Besides the stirring poetry of
the Bible, and its appealing stories, myths and parables, we have the
marvelous treasure house of religious literary wealth found in the
writings of Tennyson, Whittier, Bryant, Phillips Brooks, and many other
writers.

Material to be drawn from many sources.--The material for religious
teaching lying ready to our hand is measureless in amount, and must be
wisely chosen. In addition to material from the Bible, which always must
be the center and foundation of the religious curriculum, should be
taken other material from nature; from biography, history, and life
itself; from literature and story; from science and the great world of
objects about us; from music, and from art. All of this multiform
subject matter must be welded together with a common purpose, and so
permeated with the religious motive and application that it will touch
the child's spiritual thought and feeling at many points of his
experience.

At no moment, however, must we forget that our primary purpose is not
simply to teach the child stories, literature, history, or science, but
_religion_. By the proper use of this broader field of material religion
may be given a new and more practical significance, and the Bible itself
take on a deeper meaning from finding its setting among realities
closely related to the child's daily life.


MATERIAL FROM THE BIBLE

The very nature of the Bible requires that we make the most careful
selections from it in choosing the material for religious instruction of
children. Not all parts of the Bible are of equal value as educational
material, and some parts of it have no place in the course of study
before full mental development has been reached.

How we came by the Bible.--It will help us to understand and apply
these principles if we remember how we came by the Bible. First of all
is the fact that the Bible grew out of religion and the life of the
church, and not religion and the church out of the Bible. The Bible is
not one book, as many think of it, but a collection of sixty-six books,
which happen to be bound together. In fact, all sixty-six of these books
are now printed and bound separately by the American Bible Society, and
sold at a penny each. These sixty-six books were centuries in the
making, and they came from widely separated regions. Different ones of
them were originally written in different tongues--Hebrew, Greek, and
Aramaic.

The earlier Christians had, of course, only the scriptures of the Old
Testament. It was nearly four hundred years after Christ had lived on
earth before we had a list of the New Testament books such as our Bible
now contains. In the middle of the second century only about half of the
present New Testament was in use as a part of the Scriptures. Some of
the books which we now include were at one time or another omitted by
the Christian scholars, and several books were at one time accorded a
place which are not now accepted as a part of the Bible. The authorship
of a considerable number of the books of the Bible is unknown, and even
the exact period to which they belong is uncertain.

The different writers wrote with different purposes--one was a
historian; another a poet; another, as Paul, a theologian; another a
preacher; another a teller of stories and myths, or a user of parables.
Paul wrote his letters to local churches or to individuals, to answer
immediate questions or meet definite conditions and needs. Jesus left no
written word, so far as we know, and the first written accounts we have
of his life and work were begun forty or fifty years after his death.

The problem of selecting Bible material adapted to children.--The
Bible was therefore a slow growth. It did not take its form in
accordance with any particular or definite plan. It never was meant as a
connected, organized textbook, to be studied in the same serial and
continuous order as other books. It was not written originally for
children, but for adults to read.

Its enduring quality proves that the writers of the Bible lived close to
the heart and thought of God, and were therefore inspired of him. But we
can grant this and still feel free to select from its lessons and truths
the ones that are most directly fitted to meet the needs of our children
as we train them in religion. We can love and prize the Bible for all
that it means and has meant to the world, and yet treat it as a _means_
and not an _end_ in itself. We can believe in its truth and inspiration,
and still leave out of the lessons we give our children the sections
which contain little of interest or significance for the child's life,
or matter which is beyond his grasp and understanding.

Material which may be omitted.--This point of view implies the
omission, at least from the earlier part of the child's religious
education, of much material from different parts of the Bible; these
irrelevant sections or material not suited to the understanding of
childhood may remain for adult study.

For example, we may leave out such matter as the following: The detailed
account of the old Hebrew law as given in Leviticus; much of the Hebrew
history which has no direct bearing on the understanding of their
religion; details of the institution of the passover, and other
ecclesiastical arrangements; the philosophy of the book of Job;
genealogies which have no especial significance nor interest; the
succession of judges and kings; dates and chronological sequences of no
particular importance; any stories or matter clearly meant to be
understood as allegory or myth, but which the child would misunderstand,
or take as literal and so get a mistaken point of view which later would
have to be corrected; the theology of Paul as set forth in his letters;
matter which shows a lower state of morality than that on which we live;
and _such other matter as does not have some direct and discoverable
relation to the religious knowledge, attitudes, and applications which
should result from the study_.

After all such material of doubtful value to the child has been omitted,
there still remains an abundance of rich, inspiring, and helpful subject
matter.

The principle on which to select material from the Bible is clear: Know
what the child _is ready for_ in his grasp and understanding; know _what
he needs_ to stimulate his religious imagination and feeling and further
his moral and religious development. Then choose the material
accordingly.

Bible material for earlier childhood.--For the period of _earlier
childhood_ (ages three or four to eight or nine) we shall need to omit
all such material as deals with the broader and deeper theory of
religion. This is not the time to teach the child the significance of
the atonement, the mystery of regeneration, the power of faith, nor the
doctrine of the Trinity. Those sections of the Bible which deal with
such far-reaching concepts as these must wait for later age and fuller
development.

The child is now ready to understand about God as the Creator of the
earth and of man; he is ready to comprehend God as Father and Friend,
and Jesus as Brother and Helper; he is ready to learn lessons of
obedience to God, and of being sorry when he has done wrong; he is
therefore ready to understand forgiveness; he is ready to learn all
lessons of kindliness, truthfulness, and honesty, and of courage; he is
ready to learn to pray, and to thank God for his care and kindliness.
The Bible material taught the child should therefore center upon these
things. The simple, beautiful story of the creation; stories of God's
love, provision, and protection and of Christ's care for children;
incidents of heroic obedience and of God's punishment of disobedience;
stories of forgiveness following wrongdoing and repentance; stories of
courage and strength under temptation to do wrong; lessons upon prayer
and praise and thanksgiving--this is the kind of material from the Bible
which we should give our children of this younger age.

The greater part of the material for this stage of instruction will come
from the Old Testament, and will make the child familiar with the
childhood of Moses, Samuel, Joseph, David, and other such characters as
possess an especial appeal to the child's sympathy and imagination. The
New Testament must be drawn upon for the material bearing upon the birth
and childhood of Jesus.

Material for later childhood.--In the period of _later childhood_
(ages eight or nine to twelve or thirteen) the child is still unready
for the more difficult and doctrinal parts of the Scriptures. Most of
the impulses of earlier childhood still continue, even if in modified
form. Types of Bible material adapted to the earlier years, therefore,
still can be used to advantage.

A marked characteristic of this period, however, is the tendency to hero
worship and to be influenced by the ideals found in those who are loved
and admired. This is the time, therefore, to bring to the child the
splendid example and inspiration of the great Bible characters. The life
and work of Moses, the story of Joseph and his triumph over
discouragements and difficulties, the stern integrity and courage of
Elijah and the other prophets, the beautiful stories of Ruth, Esther,
Miriam, and Rachel, but above all the story of Jesus--the account of
these lives will minister to the child's impulse to hero worship and at
the same time teach him some of the most valuable lessons in religion.

During later childhood, the sense of personal responsibility for conduct
is developing, and the comprehension of the meaning of wrongdoing and
sin. This is the time, therefore, to bring in lessons from the Bible
showing the results of sin and disobedience to God, and the necessity
for repentance and prayer for forgiveness. During this period also,
while the social interests are not yet at their highest, the narrow
selfishness of earlier childhood should be giving way to a more generous
and social attitude, and a sense of responsibility for the welfare and
happiness of others.

To meet the needs of the growing nature at this point many lessons
should be provided containing suggestions and inspiration from high
examples of self-forgetfulness, sacrifice, and service as found in the
life of Jesus, Paul, and many others from the Old and the New Testament.
The child's growing acquaintance with the world about him and his study
of nature in the day schools prepare him for still further deepening his
realization of God beneficently at work in the material universe.
Abundant material may be found in the Bible to deepen and strengthen the
learner's love and appreciation of the beautiful and good in the
physical world.

Material for adolescence.--The _adolescent_ period (ages twelve or
thirteen to twenty or twenty-two) is the transition stage from childhood
to maturity. The broader, deeper, and more permanent interests are now
developing, and character is taking its permanent trend. Conduct,
choice, and decision are becoming more personal and less dependent on
others. A new sense of self is developing, and deeper recognition of
individual responsibility is growing.

It is all-important that at this time the Bible material should furnish
the most of inspiration and guidance possible. The life and service of
Jesus will now exert its fullest appeal, and should be studied in
detail. The work and service of Paul and of the apostles in founding the
early church will fire the imagination and quicken the sense of the
world's need of great lives. The ethical teachings of the Bible should
now be made prominent, and should be made effective in shaping the
ideals of personal and of social conduct which are crystallizing. The
development of the Hebrew religion, with its ethical teaching, and the
moral quality of the Christian religion are now fruitful matter for
study.

During the later part of adolescence the youth is ready to consider
biblical matter that throws light on the deeper meaning of sin, of
redemption, of repentance, of forgiveness, of regeneration, and other
such vital concepts from our religion. The simplest and least
controversial interpretations--that is, the broader and more significant
meanings--should be presented, and not the overspeculative and disputed
interpretations, which are almost certain to lead to mental and perhaps
spiritual disturbance and even doubt.

The guiding principle.--For whatever age or stage of the child's
development we are responsible, we will follow the same principle.
Because we want to cultivate in the child a deep and continuing interest
in the Bible and the things for which it stands, we will seek always to
bring to him such material as will appeal to his interest, stir his
imagination, and quicken his sense of spiritual values. Since we desire
to influence the learner's deeds and shape his conduct through our
teaching, we will present to him those lessons from the Bible which are
most naturally and inevitably translated into daily living. First we
will know what impression we seek to make or what application we hope to
secure, and then wisely choose from the rich Bible sources the material
which will most surely accomplish this end.


STORY MATERIAL

The story is the chief and most effective means of teaching the younger
child religion, nor does the appeal of the story form of expressing
truth lose its charm for those of older years. Lessons incomprehensible
if put into formal precept can be readily understood by the child if
made a part of life and action, and the story does just this. It shows
virtue being lived; goodness proving itself; strength, courage, and
gentleness expressing themselves in practice; and selfishness, ugliness,
and wrong revealing their unlovely quality. Taught in the story way, the
lesson is so plain that even the child cannot miss it.

The story also appeals to the child's imagination, which is so ready for
use and so vivid, and which it is so necessary to employ upon good
material in order to safeguard its possessor from using it in harmful
ways. Long before the child has come to the age of understanding
reasoned truth, therefore, he may well have implanted in his mind many
of the deepest and most beautiful religious truths which will ever come
to him.

The Old Testament rich in story material.--The wonderful religious and
ethical teachings of the Old Testament belong to a child-nation, and
were written by men who were in freshness of heart and in
picturesqueness and simplicity of thought essentially child-men; hence
these teachings are in large part written in the form of story, of
legend, of allegory, of myth, of vivid picture and of unrimed poetry. It
is this quality which makes the material so suitable to the child. The
deeper meanings of the story do not have to be explained, even to the
young child; he grasps them, not all at once, but slowly and surely as
the story is told and retold to him. If the story is properly told, the
child does not have to be taught that the Bible myth or legend _is_ myth
