from bodily pain in the next life, and to have bodily pleasure instead.
Pain and pleasure are the only gods which they really worship.  They call
the former--hell.  They call the latter--heaven.  But they know as little
of one as of the other; and their notions of both are equally worthy
of--Shall I say it?  Must I say it?--equally worthy of the savage in the
forest.  They believe that they must either go to heaven or to hell.  They
have, of course, no wish to go to the latter place; for whatever else
there is likely to be there--some of which might not be quite unpleasant
or new to them, such as evil-speaking, lying, and slandering, envy,
hatred, malice and all uncharitableness, bigotry included--there will be
certainly there--they have reason to believe--bodily pain; the thing
which they, being mostly comfortable people, dread most, and avoid most:
contrary, you will remember, to the opinion of the blessed martyrs, who
dreaded bodily pain least, and avoided it least, of all the ills which
could befal them.  Wherefore they are, in the sight of God, and of all
true men unto this day--the blessed martyrs.

But these people--and there are too many of them by hundreds of
thousands--do not want to be blessed.  They only want to be comfortable
in this world, and in the next.  As for blessedness, they do not even
know what it means; and our Lord's seven beatitudes, which begin--"Blessed
are the poor in spirit"--are not at all to their mind; even, alas! alas!
to the mind of many who call themselves religious and orthodox; at least
till they are so explained away, that they shall mean anything, or
nothing, save--I trust I am poor in spirit: and nevertheless I am right,
and everyone who differs from me is wrong.

The plain truth is--when all fine words, whether said in prayers or sung
in hymns, are stript off--that they do not wish to go to hell and pain;
and therefore prefer, very naturally, though not very spiritually, to go
to heaven and pleasure; and so sing of "crossing over Jordan to Canaan's
shore," or of "Jerusalem the golden, with milk and honey blest," and so
forth, without any clear notion of what they mean thereby, save selfish
comfort without end; they really know not what; they really care not
where.  And that they may arrive there or at a far better place; and have
their wish, and more than their wish: I for one heartily desire.  But
whether they arrive there, or not; and indeed, whether they arrive at
some place infinitely better or infinitely worse, depends on whether they
will give up selfish calculations of loss and gain, selfish choosing
between mere pain and pleasure: and choose this; choose, whatever it may
cost them, between being good and being bad, or even being only half
good; as little good as they can afford to be without the pains of hell
into the bargain.

My friends--What if Christ should answer such people--I do not say that
He does always answer them so, for He is very pitiful, and of tender
mercy;--but what if He were to answer them, Save you?  Help you?  O
presumptuous mortal, what have you done that Christ should save or help
you?  You are afraid of being ruined.  Why should you not be ruined?  What
good will it be to your fellow-men if you keep your money, instead of
losing it?  You are making nothing but a bad use of your money.  Why
should Christ help you to keep it, and misuse it still more?

You are afraid of death.  You do not wish to die.  But why should you not
die?  Why should Christ save you from death?  Of what use is your life to
Christ, or to any human being?  If you are living a bad life, your life
is a bad thing, and does harm not only to yourself, but to your
neighbours.  Why should Christ keep you alive to hurt and corrupt your
neighbours, and to set a bad example to your children?  If you are not
doing your duty where Christ has put you, you are of no use, a cumberer
of the ground.  What reason can you shew why He should not take you away,
and put some one in your place who _will_ do his duty?  You are afraid of
being lost--why should you _not_ be lost?  You are offensive, and an
injury to the universe.  You are an actual nuisance on Christ's earth and
in Christ's Kingdom.  Why should He not--as He has sworn--cast out of His
Kingdom all things which offend, and you among the rest?  Why should He
not get rid of you, as you get rid of vermin, as you get rid of weeds;
and cast you into the fire, to be burned up with all evil things?  Answer
that: before you ask Christ to save you, and deliver you from danger, and
from death, and from the hell which you so much--and perhaps so
justly--fear.

And how that question is to be answered, I cannot see.

Certainly the selfish man cannot answer it.  The idle man cannot answer
it.  The profligate man cannot answer it.  They are doing nothing for
Christ; or for their neighbours, or for the human race; and they cannot
expect Christ to do anything for them.

The only men who can answer it; the only men, it seems to me, who can
have any hope of their prayers being heard, are those who, like the
Psalmist, are trying to do something for Christ, and their neighbours,
and the human race; who are, in a word, trying to be good.  Those, I
mean, who have already prayed, earnestly and often, the first prayer,
"Teach me, O Lord, Thy statutes, and I shall keep them to the end."  They
have--not a right: no one has a right against Christ, no, not the angels
and archangels in heaven--not a right, but a hope, through Christ's most
precious and undeserved promises, that their prayers will be heard; and
that Christ will save them from destruction, because they are, at least,
likely to become worth saving; because they are likely to be of use in
Christ's world, and to do some little work in Christ's kingdom.

They are God's: they are soldiers in Christ's army.  They are labourers
in Christ's garden.  They are on God's side in the battle of life, which
is the battle of Christ and of all good men, against evil, against sin
and ignorance, and the numberless miseries which sin and ignorance
produce.  They are not the profligate; they are not the selfish, the
idle; they are not the frivolous, the insolent; they are not the wilfully
ignorant who do not care to learn, and do not even--so brutish are
they--think that there is anything worth learning in the world, save how
to turn sixpence into a shilling, and then spend it on themselves.  Not
such are those who may hope to have their prayers heard, because they are
worth hearing, and worth helping.  But they are the people who say to
themselves, not once in their lives, not once a week on Sundays, but
every day and all day long--I must be good; I will be good.  I must be of
use; I must be doing some work for God; and therefore I must learn.  I
must learn God's laws, and statutes, and commandments, about my station,
and calling, and business in life.  Else how can I do it aright?  I dare
no more be ignorant, than I dare be idle.  I must learn.  But how shall I
learn?  Stupid I am, and ignorant, and the more I try to learn, the more
I discover how stupid I am.  The more I do actually learn, the more I
discover how ignorant I am.  There is so much to be learned; and how to
learn it passes my understanding.  Who will teach me?  How shall I get
understanding?  How shall I get knowledge?  And if I get them, how shall
I be sure that they are true understanding, and true knowledge?  Mad
people have understanding enough; and so have some who are not mad, but
merely fools.  Wit enough they have, active and rapid brains: but their
understanding is of no use, for it is only misunderstanding; and
therefore the more clever they are, the more foolish they are, and the
more dangerous to themselves and their fellow-creatures.  Knowledge,
too--how shall I be sure that my knowledge, if I get it, is true
knowledge, and not false knowledge, knowledge which is not really
according to facts?  I see too many who have knowledge for which I care
little enough.  Some know a thousand things which are of no use to them,
or to any human being.  Others know a thousand things: but know them in a
shallow, inaccurate fashion; and so cannot make use of them for any
practical purpose.  Others know a thousand things: but know them all in a
prejudiced and one-sided fashion; till they see things not as things are,
but as they are not, and as they never will be; and therefore their
knowledge, instead of leading them, misleads them, and they misjudge
facts, misjudge men, and earth, and heaven, just as much as the man who
should misjudge the sunlight of heaven and fancy it to be green or blue,
because he looked at it through a green or blue glass.  How then shall I
get true knowledge?  Knowledge which will be really useful, really worth
knowing?  Knowledge which I shall know accurately, and practically too,
so that I can use it in daily life, for myself and my fellow-men?
Knowledge, too, which shall be clear knowledge, not warped or coloured by
my own fancies, passions, prejudices, but pure, and calm, and sound;
Siccum Lumen, "Dry Light," as the greatest of English Philosophers called
it of old?

To all such, who long for light, that by the light they may see to live
the life, God answers, through His only-begotten Son, The Word who
endureth for ever in heaven:--

"Ask, and ye shall receive; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall
be opened to you.  For if ye, being evil, know how to give good gifts to
your children, much more will your heavenly Father give His Holy Spirit
to those who ask Him."

Yes, ask for that Holy Spirit of God, that He may lead you into all
truth; into all truth, that is, which is necessary for you to know, in
order to see your way through the world, and through your duty in the
world.  Ask for that Holy Spirit; that He may give you eyes to see things
as they are, and courage to feel things as they are, and to do your work
in them, and by them, whether they be pleasant or unpleasant, prosperous
or adverse.  Ask Him; and He will give you true knowledge to know what a
serious position you are in, what a serious thing life is, death is,
judgment is, eternity is; that you may be no trifler nor idler, nor mere
scraper together of gain which you must leave behind you when you die:
but a truly serious man, seriously intent on your duty; seriously intent
on working God's work in the place and station to which He has called
you, before the night comes in which no man can work.

If a man is doing that; if he is earnestly trying to learn what is true,
in order that he may do what is right; then he has--I do not say a
right--but at least a reason, or a shadow of reason, when he cries to God
in his trouble--

"I am Thine, oh save me, for I have sought thy commandments."

"I am Thine."  Not merely God's creature: the very birds, and bees, and
flowers are that; and do their duty far better than I--God forgive me--do
mine.

"I am Thine."  Not merely God's child: the sinners and the thoughtless
are that, though--God help them--they care not for Him, nor for His laws,
nor for themselves and their glorious inheritance as children of God.

And I too am God's child: but I trust that I am more.  I am God's school-
child.  O Lord Jesus Christ, I claim Thy help as my schoolmaster, as well
as my Lord and Saviour.  I am the least of Thy school-children; and it
may be the most ignorant and most stupid.  I do not pretend to be a
scholar, a divine, a philosopher, a saint.  I am a very weak, foolish,
insufficient personage; sitting on the lowest form in Thy great school-
house, which is the whole world; and trying to spell out the mere letters
of Thy alphabet, in hope that hereafter I may be able to make out whole
words, and whole sentences, of Thy commandments, and having learnt them,
do them.  For if Thou wilt but teach me Thy statutes, O Lord, then I will
try to keep them to the end.  For I long to be on Thy side, and about Thy
work.  I long to help--if it be ever so little--in making myself better,
and my neighbours better.  I long to be useful, and not useless; a
benefit, and not a nuisance; a fruit-bearing tree, and not a noxious
weed, in Thy garden; and therefore I hope that Thou wilt not cut me down,
nor root me up, nor let foul creatures trample me under foot.  Have mercy
on me, O Lord, in my trouble, for the sake of the truth which I long to
learn, and for the good which I long to do.  Poor little weak plant
though I may be, I am still a plant of Thy planting, which is doing its
best to grow, and flower, and bear fruit to eternal life; and Thou wilt
not despise the work of Thine own hands, O Lord, who died that I might
live?  Thou wilt not let me perish?  I have stuck unto Thy testimonies: O
Lord, confound me not.

Therefore remember this.  If you wish to have reasonable hope when you
have to pray--"Lord, save me:" pray first, and pray continually--"Teach
me, O Lord, Thy statutes, and I will keep them to the end."




SERMON XIII.  THE ONE ESCAPE.


PSALM CXIX. 67.

   Before I was troubled, I went wrong: but now have I kept Thy Word.

Let me speak this afternoon once more about the 119th Psalm, and the man
who wrote it.

And first: he was certainly of a different opinion from nine persons out
of ten, I fear from ninety-nine out of a hundred, of every country, every
age, and every religion.

For, he says--Before I was troubled, I went wrong: but now have I kept
Thy Word.  Whereas nine people out of ten would say to God, if they
dared--Before I was troubled, I kept Thy Word.  But now that I am
troubled; of course I cannot help going wrong.

He makes his troubles a reason for doing right.  They make their troubles
an excuse for doing wrong.

Is it not so?  Do we not hear people saying, whenever they are blamed for
doing what they know to be wrong--I could not help it?  I was forced into
it.  What would you have a man do?  One must live; and so forth.  One
finds himself in danger, and tries to lie himself out of it.  Another
finds himself in difficulties, and begins playing ugly tricks in money
matters.  Another finds himself in want, and steals.  The general opinion
of the world is, that right-doing, justice, truth, and honesty, are very
graceful luxuries for those who can afford them; very good things when a
man is easy, prosperous, and well off, and without much serious business
on hand: but not for the real hard work of life; not for times of
ambition and struggle, any more than of distress and anxiety, or of
danger and difficulty.  In such times, if a man may not lie a little,
cheat a little, do a questionable stroke of business now and then; how is
he to live?  So it is in the world, so it always was; and so it always
will be.  From statesmen ruling nations, and men of business "conducting
great financial operations," as the saying is now, down to the beggar-
woman who comes to ask charity, the rule of the world is, that honesty is
_not_ the best policy; that falsehood and cunning are not only
profitable, but necessary; that in proportion as a man is in trouble, in
that proportion he has a right to go wrong.

A right to go wrong.  A right to make bad worse.  A right to break God's
laws, because we are too stupid or too hasty to find out what God's laws
are.  A right, as the wise man puts it, to draw bills on nature which she
will _not_ honour; but return them on a man's hands with "No effects"
written across them, leaving the man to pay after all, in misery and
shame.  Truly said Solomon of old--The foolishness of fools is folly.

But the Psalmist, because he was inspired by the Spirit of God, was of
quite the opposite opinion.  So far from thinking that his trouble gave
him a right to go wrong, he thought that his trouble laid on him a duty
to go right, more right than he had ever gone before; and that going
right was the only possible way of getting out of his troubles.

"Take from me," he cries, "the way of lying, and cause Thou me to make
much of Thy law.

"I have chosen the way of truth, and Thy judgments have I laid before me.

"Incline mine heart unto Thy testimonies, and not unto covetousness.

"Oh turn away mine eyes, lest they behold vanity, and quicken Thou me in
Thy way.

"Thy word is my comfort in my trouble; for Thy word hath quickened me.

"The proud have had me exceedingly in derision, yet have I not shrunk
from Thy law.

"For I remembered Thine everlasting judgments, O God, and received
comfort.

"Thy statutes have been my songs, in the house of my pilgrimage.

"I have thought upon Thy name, O Lord, in the night-season, and have kept
Thy law."

This was the Psalmist's plan for delivering himself out of trouble.  A
very singular plan, which very few persons try, either now, or in any
age.  And therefore it is, that so many persons are not delivered out of
their troubles, but sink deeper and deeper into them, heaping new
troubles on old ones, till they are crushed beneath the weight of their
own sins.

What the special trouble was, in which the Psalmist found himself, we are
not told.  But it is plain from his words, that it was just that very
sort of trouble, in which the world is most ready to excuse a man for
lying, cringing, plotting, and acting on the old devil's maxim that
"Cunning is the natural weapon of the weak."  For the Psalmist was weak,
oppressed and persecuted by the great and powerful.  But his method of
defending himself against them was certainly not the way of the world.

Princes, he says, sat and spoke against him.  But; instead of fawning on
them, excusing himself, entreating their mercy: he was occupied in God's
statutes.

The proud had him exceedingly in derision--as I am afraid too many
worldly men, poor as well as rich, working men as well as idlers, would
do now--seeing him occupied in God's statutes, when he might have been
occupied in winning money, and place, and renown for himself.

But he did not shrink from God's law.  If it was true, he could afford to
be laughed at for obeying it.

The congregation of the ungodly robbed him.  But he did not forget God's
law.  If they did wrong, that was no reason why he should do wrong
likewise.

The proud imagined a lie against him.  But he would keep God's
commandments with his whole heart, instead of breaking God's
commandments, and justifying their slander, and making their lie true.

Still, it went very hard with him.  His honour and his faith were sorely
tried.  He was dried up like a bottle in the smoke.  It seems to have
been with him at times a question of life and death; till he had hardly
any hope left.  He had to ask, almost in despair--How many are the days
of Thy servant?  When wilt Thou be avenged of them that persecute me?  The
proud dug pits for him, contrary to the law of God; contrary to honour
and justice; and almost made an end of him upon earth.  The ungodly laid
wait to destroy him.

But against them all he had but one weapon, and one defence.  However
much afraid he might be of his enemies, he was still more afraid of doing
wrong.  His flesh, he said, trembled for fear of God; and he was afraid
of God's judgments.  Therefore his only safety was, in pleasing God, and
not men.  I deal, he says, with the thing that is lawful and right.  Oh
give me not over to my oppressors.  Make Thy servant to delight in what
is good, that the proud do me no wrong.  If he could but keep right, he
would be safe at last.

I will consider Thy testimonies, O Lord.  I see that all things come to
an end.  Bad times, and bad chances, and still more bad men, and bad ways
for escaping out of trouble--they all come to an end.  But Thy
commandment is exceeding broad.  Exceeding broad.  There are depths below
depths of meaning in that true saying; depths which you will find true,
if you will but read your Bibles, and obey your Bibles.  For in them, I
tell you openly, you will find rules to guide you in every chance and
change of this mortal life.  Truly said the good man that there were in
the Bible "shallows where a lamb may drink, and deeps wherein an elephant
may swim."

There are no possible circumstances, good or bad, pleasant or unpleasant,
in which you can find yourselves, be you rich or poor, young or old,
without finding in the Bible sound advice, and a clear rule, as to how
God would have you behave under those circumstances.  For God's
commandments are exceeding broad, and take in all cases of conscience,
all details of duty; saying to each and every one of us, at every
turn--"This is the way, walk ye in it."

At least this is the teaching, this is the testimony, this is the life-
experience, of a true hero, namely, the man who wrote the 119th Psalm; a
hero according to God, but not according to the world, and the pomp and
glory of the world.

No great statesman was he, nor conqueror, nor merchant, nor financier
passing millions of money through his hands yearly; and all fancying that
they, and not God, govern the nations upon earth, and decide the fate of
empires.

He was a man who made no noise in the world: though the world, it seems,
made a little noise at him in his time, as it does often bark and yell at
those who will not go its way; as it barked at poor Christian, when he
went through Vanity Fair, and would not buy its wares, or join in its
frivolities.  Such a man was this Psalmist; for whom the world had
nothing but scorn first, and then forgetfulness.  We do not know his
name, or where he lived.  We do not even know, within a few hundred
years, when he lived.  I picture him to myself always as a poor,
shrivelled, stooping, mean-looking old man; his visage marred more than
any man, and his figure more than the sons of men; no form nor comeliness
in him, nor beauty that men should desire him; despised and rejected of
men: a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, even as his Master was
after him.

And all that he has left behind him--as far as we can tell--is this one
psalm which he wrote, as may be guessed from its arrangement, slowly, and
with exceeding care, as the very pith and marrow of an experience spread
over many painful years of struggle and of humiliation.

I say of humiliation.  For there is not a taint of self-conceit, not even
of self-satisfaction, in him.  He only sees his own weakness, and want of
life, of spirit, of manfulness, of power.  His soul cleaveth to the dust.
He is tempted, of course, again and again, to give way; to become low-
minded, cowardly, time-serving, covetous, worldly.  But he dares not.  He
feels that his only chance is to keep his honour unspotted; and he
cries--Whatever happens,--I must do right.  I must learn to do right.
Teach me to do right.  Teach me, O Lord, teach me; and strengthen me, O
Lord, strengthen me, and then all must come right at last.  That was his
cry.  And, be you sure, he did not cry in vain.

For this man had one precious possession; which he determined not to
lose, not though he died in trying to hold it fast; namely, the Eternal
Spirit of God; the Spirit of Righteousness, and Truth, and Justice, which
leads men into all truth.  By that Spirit he saw into the Eternal Laws of
God.  By that Spirit he saw who made and who administers those Eternal
Laws, even the Eternal Word of God, who endureth for ever in heaven.  By
that Spirit he saw that his only hope was to keep those eternal laws.  By
that Spirit he vowed to keep them.  By that Spirit he had strength to
keep them.  By that Spirit, when he failed he tried again; when he fell
he rose and fought on once more, to keep the commandments of the Lord.

And where is he now?  Where is he now?  Where those will never come--let
false preachers and false priests flatter them as they may--who fancy
that they can get to heaven without being good and doing good.  Where
those will never come, likewise, who, when they find themselves in
trouble, try to help themselves out of it by false and mean methods; and
so begin worshipping the devil, just when they have most need to worship
God.  He is where the fearful and unbelievers and all liars can never
come.  He is with the Word of the Lord, who endureth for ever in heaven.

With the Word of the Lord, who endured awhile on earth, even as he the
Psalmist endured.  Who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession,
and endured the cross, despising the shame, because He cared neither for
riches, nor for pleasure, for power, nor for glory; but simply for His
Father's will, and His Father's law, that He might do to the uttermost
the will of His Father who sent Him, and keep to the uttermost that Law
of which His Father says to Him for ever--"Thou art my Son, to-day have I
begotten Thee."

Into His presence may we all come at last!  But we shall never come
thither, unless we keep our honour bright, our courage unbroken, and
ourselves unspotted from the world.  For so only will be fulfilled in us
the sixth Beatitude--Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God.  Unto which may God of His free mercy bring us all.  Amen.



