upon the candidate's shoulders and cause his body to tremble.

Then the next Mid[-e]/, the third of the quartette, goes through a
similar series of forward movements and thrusts with his Mid[-e]/ sack,
uttering similar sounds and shooting the sacred m[-i]/gis--life--into
the right breast of the candidate, who is agitated still more strongly
than before. When the third Mid[-e]/, the second in order of precedence,
goes through similar gestures and pretends to shoot the m[-i]/gis into
the candidate's heart, the preceptors assist him to be violently
agitated.

The leading priest now places himself in a threatening attitude and says
to the Mid[-e]/; "M[-i]/-dzhi-de/-a-mi-sh[)i]k/"--"put your helping
heart with me"--, when he imitates his predecessors by saying, "y[^a],
h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/," at the fourth time
aiming the Mid[-e]/ sack at the candidate's head, and as the m[-i]/gis
is supposed to be shot into it, he falls forward upon the ground,
apparently lifeless.

Then the four Mid[-e]/ priests, the preceptor and the assistant, lay
their Mid[-e]/ sacks upon his back and after a few moments a m[-i]/gis
shell drops from his mouth--where he had been instructed to retain it.
The chief Mid[-e]/ picks up the m[-i]/gis and, holding it between the
thumb and index finger of the right hand, extending his arm toward the
candidate's mouth says "w[^a]! w[^a]! h[)e] h[)e] h[)e] h[)e]," the last
syllable being uttered in a high key and rapidly dropped to a low note;
then the same words are uttered while the m[-i]/gis is held toward the
east, and in regular succession to the south, to the west, to the north,
then toward the sky. During this time the candidate has begun to
partially revive and endeavor to get upon his knees, but when the
Mid[-e]/ finally places the m[-i]/gis into his mouth again, he instantly
falls upon the ground, as before. The Mid[-e]/ then take up the sacks,
each grasping his own as before, and as they pass around the inanimate
body they touch it at various points, which causes the candidate to
"return to life." The chief priest then says to him,
"[-O]/mishga'n"--"get up"--which he does; then indicating to the holder
of the Mid[-e]/ drum to bring that to him, he begins tapping and
presently sings the following song:

  [Music: 216_1]
  Mi/-si-ni-en/-di-an Mi/si-ni-en/-di-an Mi/-si-ni-en/-dian,
  Mi/-si-ni-en/-di-an, Mi/-si-ni-en/-di-an Mi/-si-ni-en/-di-an,
  Mi/-si-ni-en/-di-an, Mi/-si-ni-en/-di-an Mi/-si-ni-en/-di-an,
  Ni-kan. H[)i][-u], H[)i][-u], H[)i]u.

The words of the text signify, "This is what I am, my fellow Mid[-e]/;
I fear all my fellow Mid[-e]/." The last syllables, h[)i][-u]/, are
meaningless.

At the conclusion of the song the preceptor prompts the candidate to ask
the chief Mid[-e]/:

  Ni-kan/    k/k[)e]/-n[-o]/-mo/,  ma[n]-dzhi/-an  na/-ka-m[-o]/-in.
  Colleague  instruct me,          give me         a song.

In response to which the Mid[-e]/ teaches him the following, which is
uttered as a monotonous chant, viz:

  We/-go-n[)e]n/  ge-gwed/-dzhi-me-an/,  mi-d[-e]/-wi-w[)i]n
  What            are you asking,        grand medicine

  ke-kwed/-dzhi-me-an/?  Ki/-ka-mi/-nin   en-da-w[)e]n/-da
  are you asking?        I will give you  you want me to

  ma-wi/-n[)e]n  mi-d[-e]/-wi-w[)i]n
  give you       "grand medicine"

  tshi-da-si-n[-e]/-ga/-na-win/-da-m[-o]n;
  always take care of;

  ki-[)i]n/-tshun-di/-n[)e]-ma/-so-w[)i]n,
  you have received it yourself,

  tsho/-a-wa/-nin  di/-s[)e]-wan.
  never            forget.

To this the candidate, who is now a member, replies, [-e][n], yes, i.e.,
assent, fully agreeing with the statement made by the Mid[-e]/, and
adds:

  Mi-gw[)e]tsh/  a-shi/-wa-ka-kish/-da-win  be-m[^a]/-di-si/-an.
  Thanks         for giving to me           life.

Then the priests begin to look around in search of spaces in which to
seat themselves, saying:

  Mi/-a-shi/-gwa ki/-tshi-an/-w[^a]-bin-da-man  tshi-[-o]/-we-na/-bi-an.
  Now is the time I look around                 where we shall be [sit].

and all go to such places as are made, or reserved, for them.

The new member then goes to the pile of blankets, robes, and other gifts
and divides them among the four officiating priests, reserving some of
less value for the preceptor and his assistant; whereas tobacco is
carried around to each person present. All then make an offering of
smoke, to the east, south, west, north, toward the center and top of the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n--where Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] presides--and to the earth.
Then each person blows smoke upon his or her Mid[-e]/ sack as an
offering to the sacred m[-i]/gis within.

The chief Mid[-e]/ advances to the new member and presents him with a
new Mid[-e]/ sack, made of an otter skin, or possibly of the skin of the
mink or weasel, after which he returns to his place. The new member
rises, approaches the chief Mid[-e]/, who inclines his head to the
front, and, while passing both flat hands down over either side,

  Mi-gw[)e]tsh/,  ni-ka/-ni,      ni-ka/-ni,      ni-ka/-ni, na-ka/.
  Thanks,         my colleagues,  my colleagues,  my colleagues.

Then, approaching the next in rank, he repeats the ceremony and
continues to do so until he has made the entire circuit of the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n.

At the conclusion of this ceremony of rendering thanks to the members of
the society for their presence, the newly elected Mid[-e]/ returns to
his place and, after placing within his Mid[-e]/ sack his m[-i]/gis,
starts out anew to test his own powers. He approaches the person seated
nearest the eastern entrance, on the south side, and, grasping his sack
in a manner similar to that of the officiating priests, makes
threatening motions toward the Mid[-e]/ as if to shoot him, saying,
"y[^a], h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/," gradually raising his
voice to a higher key. At the fourth movement he makes a quick thrust
toward his victim, whereupon the latter falls forward upon the ground.
He then proceeds to the next, who is menaced in a similar manner and who
likewise becomes apparently unconscious from the powerful effects of the
m[-i]/gis. This is continued until all persons present have been
subjected to the influence of the m[-i]/gis in the possession of the new
member. At the third or fourth experiment the first subject revives and
sits up, the others recovering in regular order a short time after
having been "shot at," as this procedure is termed.

When all of the Mid[-e]/ have recovered a very curious ceremony takes
place. Each one places his m[-i]/gis shell upon the right palm and,
grasping the Mid[-e]/ sack with the left hand, moves around the
inclosure and exhibits his m[-i]/gis to everyone present, constantly
uttering the word "h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/, h[)o]/," in a quick, low
tone. During this period there is a mingling of all the persons present,
each endeavoring to attract the attention of the others. Each Mid[-e]/
then pretends to swallow his m[-i]/gis, when suddenly there are sounds
of violent coughing, as if the actors were strangling, and soon
thereafter they gag and spit out upon the ground the m[-i]/gis, upon
which each one falls apparently dead. In a few moments, however, they
recover, take up the little shells again and pretend to swallow them. As
the Mid[-e]/ return to their respective places the m[-i]/gis is restored
to its receptacle in the Mid[-e]/ sack.

Food is then brought into the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n and all partake of it at
the expense of the new member.

After the feast, the older Mid[-e]/ of high order, and possibly the
officiating priests, recount the tradition of the Ani/shin[^a]/b[-e]g
and the origin of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, together with speeches relating to
the benefits to be derived through a knowledge thereof, and sometimes,
tales of individual success and exploits. When the inspired ones have
given utterance to their thoughts and feelings, their memories and their
boastings, and the time of adjournment has almost arrived, the new
member gives an evidence of his skill as a singer and a Mid[-e]/. Having
acted upon the suggestion of his preceptor, he has prepared some songs
and learned them, and now for the first time the opportunity presents
itself for him to gain admirers and influential friends, a sufficient
number of whom he will require to speak well of him, and to counteract
the evil which will be spoken of him by enemies--for enemies are
numerous and may be found chiefly among those who are not fitted for the
society of the Mid[-e]/, or who have failed to attain the desired
distinction.

The new member, in the absence of a Mid[-e]/ drum of his own, borrows
one from a fellow Mid[-e]/ and begins to beat it gently, increasing the
strokes in intensity as he feels more and more inspired, then sings a
song (Pl. X, D), of which the following are the words, each line being
repeated ad libitum, viz:

  [Illustration]
  We/-nen-wi/-wik ka/-ni-an.
  The spirit has made sacred the place in which I live.
    [The singer is shown partly within, and partly above his wigwam, the
    latter being represented by the lines upon either side, and crossing
    his body.]

  [Illustration]
  En/-da-yan/ pi-ma/-ti-su/-i-[)u]n en/-da-yan/.
  The spirit gave the "medicine" which we receive.
    [The upper inverted crescent is the arch of the sky, the magic
    influence descending, like rain upon the earth, the latter being
    shown by the horizontal line at the bottom.]

  [Illustration]
  Rest.

  [Illustration]
  Nin/-nik-ka/-ni man/-i-d[-o].
  I too have taken the medicine he gave us.
    [The speaker's arm, covered with m[-i]/gis, or magic influence,
    reaches toward the sky to receive from Ki/tshi Man/id[-o] the divine
    favor of a Mid[-e]'s power.]

  [Illustration]
  Ke-k[)e]k/-[-o]-[)i]-yan/.
  I brought life to the people.
    [The Thunderer, the one who causes the rains, and consequently life
    to vegetation, by which the Indian may sustain life.]

  [Illustration]
  Be-mo/-se ma-k[-o]-yan.
  I have come to the medicine lodge also.
    [The Bear Spirit, one of the guardians of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, was
    also present, and did not oppose the singer's entrance.]

  [Illustration]
  Ka/-ka-mi/-ni-ni/-ta.
  We spirits are talking together.
    [The singer compares himself and his colleagues to spirits, i.e.,
    those possessing supernatural powers, and communes with them as an
    equal.]

  [Illustration]
  O-ni/-ni-sh[)i]nk-ni/-yo.
  The m[-i]/gis is on my body.
    [The magic power has been put into his body by the Mid[-e] priests.]

  [Illustration]
  Ni man/-i-d[-o] ni/-y[)a]n.
  The spirit has put away all my sickness.
    [He has received new life, and is, henceforth, free from the
    disturbing influences of evil man/id[-o]s.]

As the sun approaches the western horizon, the Mid[-e]/ priests emerge
from the western door of the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n and go to their respective
wig/iwams, where they partake of their regular evening repast, after
which the remainder of the evening is spent in paying calls upon other
members of the society, smoking, etc.

The preceptor and his assistant return to the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n at
nightfall, remove the degree post and plant it at the head of the
wig/iwam--that part directly opposite the entrance--occupied by the new
member. Two stones are placed at the base of the post, to represent the
two forefeet of the bear Man/id[-o] through whom life was also given to
the Ani/shin[^a]/b[-e]g.

If there should be more than one candidate to receive a degree the
entire number, if not too great, is taken into the Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n for
initiation at the same time; and if one day suffices to transact the
business for which the meeting was called the Indians return to their
respective homes upon the following morning. If, however, arrangements
have been made to advance a member to a higher degree, the necessary
changes and appropriate arrangement of the interior of the
Mid[-e]/wig[^a]n are begun immediately after the society has adjourned.

DESCRIPTIVE NOTES.

The m[-i]/gis referred to in this description of the initiation consists
of a small white shell, of almost any species, but the one believed to
resemble the form of the mythical m[-i]/gis is similar to the cowrie,
Cypraea moneta, L., and is figured at No. 1 on Pl. XI. Nearly all of the
shells employed for this purpose are foreign species, and have no doubt
been obtained from the traders. The shells found in the country of the
Ojibwa are of rather delicate structure, and it is probable that the
salt water shells are employed as a substitute chiefly because of their
less frangible character. The m[-i]/gis of the other degrees are
presented on the same plate, but special reference to them will be made.
No. 2 represents the m[-i]/gis in the possession of the chief Mid[-e]
priest of the society at Leech Lake, Minnesota, and consists of a
pearl-white Helix (sp?).

The Mid[-e]/ sack represented in No. 7 (Pl. XI.) is made of the skin of
a mink--Putorius vison, Gapp. White, downy feathers are secured to the
nose, as an additional ornament. In this sack are carried the sacred
objects belonging to its owner, such as colors for facial ornamentation,
and the magic red powder employed in the preparation of hunters/ songs;
effigies and other contrivances to prove to the incredulous the
genuineness of the Mid[-e]/ pretensions, sacred songs, amulets, and
other small man/id[-o]s--abnormal productions to which they attach
supernatural properties--invitation sticks, etc.

  [Illustration: Plate XI.
  Sacred Objects.]

In Fig. 19 is reproduced a curious abnormal growth which was in the
possession of a Mid[-e]/ near Red Lake, Minnesota. It consists of the
leg of a Goshawk--Astur atricapillus, Wilson--from the outer inferior
condyle of the right tibia of which had projected a supernumerary leg
that terminated in two toes, the whole abnormality being about one-half
the size and length of the natural leg and toes.

  [Illustration: Fig. 19.--Hawk-leg fetish.]

This fetish was highly prized by its former owner, and was believed to
be a medium whereby the favor of the Great Thunderer, or Thunder God,
might be invoked and his anger appeased. This deity is represented in
pictography by the eagle, or frequently by one of the Falconidae; hence
it is but natural that the superstitious should look with awe and
reverence upon such an abnormality on one of the terrestrial
representatives of this deity.

A Mid[-e]/ of the first degree, who may not be enabled to advance
further in the mysteries of the Mid[-e]/wiwin, owing to his inability to
procure the necessary quantity of presents and gifts which he is
required to pay to new preceptors and to the officiating priests--the
latter demanding goods of double the value of those given as an entrance
to the first degree--may, however, accomplish the acquisition of
additional knowledge by purchasing it from individual Mid[-e]/. It is
customary with Mid[-e]/ priests to exact payment for every individual
remedy or secret that may be imparted to another who may desire such
information. This practice is not entirely based upon mercenary motives,
but it is firmly believed that when a secret or remedy has been paid,
for it can not be imparted for nothing, as then its virtue would be
impaired, if not entirely destroyed, by the man/id[-o] or guardian
spirit under whose special protection it may be supposed to be held or
controlled.

Under such circumstances certain first degree Mid[-e]/ may become
possessed of alleged magic powers which are in reality part of the
accomplishments of the Mid[-e]/ of the higher degrees; but, for the
mutual protection of the members of the society, they generally hesitate
to impart anything that may be considered of high value. The usual kind
of knowledge sought consists of the magic properties and use of plants,
to the chief varieties of which reference will be made in connection
with the next degree.

There is one subject, however, which first-degree Mid[-e]/ seek
enlightment upon, and that is the preparation of the "hunter's medicine"
and the pictographic drawings employed in connection therewith. The
compound is made of several plants, the leaves and roots of which are
ground into powder. A little of this is put into the gun barrel, with
the bullet, and sometimes a small pinch is dropped upon the track of the
animal to compel it to halt at whatever place it may be when the powder
is so sprinkled upon the ground.

The method generally employed to give to the hunter success is as
follows: When anyone contemplates making a hunting trip, he first visits
the Mid[-e]/, giving him a present of tobacco before announcing the
object of his visit and afterwards promising to give him such and such
portions of the animal which he may procure. The Mid[-e]/, if satisfied
with the gift, produces his pipe and after making an offering to Ki/tshi
Man/id[-o] for aid in the preparation of his "medicine," and to appease
the anger of the man/id[-o] who controls the class of animals desired,
sings a song, one of his own composition, after which he will draw with
a sharp-pointed bone or nail, upon a small piece of birch bark, the
outline of the animal desired by the applicant. The place of the heart
of the animal is indicated by a puncture upon which a small quantity of
vermilion is carefully rubbed, this color being very efficacious toward
effecting the capture of the animal and the punctured heart insuring its
death.

  [Illustration: Fig. 20.--Hunter's medicine.]

Frequently the heart is indicated by a round or triangular figure, from
which a line extends toward the mouth, generally designated the life
line, i.e., that magic power may reach its heart and influence the life
of the subject designated. Fig. 20 is a reproduction of the character
drawn upon a small oval piece of birch bark, which had been made by a
Mid[-e]/ to insure the death of two bears. Another example is presented
in Fig. 21, a variety of animals being figured and a small quantity of
vermilion being rubbed upon the heart of each. In some instances the
representation of animal forms is drawn by the Mid[-e]/ not upon birch
bark, but directly upon sandy earth or a bed of ashes, either of which
affords a smooth surface. For this purpose he uses a sharply pointed
piece of wood, thrusts it into the region of the heart, and afterwards
sprinkles upon this a small quantity of powder consisting of magic
plants and vermilion. These performances are not conducted in public,
but after the regular mystic ceremony has been conducted by the Mid[-e]/
the information is delivered with certain injunctions as to the course
of procedure, direction, etc. In the latter method of drawing the
outline upon the sand or upon ashes, the result is made known with such
directions as may be deemed necessary to insure success.

  [Illustration: Fig. 21.--Hunter's medicine.]

For the purpose of gaining instruction and success in the disposition of
his alleged medicines, the Mid[-e]/ familiarizes himself with the
topography and characteristics of the country extending over a wide
area, to ascertain the best feeding grounds of the various animals and
their haunts at various seasons. He keeps himself informed by also
skillfully conducting inquiries of returning hunters, and thus becomes
possessed of a large amount of valuable information respecting the
natural history of the surrounding country, by which means he can, with
a tolerable amount of certainty, direct a hunter to the best localities
for such varieties of game as may be particularly desired by him.

  [Illustration: Fig. 22.--W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ drum.]

In his incantations a W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ uses a drum resembling a
tambourine. A hoop made of ash wood is covered with a piece of rawhide,
tightly stretched while wet. Upon the upper surface is painted a mythic
figure, usually that of his tutelaly daimon. An example of this kind is
from Red Lake, Minnesota, presented in Fig. 22. The human figure is
painted red, while the outline of the head is black, as are also the
waving lines extending from the head. These lines denote superior power.
When drumming upon this figure, the W[^a]b[)e]n[-o]/ chants and is thus
more easily enabled to invoke the assistance of his man/id[-o].

Women, as before remarked, may take the degrees of the Mid[-e]/wiwin,
but, so far as could be ascertained, their professions pertain chiefly
to the treatment of women and children and to tattooing for the cure of
headache and chronic neuralgia.

Tattooing is accomplished by the use of finely powdered charcoal, soot
or gunpowder, the pricking instrument being made by tying together a
small number of needles; though formerly, it is said, fish spines or
sharp splinters of bone were used for the purpose. The marks consist of
round spots of one-half to three-fourths of an inch in diameter
immediately over the afflicted part, the intention being to drive out
the demon. Such spots are usually found upon the temples, though an
occasional one may be found on the forehead or over the nasal eminence.

When the pain extends over considerable space the tattoo marks are
smaller, and are arranged in rows or continuous lines. Such marks may be
found upon some individuals to run outward over either or both cheeks
from the alae of the nose to a point near the lobe of the ear, clearly
indicating that the tattooing was done for toothache or neuralgia.

The female Mid[-e]/ is usually present at the initiation of new members,
but her duties are mainly to assist in the singing and to make herself
generally useful in connection with the preparation of the medicine
feast.


SECOND DEGREE.

The inclosure within which the second degree of the Mid[-e]/wiwin is
conferred, resembles in almost every respect that of the first, the only
important difference being that there are two degree posts instead of
one. A diagram is presented in Fig. 23. The first post is planted a
short distance beyond the middle of the floor--toward the western
door--and is similar to the post of the first degree, i.e., red, with a
band of green around the top, upon which is perched the stuffed body of
