_Vide_ Sura XVII, 81. On this subject Dr. Marcus Dods observes:--

     "There are two features of the devout character which the
     Mohammedans have the merit of exhibiting with much greater
     distinctness than we do. They show not the smallest hesitation or
     fear in confessing God, and they reduce to practice the great
     principle that the worship of God is not confined to temples or
     any special place:--

     "Most honour to the men of prayer,
     Whose mosque is in them everywhere!
     Who amid revel's wildest din,
     In war's severest discipline,
     On rolling deck, in thronged bazaar,
     In stranger land, however far,
     However different in their reach
     Of thought, in manners, dress or speech,--
     Will quietly their carpet spread.
     To Mekkeh turn the humble head,
     And, as if blind to all around,
     And deaf to each distracting sound,
     In ritual language God adore,
     In spirit to his presence soar,
     And in the pauses of the prayer,
     Rest, as if rapt in glory there."

     "There are of course formalists and hypocrites in Islam as well as
     in religions of which we have more experience. The uniformity and
     regularity of their prostrations resemble the movements of a
     well-drilled company of soldiers or of machines, but the Koran
     denounces "woe upon those who pray, but in their prayers are
     careless, who make a show of devotion, but refuse to help the
     needy;" while nowhere is formalism more pungently ridiculed than in
     the common Arabic proverb, "His head is towards the Kibleh, but his
     heels among the weeds." We could almost excuse a touch of formalism
     for the sake of securing that absolute stillness and outward
     decorum in worship which deceives the stranger as he enters a
     crowded mosque into the belief that it is quite empty. Persons who
     hold themselves excused from the duty of worship by every slight
     obstacle might do worse than get infected with the sublime
     formalism of Cais, son of Sad, who would not shift his head an inch
     from the place of his prostration, though a huge serpent lifted its
     fangs close to his face and finally coiled itself round his neck.
     And if some are formal, certainly many are very much in
     earnest."[157]

[Sidenote: Ablutions.]

The ablutions have not been imposed as burdens, or as having any
mysterious merit, but merely as a measure of cleanliness.

     "God desireth not to lay a burden upon you, but he desireth to
     purify you."

[Footnote 156: The institution of pilgrimage is a harmless one, and
conducive to unity in religion for Arabs, and gives moreover an impetus
to trade at large.]

[Footnote 157: Mohammed, Buddha, and Christ, by Marcus Dods, D.D., pp.
30-1.]


[Sidenote: Koran both abstract and concrete in morals.]

41. (4) The Koran seems fully aware of the danger of the precise and
fixed system of positive precepts moulding and regulating every
department of life. The danger is that the system of formalism in which
men are tied down to the performance of certain religious functions,
minutely and precisely fixed in respect to time, place and manner, so
that neither less nor more is required of them, retains too tight a grip
upon them, when the circumstances which justified it have changed or
vanished away. The moral growth of those who live under such a system of
minute and punctilious restraint is stunted and retarded. The tendency
of mankind to formalism is so strong that they very commonly, though
often unconsciously, fall into the error of imagining that there is a
peculiar intrinsic merit and virtue in the mere discharge of those
prescribed forms of duties and religious ceremonies. Morality is with
them not in the abstract but in the concrete, as consisting of a mass of
religious observances, rather than of a certain disposition of heart
towards God and man. The Koran deals with vice and virtue as a whole as
well as in fragmentary details. It treats of inward motives as much as
of outward practice, of exhortations equally with precepts and commands.
It holds up before man the hatefulness and ugliness of vice _as a
whole_. It does not enclose the whole of the practical morality and
piety within the narrow compass of a fixed number of precepts. It lays
the foundation of that far-reaching charity which regards all men as
equal in the sight of God, and recognizes no distinction of races and
classes.

     120. "And abandon the semblance of wickedness and wickedness
     itself. They, verily, whose _only_ acquirement is iniquity shall be
     repaid for what they have gained."

     152. "Say: Come, I will rehearse what your Lord hath made binding
     on you, that ye assign not aught to Him as sharers of his Divine
     honour, and that ye be good to your parents; _and_ that ye slay not
     your children because of poverty, for them and for you will We
     provide; and that ye come not near to pollutions, outward or
     inward; and that ye slay not anyone whom God hath forbidden you,
     unless for a just cause. This hath He enjoined on you: haply ye
     will understand."--Sura VI.

     31. "Say: Only hath my Lord forbidden filthy actions, whether open
     or secret, and iniquity, and unjust violence, and to associate with
     God that for which He hath sent down no warranty, and to speak of
     God that of which ye have no knowledge."--Sura VII.

     33. "To those who avoid great crimes and scandals, but commit only
     lighter faults, verily, thy Lord will be rich in forgiveness. He
     well knew you when He produced you out of the earth, and when ye
     were embryos in your mothers' womb. Assert not then your own
     purity. He best knoweth who feareth him."--Sura LIII.

     13. "O men! verily We have created you of a male and a female: and
     We have divided you into peoples and tribes that ye might take
     knowledge one of another. Truly the most worthy of honour in the
     sight of God is he who feareth Him most. Verily God is Knowing,
     Cognizant."--Sura XLIX.

     143. "And every _nation_ has a quarter _of the Heavens_. It is God
     who turneth them _towards it_: hasten then emulously after good:
     wheresover ye be, God will one day bring you all together: verily
     God is all powerful."--Sura II.

     52. "And to thee We have sent down the Book _of the Koran_ with
     truth, confirmatory of previous scripture and its safeguard. Judge
     therefore between them by what God hath sent down, and follow not
     their desires, after the truth which hath come unto thee. To
     everyone of you have We given a rule and an open way."

     53. "And if God had pleased He had surely made you all one people;
     but He would test you by what He hath given to each. Be emulous
     then in good deeds. To God do ye _all_ return, and He will tell you
     concerning the subjects of your disputes."--Sura V.

     127 "And vie in haste for pardon from your Lord, and a Paradise,
     vast as the Heavens and the Earth, prepared for the God-fearing."

     128. "Who gives alms, _alike_ in prosperity and _in_ distress, and
     who master their anger, and forgive others! And God loveth the doer
     of good."

     129. "And who, after they have done a base deed or committed a
     wrong against their own souls, remember God and implore forgiveness
     of their sins--and who can forgive sins but God only?--and
     persevere not in what they have willingly done amiss."--Sura III.

     21. "Vie in hasting after pardon from your Lord, and
     Paradise--whose outspread is as the outspread of the Heaven and of
     the Earth. Prepared is it for those who believed in God and his
     apostles. Such is the bounty of God: to whom He will He giveth it:
     and of immense bounty is God!"--Sura LII.

     183. "Ye shall assuredly be tried in your possessions and in
     yourselves. And many hurtful things shall ye assuredly hear from
     those to whom the scriptures were given before you, and from those
     who join other gods with God. But if ye be steadfast and fear God,
     then this verily is _God's_ decree for the affairs of
     _life_."--Sura III.

     16. "O my son! observe prayer and enjoin the right and forbid the
     wrong, and be patient under whatever shall betide thee: verily this
     is a bounden duty."--Sura XXXI.

     38. "Yet let the recompense of evil be only a like evil; but he who
     forgiveth and maketh peace, shall find his reward for it from God;
     verily He loveth not those who act unjustly."

     39. "And there shall be no way _open_ against those who, after
     being wronged, avenge themselves."

     40. "Only shall there be a way _open_ against those who unjustly
     wrong others, and act insolently on the earth in disregard of
     justice. These! a grievous punishment doth await them."

     41. "And whoso beareth _wrongs_ with patience and forgiveth,--this
     verily is a bounden duty."--Sura XLII.


[Sidenote: Adaptability of the Koran to surrounding circumstances.]

42. (5) The Koran keeps pace with the most fully and rapidly-developing
civilization, if it is rationally interpreted, not as expounded by the
Ulema in the Common Law Book and enforced by the sentiment of a nation.
It is only the Mohammadan Common Law, with all its traditions or oral
sayings of the Prophet,--very few of which are genuine reports, and the
supposed chimerical concurrence of the learned Moslem Doctors and mostly
their analogical reasonings (called _Hadees_, _Ijma_, and _Kias_),
passed under the name of _Fiqah_ or _Shariat_, that has blended together
the spiritual and the secular, and has become a barrier in some respects
regarding certain social and political innovations for the higher
civilization and progress of the nation. But the Koran is not
responsible for this all.

Mr. Stanley Lane Poole writes:--

     "The Koran does not contain, even in outline, the elaborate
     ritual and complicated law which now passes under the name of
     Islam. It contains merely those decisions which happened to be
     called for at Medina. Mohammad himself knew that it did not provide
     for every emergency, and recommended a principle of analogical
     deduction to guide his followers when they were in doubt. This
     analogical deduction has been the ruin of Islam. Commentators and
     Jurists have set their nimble wits to work to extract from the
     Koran legal decisions which an ordinary mind could never
     discover there; and the whole structure of modern Mohammadanism has
     been built upon the foundation of sand. The Koran is not
     responsible for it."[158]

I can only differ from the above in the allegation that Mohammad
recommended a principle of analogical deduction.

[Footnote 158: The Speeches and Table-talk of the Prophet Mohammad, by
Stanley Lane Poole, pages lii and liii, Introduction, London, 1882.]


[Sidenote: Suitability of the Koran to all classes of humanity.]

43. Thus the system of religious and moral teaching of the Koran
admirably suits the lower and the higher forms of humanity. The precepts
which regulate some department of social life, moral conduct, and
religious ceremonial are blessings to the barbarous; and that portion of
the Koran which inculcates large principles, for the due application of
which much must be left to the individual conscience, suits the same
people when they begin to emerge from their barbarism under its
influence into a higher condition, or to those already possessing the
higher forms of civilization. For instance, the command to give full
measure, to weigh with just balance, to abstain from wine and gambling,
and to treat persons with kindness are intended for men not reaching
the high forms of civilization. The teachings of the Koran regarding the
graces of truth, honesty and temperance and mercy, the virtues of
meekness, and the stress laid upon thoughts and inclinations are fit to
instruct persons who have attained the higher forms of civilization, and
have outgrown the need of positive precepts of minute detail.

     C. Ali.

     Hyderabad,
     Deccan,
     _March 1884_.




[Transcriber's Note: Despite the reference to a "Note" on page cv in
the Table of Contents, no such page exists in this edition of the
printed book.]




                                      KAHTAN.
                                         |
                    .--------------------+-------------------.
                    |                                        |
                  Yarab.                                 Hazaramaut.
                    |                                        *
                 Yoshjab.                                    *
                    |                                      Sadif.
                  Saba.
                    |
            .-----------------------------.
            |                             |
          Himyar.                       Kahlan.
            *                             |
            *           .-----------------+----------.
          Kozaa.        |                            |
            |         Rabia.                        Zeid.
          Al-Hafi.      *                            |
            |           *                         .-----------------------.
            |        Hamadan.                     |                       |
            |                                   Abad.                     *
      .-----+-----+----------.                    *                       *
      |           |          |                    *                    Ghous.
    Aslom.       Amran.      Amr.                 |                       |
      *           *           |            .------+--+-----+------.       |
      *           *     .-----+-----.      |         |     |      |       |
     Zeid.        |     |     |     |   Murrah.  Muzhij.  Tay.  Ash-ar.   |
      |   .-------+.  Bahra.  *   Bali.    |         |     |              |
      |   |        |          *        .---+---.     |  .--+-----.        |
      |  Jarm.   Taghlib.   Mahra.     |       |     |  |        |        |
      |            |                  Adi.  Khaulan. | Ghous.  Kharija.   |
      |          Vabra.                |             |           |        |
      |            |           .--------------.      |         Jadila.    |
      |    .---------.         |       |      |      |                    |
      |    |         |       Lakhm.  Ofeir.  Juzam.  |                    |
      |  Kalb.    Khoshain.    |       |        .------+------.           |
      |    |                  Dar.   Kinda.     |      |      |           |
      |  Taym Allat.                   |       Ans.  Illah.   |           |
      |                              Sukun.     |      |      |           |
  .---+-------+-----.                         Morad.   |  Saad-ul-Ashira  |
  |           |     |                                  |        |         |
  Joheina.  Saad.  Nohd.               .------------------.    Jufi.      |
              |                        |                  |               |
            Ozra.                     Harb.              Amr.             |
                                       |                  |               |
                                .----------.            Nakha.            |
                                |          |                              |
                              Raha.       Sada.   .-----------------------.
                                                  |
                                       .----------+----------.
                                       |                     |
                                      Azd.                 Anmar.
                                       |                     |
                       .---------------+---.          .------+-+-------.
                       |                   |          |        |       |
                     Mazin.             Shahnvah.  Khas-am.  Ghous.  Ghafiq.
                       |                    |           |        |
      .----------+----------.       .-------+-------.  Bajila.  Ahmas.
      |          |          |       |       |       |
    Saalba.   Harisa.       |     Samala.  Doos.  Haddan.
      |          |        Jafna.
   .--+----.     |   (The Ghassinides).
   |       |     |
  Aus.  Khazraj. |
                 |
           .-----+---+----------.
           |         |          |
          Adi.     Afsa.      Lohay.
           |         |          |
         Bariq.    Aslam.     Khozaa.
                     |          |
                  Salaman.   Mustalik.




                                     MOADD.
                                       *
                                       *
                                     NIZAR.
                                       |
                           .-----------+---------------------------------.
                           |                                             |
                     Mozar (Modhar).                                   Rabia.
                           |                                             *
                    .------+----------------------------------.          *
                    |                                         |          |
                 Al-Nas.                                   Al-Yas.   .-----.
                    |                                         *      |     |
                  Kays.                                       *     Anaza. |
                    |                                      Khundif.        |
                 Aylan.                                       |         Jadila.
                    |                                 .-------+-----.        *
             .------+-----------.                     |             |        *
             |                  |                  Tabikha.      Modrika.    |
          Khasafa.           Ghatafan.                |             *        |
             *                  |                    Add.           *        |
             *             .----+------.              |             |        |
          Mansur.          |           |     .--------+-----.      .+---.    |
             |           Aasir.      Reis.   |        |     |      |    |    |
        .----+---.          |          |    Tamim.    *   Mozeina. | Hozeil. |
        |        |         .+-----.    |      *                    |      |  |
      Suleim.  Hawazan.    |      |    |      *       *        Khozeima.  |  |
        |        |      Sad Monat |    |   Darim.     |          |        |  |
     .--+--.    Bakr.    Bahila.  |    |              |          |   Lahyan. |
     |     |     *                |    |       Saliba bin Sad.   |           |
  Makwan.  *     *            Movahib. |                      Kinana.        |
                 |                    .+--------.                |           |
           *    .+--------+------.    |         |           .----+-----.     |
           |    |         |      |    Asha.  Baghiz.        |          |     |
     .-----+.  Sakeef.  Saad.  Saasaa.          |        Abd Monat.  Nazar.  |
     |      |                    |          .---+---.       |          |     |
   Ussya.  Ril.                Aamir.       |       |   .---+-.      Malik.  |
                                 |        Zobian.  Abs. |     |        |     |
                   .-------------+-.         *          *  Bakr.    Fahr or  |
                   |               |         *          *     |    Koreish.  |
                 Rabia.          Hilal.      |          |  Zamra.      |     |
                   |                         |     Mudlij.    |     Ghalib.  |
        .----------+--+-------------.        |             Ghifar.     |     |
        |             |             |      .-+-----+------.          Loway.  |
      Kilab.        Kaab.         Aamir.   |       |      |            |     |
        *             |             *    Shahm.  Murra.  Fezara.       |     |
        *        .----+-+----.      *                                  |     |
        |        |      |    |      |            .---------------------+     |
      Rivas.  Kosheir.  *  Jaada.  Baka.         |                     |     |
                        |                       Kab               Khozeima.  |
                        *                        |                           |
                        |       .----------------+-.          .--------+-----+
                    Muntafiq.   |                  |          |        |
                              Murrah.              *          *   Abd-ul-Kays.
                                |                  *          *
                      .-------+-+-----.            |          |
                      |       |       |       .----+-.      .-+---+----.
                    Kilab.  Taym.  Mukhzum.   |      |      |     |    |
                      |                     Sahm.  Jamah.   |     | Aus Allat.
                   .--+------.                              |     |
                   |         |                        Taym Allah. |
                Kossay.    Zohra.                                 |
                   |                                             Wail.
       .-----------+---------------.                              |
       |           |               |                        .-----+---.
       *       Abd Manaf.     Abd-ud-Dar.                   |         |
       *           |                                     Taghlib.   Bakr.
       |     .-----+----------------------.                           *
      Asad.  |                            |                           *
            Hashim.                   Abd Shams.                      |
             |                            |                       Hanifa.
         Abd-ul-Muttalib.              Omayya.                      *
             |                            |                         *
     .-------+----+-----------.         Harab.                      |
     |            |           |        (Sakhr).                .------.
   Abbas.     Abdullah.   Abu Talib.      |                    |      |
     |            |           |       Abu Sofian.            Taheem   *
  Ibn Abbas.  Mohammad.      Ali.         |                           *
                                       Moavia.                        |
                                                                   Shaiban.
                                                                      *
                                                                      *
                                                                      |
                                                                    Sadus.




ALL THE WARS OF MOHAMMAD WERE DEFENSIVE.


_The Persecutions._

[Sidenote: 1. The early persecutions of Moslems by the people of Mecca.]

The severe persecution which Mohammad and his early converts suffered at
Mecca at the hands of their fellow-citizens, the Koreish, is a fact
admitted by all historians.

The Koran, which may be regarded as a contemporary record of the
ill-feeling manifested towards the Prophet and his followers, bears
ample testimony to the fact. Not only were the early Moslems persecuted
for renouncing the pagan religion and obtaining converts to the
monotheistic religion of Mohammad, but they were also tortured and
otherwise ill-treated to induce them to return to the religion which
they had forsaken. The persecution seems to have been so great that
Mohammad was compelled to recognize those of his followers, who by force
and cruelty were compelled to renounce Islam and profess paganism, but
were inwardly steadfast in their belief of the one true God, as true
Moslems.

The Koran says:

"Whoso after he hath believed in God denieth Him, if he were forced to
it, and if his heart remain steadfast in the faith, _shall be
guiltless_; but whoso openeth his breast to infidelity, on them, in that
case, shall be wrath from God, and a severe punishment awaiteth
them."--Sura xvi, 108.

"The incarceration and tortures," says Mr. Stobart, "chiefly by thirst
in the burning rays of the sun, to which these humble converts were
subjected, to induce their recantation and adoration of the national
idols, touched the heart of Mahomet, and by divine authority, he
permitted them, under certain circumstances, to deny their faith so long
as their hearts were steadfast in it."[159]
