during his residence there as chaplain to the Swiss mercenaries. Like
Luther, he well knew how to win the attention and sympathy of the mob
by his appeals to the national feelings of his countrymen, and like
Luther he insisted that the Scriptures were the sole rule of faith. He
denounced in the strongest language the immorality and vices of the
clergy, celibacy, vows of chastity, pilgrimages and the veneration of
the saints, but for so far he had not broken entirely with the Church.

The preaching of the Indulgences promulgated by Leo X. in Constance
was entrusted to the Franciscans. Their work was a difficult one
especially as the Grand Council of Zurich forbade them to persist, as,
indeed, did also the able and zealous Hugo von Hohenlandenberg, Bishop
of Constance, in whose diocese Zurich was situated. Zwingli, confident
of the support of the city authorities, attacked the doctrine of
Indulgences and was backed by the Grand Council, which ordered, at his
instigation, that the Word of God should be preached according to the
Scriptures, regardless of tradition or the interpretation of the
Church. Later on he directed his attacks against the meritoriousness
of good works and the practice of fast and abstinence (1522), and
about the same time he addressed a petition to the Bishop of Constance
demanding that he should not interfere with the preaching of the pure
Word of God nor set any obstacle to the marriage of his priests. He
admitted publicly that his relations with women had been disgraceful,
that he had learned from his own personal experience how impossible of
fulfilment was the vow of chastity, and that marriage was the only
remedy that would enable him to overcome the emotions of carnal lust
referred to by St. Paul in his epistle to the Corinthians (I. 7, 9).
The bishop refused to yield to this demand insisting on the strict
observance of celibacy, and appealed to the Grand Council to support
him with the full weight of their authority (April 1522).

Incensed by this refusal Zwingli shook off the yoke of ecclesiastical
authority, rejected the primacy of the Pope, and the infallibility of
General Councils, denounced celibacy and vows of chastity as
inventions of the devil, and called upon the Swiss people to support
him in his fight for religious freedom. Once before, in 1520, Leo X.
had summoned Zwingli to Rome to answer for his teaching, but the
summons had been unheeded. Adrian VI. made another attempt to win him
from his dangerous course by a letter full of kindness and sympathy,
but his remonstrance produced no effect (1523). The Grand Council of
Zurich, hopeful of securing a preponderating influence in Switzerland
by taking the lead in the new movement, favoured Zwingli. Instead of
responding to the appeal of the Bishop of Constance it announced a
great religious disputation to be held in January 1523, to which both
Zwingli and his opponents were summoned for the explanation and
defence of their views. Zwingli put forward sixty-seven theses, the
principal of which were that the Bible is the sole rule of faith, that
the Church is not a visible society but only an assembly of the elect,
of which body Christ is the only true head, that consequently the
jurisdiction of the Pope and of the bishops is a usurpation devoid of
scriptural authority, that the Mass, Confession, Purgatory, and
Intercession of the Saints are to be rejected as derogatory to the
merits of Christ, and finally, that clerical celibacy and monastic
vows, instead of being counsels of perfection, are only cloaks for sin
and hypocrisy. The Bishop of Constance refused to take part in such a
disputation. His vicar-general, Johann Faber of Constance, however,
attended the meeting, not indeed to take part in the discussion but
merely to protest against it as opposed to the authority of the Church
and of the councils. As his protests were unheeded, he undertook to
defend the doctrines attacked, but in the end the Grand Council
declared that the victory rested with Zwingli.

Flushed with his triumph Zwingli now proceeded to put his theories
into practice. Supported by a mob he endeavoured to prevent the
celebration of Mass, religious processions, the use of pictures and
statues, and the solemn ceremonial associated with Extreme Unction and
the Viaticum. He compiled an introduction to the New Testament for the
use of the clergy, called upon them to abandon their obligations of
celibacy, and set them an example by taking as his wife a woman who
had been for years his concubine. He and his followers, supported by
the majority of the Grand Council, went through the city destroying
altars, pictures, statues, organs, and confessionals, and erecting in
place of the altars plain tables with a plate for bread and a vessel
for wine. The Catholic members of the Grand Council were driven from
their position, and Catholic worship forbidden in Zurich (1523-5).

The system of Zwingli was much more rationalistic and, in a certain
sense, much more logical than that of Luther. Imbued with the
principles of pantheistic mysticism, he maintained that God is in
Himself all being, created as well as uncreated, and all activity.
Hence it was as absurd to speak of individual liberty or individual
action as to speak of a multiplicity of gods. Whether it was a case of
doing good or doing evil man was but a machine like a brush in the
hands of a painter. In regard to sin he contended man may be punished
for violating the law laid down by God even though the violation is
unavoidable, but God, being above all law, is nowise to blame.
Concupiscence or self-love is, according to him, at the root of all
misdeeds. It is in itself the real original sin, and is not blotted
out by Baptism. His teaching on the Scriptures, individual judgment,
ecclesiastical authority as represented by the bishops, councils, and
Pope, good works, indulgences, purgatory, invocation of the saints,
and vows of chastity differed but slightly from what Luther had put
forward. On the question of Justification, and particularly on the
doctrine of the Eucharist, the two reformers found themselves in
hopeless conflict.[3]

Zwingli's teaching did not at first find much favour in other portions
of German Switzerland. Lucerne declared against it in 1524. The city
authorities forbade the introduction of the new teaching, and offered
an asylum to those Catholics who had been forced to flee from Zurich.
Other cantons associated themselves with Lucerne, and a deputation was
sent to Zurich to request the city authorities to abandon Zwingli and
to take part in a general movement for a real and constitutional
reform. But the Grand Council, mindful of the political advantages
which would accrue to Zurich from its leadership in the new religious
revolt, declined to recede from their position.

While Zwingli was at work in Zurich, Oecolampadius (1482-1531) set
himself to stir up religious divisions in Basle. He was born at
Weisnberg, studied law at Bologna and theology subsequently at
Heidelberg, was ordained priest, and appointed to a parish in Basle
(1512). With Erasmus he was on terms of the closest intimacy, and, as
Basle was then one of the great literary centres of the world, he soon
became acquainted with Luther's pamphlets and teaching. Some of the
clergy in Basle, notably Wolfgang Capito, a warm friend of Zwingli,
were already showing signs of restlessness especially in regard to the
Mass, purgatory, and invocation of the saints, and Oecolampadius was
not slow to imbibe the new ideas. In 1518 he was appointed preacher in
the Cathedral of Augsburg, but, having resigned this office on account
of failing health, he withdrew to the convent of Altmunster, where,
for some time, he lived a retired life. Subsequently he acted as
chaplain to the well-known German knight, Franz von Sickingen, and
finally, in 1524, he accepted the parish of St. Martin's in Basle.

He now proclaimed himself openly a supporter of Zwingli, advocated the
new teaching on justification and good works, and attacked several
Catholic doctrines and practices. For him, as indeed for most of the
other reformers, clerical celibacy was the great stumbling block. He
encouraged his followers by taking as his wife a young widow, who was
subsequently in turn the wife of the two renowned Lutheran preachers,
Butzer and Capito. At first the city authorities and a large body of
the university professors were against him, but owing to the
disturbances created by his partisans full liberty of worship was
granted to the new sect (1527). Not content with this concession, they
demanded that the Mass should be suppressed. In 1529 the followers of
Oecolampadius rose in revolt, seized the arsenal of the city, directed
the cannon on the principal squares, and attacked the churches,
destroying altars, statues, and pictures. Erasmus, disgusted with such
methods of propagating religion, left Basle and sought a home in
Freiburg. The Catholics were expelled from the city council, their
religion was proscribed, and Basle joined hands with Zurich in its
rebellion against the Church.

The revolt soon spread into other cantons of Switzerland. In Berne and
Schaffhausen both parties were strong and determined, and for a time
the issue of the conflict was uncertain, but in 1528 the party of
Zwingli and Oecolampadius secured the upper hand. Similarly in St.
Gall, Glarus, etc., victory rested with the new teaching. Other
cantons, as for example, Solothurn, wavered as to which side they
should take, but the three oldest cantons of Switzerland, Uri, Schweiz
and Unterwalden, together with Zug, Freiburg and Lucerne, refused to
be separated from the Church.

Apart altogether from the question of religion, there was a natural
opposition between populous and manufacturing centres like Berne and
Basle, and the rural cantons, devoted almost entirely to agricultural
and pastoral pursuits. When religious differences supervened to
accentuate the rivalry already in existence, they led almost
inevitably to the division of Switzerland into two hostile camps.
Zurich, Basle, Berne, Schaffhausen, and St. Gall, though they were the
most important cities, soon found themselves unable to force their
views on the rest of the country, as they were withstood by the
federal council, the majority of which was still Catholic. The latter
insisted that a conference should be held to settle the religious
disputes. The conference was arranged to take place at Baden in 1526.
Eck, assisted by two other Catholic theologians, Faber and Murner,
undertook to defend the Catholic position. Zurich refused to send
representatives, but the reforming party were represented by
Oecolampadius, Haller, and others of their leaders. The conference was
attended by delegates from twelve cantons, and was approved of by the
Swiss bishops. After a discussion lasting fifteen days during which
Eck defended the Catholic doctrine regarding the Mass, Eucharist,
Purgatory, and the Intercession of the Saints, the majority of the
cantons decided in his favour, and a resolution was passed forbidding
religious changes in Switzerland and prohibiting the sale of the works
of Luther and Zwingli.

It was soon evident, however, that peace could not be secured by such
measures. The rural and Catholic cantons were in the majority, much to
the disgust of flourishing cities like Berne and Zurich. These states,
believing that they were entitled to a controlling voice in the
federal council, determined to use the religious question to bring
about a complete change in the constitution of the country by
assigning the cantonal representation in the federal council on the
basis of population. They formed an alliance with the other Protestant
cantons and with Constance to forward their claims (1527-8), but the
Catholic cantons imitated their example by organising a Catholic
federation to which the Archduke, Ferdinand of Austria, promised his
support (1529).

Zwingli was most eager for war, and at his instigation the army of
Zurich, backed by Berne, took the field in 1529. The Catholic states,
however, made it clear that they were both able and willing to defend
the constitution, but the bond of national unity and the dislike of
civil war exercised such an influence on both parties that a conflict
was averted by the conclusion of the Peace of Kappel (1529). The
concessions secured for his party by this Peace did not satisfy
Zwingli, who desired nothing less than the complete subjugation of the
Catholic cantons. Negotiations were opened up with Philip of Hesse,
with the German Lutherans, and with Francis I. of France, and when the
news of the formation of the League of Schmalkald reached the
Protestants of Switzerland, it was thought that the time had come when
the triumph of Zurich and Berne, which meant also the triumph of the
new teaching, should be secured. Zwingli besought his followers to
issue a declaration of war, but it was suggested that the reduction of
the Catholic cantons could be secured just as effectively by a
blockade. In this movement Zurich took the lead. The result, however,
did not coincide with the anticipations of Zwingli. The Catholic
cantons flew to arms at once, and as their territories formed a
compact unit, they were able to put their united army into the field
before the forces of Zurich and Berne could effect a junction. The
decisive battle took place at Kappel in October 1531, when the
Zwinglians suffered a complete defeat, Zwingli himself and five
hundred of the best men of Zurich being left dead on the field. The
army of Berne advanced too late to save their allies or to change the
result of the war. The Catholic cantons used their victory with great
moderation. Instead of crushing their opponents, as they might have
done, they concluded with them the second Peace of Kappel (1531).
According to the terms of this treaty, no canton was to force another
to change its religion, and liberty of worship was guaranteed in the
cantonal domains. Several of the districts that had been wavering
returned to the Catholic faith, and the abbot of St. Gall was restored
to the abbey from which he had been expelled.

Oecolampadius followed Zwingli to the grave in a short time, having
been carried off by a fever about a month after the defeat of Kappel,
and the leadership of the movement devolved upon their successors,
Bullinger and Myconius.

With regard to the Sacraments Luther and Zwingli agreed that they were
only signs of grace, though in the explanation of this view Zwingli
was much more extreme, because much more logical, than Luther.
Believing as he did that justification depended upon faith alone, he
contended that the Sacraments were mere ceremonies by which a man
became or showed himself to be a follower of Christ. They were devoid
of any objective virtue, and were efficacious only in so far as they
guaranteed that the individual receiving them possessed the faith
necessary for justification. But it was principally in regard to the
Eucharist that the two reformers found themselves in hopeless
disagreement. Had Luther wished to be consistent he should have thrown
over the Real Presence as well as Transubstantiation, but the force of
tradition, the fear that any such teaching would arouse the opposition
of the people, and the plain meaning of the texts of Scripture forced
him to adopt a compromise. "Had Doctor Carlstadt," he wrote, "or any
one else been able to persuade me five years ago that the sacrament of
the altar is but bread and wine he would, indeed, have done me a great
service, and rendered me very material aid in my efforts to make a
breach in the Papacy. But it is all in vain. The meaning of the texts
is so evident that every artifice of language will be powerless to
explain it away." He contended that the words "This is My body and
This is My blood" could bear only one meaning, namely, that Christ was
really present, but while agreeing with Catholics about the Real
Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, he rejected the doctrine of
Transubstantiation, maintaining in its place Consubstantiation or
Impanation.

Though Luther insisted so strongly on the Real Presence, it is not
clear that in the beginning he had any very fixed views on the
subject, or that he would have been unwilling to change any views he
had formed, were it not that one of his lieutenants, Carlstadt, began
to exercise his privilege of judgment by rejecting the Real Presence.
Such an act of insubordination aroused the implacable ire of Luther,
who denounced his former colleague as a heretic, and pursued him from
Wittenberg and Jena, where he had fled for refuge. In the end
Carlstadt was obliged to retire to Switzerland, where his doctrine
found favour with the Swiss reformers.

From the beginning of his campaign Zwingli realised that the Real
Presence was not in harmony with his theory of justification, and
hence he was inclined to hold that the Eucharist was a mere sign
instituted as a reminder of Christ's death. But in view of the clear
testimony of the Holy Scripture he was at a loss how to justify his
position. At last by pondering on other passages that he considered
similar to the text "This is My body," where the word "is" should be
interpreted "signifies," he contended that the true meaning of
Christ's words at the Last Supper is, "This signifies My body."
Oecolampadius agreed with this interpretation, though for a different
reason, comparing the Blessed Eucharist to a ring that a husband going
away on a long journey might give to his wife as a pledge and reminder
of his affection.[4]

Luther resented bitterly such a theory as an attack upon his
authority, especially as Zwingli refused to allow himself to be brow-
beaten into retracting his doctrine. Instead of submitting to the new
religious dictator, Zwingli sought to justify himself by the very
principle by which Luther justified his own revolt against the
Catholic Church. He contended that Luther's theory of justification
involved logically the rejection of the Eucharist as well as of the
other Sacraments, that the Scriptural texts could be interpreted as he
had interpreted them, and that he was not bound to take any cognisance
of the Christian tradition or of the authority of the councils. He
complained that Luther treated himself and his followers as heretics
with whom it was not right to hold communion, that he proscribed their
writings and denounced them to the magistrates, and that he did
precisely towards them what he blamed the Pope for doing to himself.
Luther found it difficult to meet this line of argument. Much against
his will he was obliged to support his opinions by appealing to the
tradition of the Church and the writings of the Fathers, which latter
he had denounced as "fetid pools whence Christians have been drinking
unwholesome draughts instead of slaking their thirst from the pure
fountain of Holy Scripture."[5] "This article (The Eucharist)," he
wrote, "is neither unscriptural nor a dogma of human invention. It is
based upon the clear and irrefragable words of Holy Writ. It has been
uniformly held and believed throughout the whole Christian world from
the foundation of the Church to the present time. That such has been
the fact is attested by the writings of the Holy Fathers, both Greek
and Latin, by daily usage and by the uninterrupted practice of the
Church. . . . To doubt it, therefore, is to disbelieve the Christian
Church and to brand her as heretical, and with her the prophets,
apostles, and Christ Himself, who, in establishing the Church said:
'Behold I am with you all days even to the consummation of the
world.'"[6]

The opposition of Luther did not put an end to the controversy. The
Zwinglian theories spread rapidly in Switzerland, whence they were
carried into Germany, much to the annoyance of Luther and of the
Protestant princes for whom religious unity was necessary at almost
any cost. Luther would listen to no schemes of compromise. He
denounced the Zwinglians in the most violent terms, as servants of the
devil, liars, and heretics for whose salvation no man should pray.
Having rejected Transubstantiation in order to rid himself of the
sacrificial idea and of the doctrine of a Christian priesthood, he
fought strongly for the Real Presence on the ground that God's body,
being united to the divinity, enjoyed the divine attribute of
ubiquity. To this Zwingli made the very effective rejoinder that if
the words of Scripture "This is My body and this is My blood" are to
be interpreted literally they could bear only the sense put upon them
by the Catholics, because Christ did not say "My body is in or under
this bread," but rather "This (the bread) is My body." Furthermore, he
pointed out that Luther's explanation concerning the ubiquity of
Christ's body led clearly to a confusion of the divine and human
nature of Christ, and was in consequence only a renewal of the
Monophysite heresy, condemned by the whole Christian Church.

This unseemly dispute between the two leaders of the new movement did
not please the Protestant princes of Germany, for whom division of
their forces might mean political extinction. The Elector of Saxony
supported Luther warmly, while Philip of Hesse was more or less
inclined to side with Zwingli. A conference was arranged between the
two parties at Marburg (1529), at which Luther and Oecolampadius were
present to defend their views. On a few secondary matters an agreement
was arrived at, but on the main question, the Real Presence, Luther
would yield nothing, and so the Reformers were divided into two
parties, German Lutherans and Swiss Reformed.
                              ----------

[1] /Precis Historique de l'Abbaye et du Pelerinage de Notre-Dame-des-
    Ermites/, 1870.

[2] /Realencycl. fur Protestantische Theol./, xxi., p. 778.

[3] Schwane, op. cit., p. 141.

[4] Schwane, op. cit., p. 349.

[5] Dollinger, /Die Reformation/, i., pp. 430-51.

[6] Alzog, iii., 256-7.


                         (c) Northern Europe.

  See bibliography, chap. ii. (a). Karup, /Geschichte der
  Katholischen Kirche in Danemark/, 1863. Munter, /Kirchengeschichte
  von Danemark und Norwegen/, 1823. Theiner-Cohen, /La Suede et la
  Saint-Siege sous les rois Jean III., Sigismond III., et Charles
  IX./, 1842. Butler, /The Reformation in Sweden/, 1884. De Flaux,
  /La Suede au XVIme siecle/, 1861. Englestoft, /Reformantes et
  Catholici tempore, quo sacra emendata sunt, in Dania
  concertantes/, 1836. Schmitt, /Die Verteidigung der Kathol. Kirche
  in Danemark gegen die Religionsneuerung im 16en Jahr/, 1899.
  /Confutatio Lutheranismi Danici/, etc. (written 1530, ed. 1902).

At the beginning of the sixteenth century political power in Denmark
was vested to a great extent in the hands of the bishops and nobles.
It was by these two parties that the king was elected, and so great
was their influence that, as a rule, the candidate chosen by their
votes was obliged to accept any conditions they cared to impose. The
bishops, as in most countries at the time, held enormous estates,
granted to their predecessors by the crown or bequeathed by generous
benefactors for the maintenance of religion. Unfortunately, with some
exceptions, they were not men zealous for religious interests, or
capable of understanding that a serious crisis was at hand. In every
direction the need of reform was only too apparent, and, as such as
work had not been undertaken by those who should have undertaken it, a
splendid opportunity was afforded to the men who desired not the
welfare of religion but rather the overthrow of the Church.

Christian II. (1513-23) wished to put an end to the supremacy of the
bishops and nobles and to assert for himself and his successors
absolute control. He was a man of great ability and determination,
well acquainted with the tendencies of the age, and not particularly
scrupulous about the means by which the success of his policy might be
assured. To such a man Luther's attack on the bishops of Germany
seemed to be almost providential. He realised that by embracing the
new religious system, which enabled him to seize the wealth of the
Church and to concentrate in his own hands full ecclesiastical power,
he could rid himself of one of the greatest obstacles to absolutism,
and secure for himself and his successors undisputed sway in Denmark.
Though his own life was scandalously immoral he determined to become
the champion of a religious reformation, and against the wishes of the
nobles, clergy, and people he invited a disciple of Luther's to
Copenhagen, and placed at his disposal one of the city's churches.
This step aroused the strongest opposition, but Christian, confident
that boldness meant success, adopted stern measures to overcome his
opponents. He proclaimed himself the patron of those priests who were
willing to disregard their vows of celibacy, issued regulations
against the unmarried clergy, and appealed to the people against the
bishops and the nobles. As the Archbishop-elect of Lund was unwilling
to show himself to be coerced into betraying the interests confided to
his charge, the king commanded that he should be put to death.

By these violent methods he had hoped to frighten his subjects into
compliance with his wishes, but he was doomed to speedy and complete
disappointment. The bishops and barons, though divided on many
questions, were at one in their resistance to such despotism, and they
had behind them the great body of the people, who had little if any
desire for a religious revolution. Christian II. was deposed, and in
his place his uncle, Frederick I. (1523-33), became king of Denmark.
At his coronation the new monarch pledged himself to defend the
Catholic religion and to suppress heresy. Soon, however, motives
similar to those that had influenced his predecessor induced him also
to lean towards Lutheranism. At first his efforts for the spread of
the new teaching were carried out secretly, but once he felt himself
secure on the throne, he proclaimed himself publicly a Lutheran (1526)
and invited Lutheran preachers to the capital. A Diet was called in
1527 at Odensee to consider the religious controversy that had arisen.
In this assembly the king, basing his defence on the ground that
though he had pledged himself to protect the Catholic Church he was
under no obligation to tolerate abuses, contended that the suppression
of abuses and the purifying of religion were the only objects he had
at heart in the measures that he had taken. Owing mainly to his own
stubbornness and the cowardly and wavering attitude of the bishops, it
was agreed by the Diet that till a General Council could be convoked
full toleration should be given to the Lutheran preachers, that in the
meantime no civil disabilities should be inflicted on supporters of
the new religion, that those of the clergy who wished to marry should
be allowed to do so, that the archbishop should apply no longer to
Rome for his pallium, and finally that the confirmation of the
appointment of bishops should be transferred from the Pope to the
king.

By these measures, to which the bishops offered only a faint
opposition, Denmark was separated practically from the Holy See, and
the first step was taken on the road that was to lead to national
apostasy. The next important measure was the disputation arranged by
the king to take place at Copenhagen in 1529. The very fact that at
this meeting no Danish ecclesiastic capable of defending the Catholic
faith was to be found, and that it was necessary to have recourse to
Germany for champions of orthodoxy, is in itself a sufficient
indication of the character of the bishops who then ruled in Denmark,
and of the state of learning amongst the Danish clergy of the period.
Eck and Cochlaeus were invited to come to Copenhagen, but as they had
sufficient work to engage their attention at home, the duty of
upholding Catholic doctrine devolved upon Stagefyr, a theologian of
Cologne.[1] He could not speak Danish, nor would the Lutheran party
consent to carry on the conference in Latin. Furthermore, he claimed
that the authority of the Fathers and the decrees of previous General
Councils should be recognised, but the Lutherans insisted that the
Bible was the only source from which Christians should receive their
doctrines. In these circumstances, since a disputation was impossible,
both parties agreed to submit a full statement of their views in
writing to the king and council, who, as might have been anticipated,
decided in favour of Lutheranism.

During the remainder of his reign, Frederick I. spared no pains to
secure the victory for the new teaching in his dominions. The nobles
were won over to the king's views by promises of a share in the
partition of ecclesiastical property, and those who wished to stand
well with the sovereign were not slow in having recourse to violence
as affording proof that their zeal for Lutheranism was sincere.
Consequently the Lutheran party found themselves in a majority in the
Diet of 1530, and were powerful enough to do as they pleased. In
accordance with the example set in Germany and Switzerland attacks
were begun on churches, pictures, and statues, but in many places the
