gave unto your fathers, and _I said_, I will never break my covenant
with you." Judges ii. "Thus saith Jehovah, Elohe of Israel, I brought
you up from Egypt, and _I said_ unto you, I am Jehovah your Elohe."
"And Melach Jehovah _came and sat_ under an oak, and said unto Gideon,
Jehovah is with thee. And Melach _the_ Elohim _said_ unto him, Take the
flesh and the unleavened cakes and lay them upon this rock. And Melach
Jehovah _put forth_ the end of the staff that was in his _hand_, and
touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes." Judges v. "The _eye_ of
Jehovah is upon them that fear him." Ps. xxxiii. 18. "The _eyes_ of
Jehovah thy Elohe are always upon it [the land]." Deut. xi. "The _eyes_
of Jehovah are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their cry.
The _face_ of Jehovah is against them that do evil. Melach Jehovah
_encampeth_ round about them that fear him, and delivereth them. They
cry, and Jehovah _heareth_ them." Ps. xxxiv. "Melach Jehovah _touched_
Elijah, and said, Arise and eat." 1 Kings xix.

The preceding observations concerning the faculties of angels suggest
the relation to their acquisition of knowledge of the visible persons,
objects and events within their view on earth, and the congruity of that
relation with the visibility of the God-man, Messiah, Mediator, Ruler,
and Revealer.

Suppose the celestial hosts, with the visual powers and the freedom from
the conditions of distance above intimated, from the moment of their
creation in the full maturity of their faculties and of their
endowments, except in respect to the knowledge to be derived from the
evolution and progress of events, to have seen each other, and the
visible objects of their own and other spheres; to have seen, among the
earliest of events, the rebellion and dejection from their ranks of an
archangel, with numerous adherents, followed by the apostasy and
degradation of the progenitors of the human race; and, in connection
therewith, to have seen the Personal Word walking in Eden, to have
heard his voice, and thenceforth to have observed the acts and events
connected with our race. It is plain that if they see and hear in
conformity with the same laws as men, and acquire knowledge by so seeing
and hearing, then it was necessary to them, as well as to man, that all
the agents in the scene should be visible, and that their voices should
be audible.

The object, on the occasions referred to, was to instruct and influence,
by visible and tangible realities presented to the senses. To suppose
some of the agents and acts to have been what they are declared to be,
and others to have been illusions, unreal, imaginary, is to defeat the
object of them, divest them of all certainty, and justify the same
inference with respect to the human as to the celestial agents. In
numerous instances it is evident that the power of vision in men was so
enlarged, that they beheld objects not ordinarily visible to them. Had
that augmented power continued, those objects would have continued to be
visible, and so far from being less, would have been more free from
illusion and uncertainty; and it is absurd, and contrary to all analogy,
to suppose that it did not render their vision as certain, and their
inference from it as just, in respect to every person and object
apprehended by it, as in respect to any one of them. And if, as in the
case of the three who appeared to Abraham, and in other cases, they did
not see the persons in the likeness of men whom they are declared to
have seen, then we have no ground of certainty that they themselves were
present, or acted the parts ascribed to them.

It is observed above that in every instance of the personal manifestation
of the Messenger Jehovah under the ancient dispensations, he was
distinctly recognized in the likeness of man. On many occasions he is
expressly called a man; and in various instances acts peculiar to a man
are ascribed to him. Thus, at his appearance to Abraham in the plain of
Mamre, to Jacob at Peni-El, to Joshua, to Manoah, to Ezekiel, to Daniel,
to Amos, and to Zechariah, he is expressly called a man; in Eden and in
the plain of Mamre he walked and spoke as a man; to Moses he spake face to
face, as a man speaketh with his friend, and of him it was said, "the
similitude of Jehovah shall he behold;" to Balaam, Joshua, and David, he
appeared with a drawn sword in his hand; when accepting the offering of
Gideon, he put forth the staff that was in his hand, and touched the
sacrifice; he "touched Elijah, and said, Arise and eat." Again, in the
instances in which it is said that he appeared to Abraham and others,
without specifying that his person was visible, and in those in which it
is said that he came, or that the Word of the Lord came, to Abraham,
Moses, Samuel, David, and the prophets, the things said and done are, as
to matter and manner, in respect to the persons addressed or spoken of,
reference to circumstances of time and place, particularity of directions
and details, similar to those in which he visibly appeared as man.

In the minds of the patriarchs and prophets, therefore, the human
likeness in which he visibly appeared was intimately and familiarly
associated with his person. When they thought of him, they thought of
him in that form, and accordingly his visible appearance in that form
occasioned little or no surprise. They knew, it may well be believed,
from and after the first appearance or announcement of the Messiah in
Eden, that human nature and the human form were appointed and essential
conditions of his complex official person and his sacerdotal work.
Every typical sacrifice, the piacular shedding of blood, the altar
typifying the cross, the burnt offering, the paschal lamb, every net of
worship founded on the revealed doctrine of mediation, implied this
distinctive apprehension of his person as Mediator. To suppose that
patriarchs and prophets to whom he appeared in this manner, and whom he
inspired to teach others, did not know and recognize him in his true
character, is not less derogatory to him than to them; and to suppose
that those who earliest offered typical sacrifices did not as truly and
adequately understand what belonged to his personal and official
character as those who succeeded, is to nullify their worship and their
faith, and to treat the system as a device of sinful and ignorant men,
rather than as divinely revealed and sanctioned.

But the Divine Mediator being thus clearly and familiarly known from the
first beginning of the race, as to the constitution of his complex
official person, his delegated character, his sacerdotal and mediatory
work; this knowledge being common to all true worshippers, and being
illustrated and confirmed to others by local visible appearances of the
Personal Word, by oral instructions from inspired men, and by the
external institutions, rites and forms of the true worship; it is
obvious how, and with what facility, the adverse party, the worshippers
of Baal after the deluge, obtained their antagonist counterfeit notions
of the incarnation of their rival god, and afterwards of other spiritual
beings and disembodied intelligences; of a shekina of visible glory as
the residence or tabernacle of Baal; of mediation, oracular responses,
altars, sacrifices, incense, &c. To suppose that any one of these things
was originally conceived and invented by the natural reason of man, is
at once to yield the question between revealed religion and the
competency of fallen man to devise one which should obtain the undivided
suffrage of nine tenths of the human race from age to age. The utter
absurdity of such a supposition is shown by the fact that all the
different nations and tribes of idolaters have, from the earliest
records and traditions of their history, held essentially the same ideas
upon these and kindred subjects. In the history of some countries,
indeed, as in that of India, Thibet and China, the notion of the
incarnation, and of repeated incarnations, of their false god is more
conspicuous than in that of others. But the notion that the shedding of
blood would procure the remission of sin, that the piacular sacrifices
must be offered on an altar and burnt with fire, that the firstlings of
the flock must be sacrificed, and that incense must be burned by
consecrated priests, has prevailed among all pagan nations and tribes,
with or without letters, in all climates, and in all ages, and if not
derived from the descendants of Noah at the dispersion, we must, by
ascribing the invention to each distinct community for itself, imagine a
greater miracle than that of the inspiration of true prophets.

The revolt of the arch-apostate, with his angels and the head of the
human race, was an open renunciation of allegiance to Jehovah as
Creator, Lawgiver and Ruler, from which a total and ceaseless alienation
and opposition ensued, which, but for his redemptive work, would have
subverted and defeated his design as Creator. To counteract and overcome
that revolt required his humiliation unto death. Prior to that event,
his opposers denied his prerogatives and rights as Creator, Lawgiver and
Ruler, and arrogated them for creatures. The antagonist system of
rivalship and homage was exhibited in the face of the universe in the
forms of political tyranny and idolatry. To reaessert and exhibit to the
whole universe his claims, after his humiliation, he rose from the
grave, ascended on high, was invested with all power in heaven and
earth, and in his glorified and visible person as God-man was recognized
as swaying the sceptre of universal empire.

His claims and prerogatives as Creator, Upholder and Ruler being thus
manifested and established, and the efficacy of his vicarious death
being at the same time demonstrated by the conversion and salvation of
multitudes from age to age, he will at length return to the earth to
consummate his victory over all adversaries, to remove the curse and
restore the earth to its primeval state, assume his visible regal sway,
and establish his everlasting kingdom.

The union, as appointed and fixed in the order of events, of the Divine
and human natures in the Person of the God-man, was a primary condition
in the great scheme of Divine works and manifestations. That union is,
accordingly, implied in all the designations, whether prophetic or
otherwise, of the Anointed, or official Person; the Logos, who was in
the beginning; the Christ, who was before all things. On the basis of
this union of the second Person of the Godhead with human nature,
rendering him capable of subordinate relations and agencies, the works
of creation, providence and grace were delegated to him by the Father.

Such a provision in the constitution of his official person, in order to
the subordinate relations, delegated agencies, and visible manifestations,
involved in his undertaking, would seem manifestly necessary. Apart from
that provision, he was in all respects equal with the Father; and in
respect to his person, therefore, some special ground of subordination,
in order to the delegation to him of such works in such relations with
man, and with material and visible things, would seem to be necessary.
Again, the works delegated to him, and for which he was sent of the
Father, all of them in some relations, and many of them absolutely,
implied and required this union of the human nature with his person.
Accordingly, in this delegated, subordinate official Person, he was
foreordained before the foundation of the world, and had glory with the
Father before the world was.

By him and for him, in his official person and delegated character, are
all things. By him and for his pleasure they were created. He upholds
all things, and by him all things consist.

His undertaking included the works of creation, providence and
redemption; the physical and moral government of the world, and the
manifestation of the Divine perfections to all intelligent creatures.

In the execution of his undertaking, local and visible manifestations of
his person and of his official prerogatives and acts were indispensable,
in the relations he was to sustain as Lawgiver and Ruler, Prophet and
Priest. His undertaking comprised a succession of acts and dispensations,
and of corresponding changes in the manner of his agency, the nature of
his manifestations, and the immediate objects of his administration. In
these respects the progress of his work is indicated in the revelation he
has made in the Holy Scriptures, in which his person and his acts appear,
from stage to stage, in different aspects. He speaks of himself, and is
spoken of by the inspired writers, sometimes with reference only to his
Divine, and at other times with reference only to his human nature. On
some occasions acts are ascribed to him which are proper to him only as
Divine; and on other occasions such as could be affirmed of him only as
human; as in one case, the act of creation, and in the other, the act of
walking.

It is in this complex person that he is primarily the object of all our
knowledge of the Deity as revealed in the Scriptures. He is the image,
the visible manifestation of the invisible God, whom no man hath seen or
can see. He in this person hath declared, manifested the Father; no less
under the earliest, than under the present dispensation.

Accordingly, though distinguished by Moses in the beginning of his
narrative by designations which specially relate to the Divine nature in
his person, acts are ascribed to him which denote his complex official
person; such as walking in the garden of Eden, and conversing face to
face with Adam. As his official work is in Scripture referred to as one
comprehensive undertaking, though involving a long succession of acts
and events, so his official person is ever referred to as the same,
though in the succession many events preceded that of his taking man's
nature into union with that person. By appointment and covenant,
virtually and officially he was the same from the beginning; and on that
ground, and because his expiatory death in man's nature was essential to
his undertaking as a whole, and its effect as necessary to the earliest
as to any succeeding portion of man's race, he is spoken of as "slain
from the foundation of the world."

Had no apostasy of man taken place, we are warranted in believing that
he would have continued that local, visible presence and intercourse
with Adam and his descendants which characterized the earliest period of
their existence. For as Creator of all things he was the Heir and Lord
of all, and would have been Lawgiver and King of the race, the medium of
their relations to God and of their homage, as he is to be hereafter at
the restitution of all things to their primeval condition, when all the
evil consequences of the fall shall have been superseded, death itself
destroyed, and the earth delivered from the curse and restored to its
original perfection.

But no such course of things could have been possible had the earth, at
the epoch of man's creation, been in its present imperfect condition,
the scene of disease and death. Nor can there, if it was at the outset
so imperfect and so fraught with physical evils, be a restoration of it
hereafter to its pristine state. If it is to be renovated, remodelled,
new-made, it is because it has been degraded from its primeval
condition. If it is to be restored by the instrumentality of fire, that
is to happen as the counterpart of its destruction by water. If its
renovation is to be one of the consequences and concomitants of his
perfect triumph over the evils of the apostasy, its subjection to its
present state is no less certainly a consequence of the apostasy.

In view of this scheme and course of administration, we may perhaps
discern some of the reasons why this earth and the human race were
selected.

We may suppose that of all the orders of intelligent creatures, man,
with his material body, is the least exalted, and for that reason, in
such a course of manifestation to all orders, alliance with his nature
would be selected.

The visibility required in such a scheme would require union with a
visible body.

So far as we have reason to conclude, no other race of intelligent
creatures is multiplied by succession. That peculiarity of the human
race rendered it practicable for the Creator to take the human nature
into union with his person; and it likewise allows of a perpetual
increase of the subjects of his grace and of his kingdom, after the
ruins of the fall shall have been overcome, and the sovereignty of the
rest of the universe, preserved and confirmed in holiness, shall have
been surrendered to the Father.

Probably the preservation of the rest of the universe from defection is
among the results of his expiation of sin, his ascension incarnate to
heaven, his reign there till his second advent, and his victory over
Satan and all opposition. That being accomplished, he resumes and
prosecutes his original purpose as visible Head and King of the human
race.




CHAPTER XI.

    Of the official Person and Relations of the Messiah.


The term Jehovah, though employed interchangeably with the other Divine
designations, is in one respect peculiar. It is never used with
reference to any other than the Divine Being. Hence it is by many
regarded as a proper name. It is however replaced in the New Testament
by an appellative.

Gesenius, who regards this as a proper name, and the word Elohim as an
appellative, refers to the "Seventy" as uniformly prefixing the definite
article to the word which they substitute for Jehovah; making the
version, as in the English, _The_ Lord. He considers the formulas, "I
shall be what I am," and "which is, and which was, and which is to
come," as expressing the meaning of this name, by which the being
designated was to be distinctively recognized, remembered, and
acknowledged for ever, according to the declarations: "This is my name
for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations;" and "this is my
name for ever: so shall ye name me throughout all generations."

But, as has been shown, this name is employed both separately and
conjointly, with strictly official designations, to identify the second
Person of the Trinity in his delegated character and work; who in the
New Testament is announced as Jehovah, Immanu-El, Jesus, the Christ.

The subsistence of three distinct coequal Persons in the Godhead is
eternal. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit are, as persons,
coeternal, coequal, and alike infinitely removed from all possibility of
change. Whatever change has taken place with respect to them must
therefore be merely relative, and have reference to their respective
agencies, and to the works of creation, providence, and grace. They are
accordingly revealed to us in connection with those works, and in the
relations which they sustain to them, and to each other in connection
with them; and pursuant to the economy or covenant in which those
relations and works are founded, the designations by which they are
respectively made known are _official_ designations, or employed with a
personal and official reference. The Father is first, the fountain of
authority, and delegates the Son. The Son is second, and is subordinate
to the Father. The Holy Spirit is third, and is subordinate to the
