the _croust_, he would be left to his own resources to find the lode,
and, moreover, the "knockers" would do all they could to lead him away
from a good lode. These mine pixies, too, were supposed to be spirits,
sometimes spirits of the miners of ancient times.'[71]

_Fairies and Pixies._--'In general appearance the fairies were much the
same as pixies. They were small men and women, much smaller than dwarfs.
The men were swarthy in complexion, and the women had a clear complexion
of a peach-like bloom. None ever appeared to be more than
five-and-twenty to thirty years old. I have heard my nurse say that she
could see scores of them whenever she picked a four-leaf clover and put
it in the wisp of straw which she carried on her head as a cushion for
the bucket of milk. Her theory was that the richness of the milk was
what attracted them. Pixies, like fairies, very much enjoyed milk, and
people of miserly nature used to put salt around a cow to keep the
pixies away; and then the pixies would lead such mean people astray the
very first opportunity that came. According to some country-people, the
pixies have been seen in the day-time, but usually they are only seen at
night.'


A CORNISH EDITOR'S OPINION

Mr. Herbert Thomas, editor of four Cornish papers, _The Cornishman_,
_The Cornish Telegraph_, _Post_, and _Evening Times_, and a true Celt
himself, has been deeply interested in the folk-lore of Cornwall, and
has made excellent use of it in his poetry and other literary
productions; so that his personal opinions, which follow, as to the
probable origin of the fairy-belief, are for our study a very important
contribution:--

_Animistic Origin of Belief in Pixies._--'I should say that the modern
belief in pixies, or in fairies, arose from a very ancient Celtic or
pre-Celtic belief in spirits. Just as among some savage tribes there is
belief in gods and totems, here there was belief in little spirits good
and bad, who were able to help or to hinder man. Belief in the
supernatural, in my opinion, is the root of it all.'


A CORNISH FOLK-LORIST'S TESTIMONY

In Penzance I had the privilege of also meeting Miss M. A. Courtney, the
well-known folk-lorist, who quite agrees with me in believing that there
is in Cornwall a widespread Legend of the Dead; and she cited a few
special instances in illustration, as follows:--

_Cornish Legend of the Dead._--'Here amongst the fishermen and sailors
there is a belief that the dead in the sea will be heard calling if a
drowning is about to occur. I know of a woman who went to a clergyman to
have him exorcize her of the spirit of her dead sister, which she said
appeared in the form of a bee. And I have heard of miners believing that
white moths are spirits.'[72]


EVIDENCE FROM NEWLYN

In Newlyn, Mrs. Jane Tregurtha gave the following important testimony:--

_The 'Little Folk'._--'The old people thoroughly believed in the _little
folk_, and that they gambolled all over the moors on moonlight nights.
Some pixies would rain down blessings and others curses; and to remove
the curses people would go to the wells blessed by the saints. Whenever
anything went wrong in the kitchen at night the pixies were blamed.
After the 31st of October [or after Halloween] the blackberries are not
fit to eat, for the pixies have then been over them' (cf. the parallel
Irish belief, p. 38).

_Fairy Guardian of the Men-an-Tol._[73]--'At the Men-an-Tol there is
supposed to be a guardian fairy or pixy who can make miraculous cures.
And my mother knew of an actual case in which a changeling was put
through the stone in order to get the real child back. It seems that
evil pixies changed children, and that the pixy at the Men-an-Tol being
good, could, in opposition, undo their work.'

_Exorcism._--'A spirit was put to rest on the Green here in Newlyn. The
parson prayed and fasted, and then commanded the spirit to _teeme_ (dip
dry) the sea with a limpet shell containing no bottom; and the spirit is
supposed to be still busy at this task.'

_Piskies as Apparitions._--When I talked with her in her neat cottage at
Newlyn, Miss Mary Ann Chirgwin (who was born on St. Michael's Mount in
1825) told me this:--'The old people used to say the piskies were
apparitions of the dead come back in the form of little people, but I
can't remember anything more than this about them.'


AN ARTIST'S TESTIMONY

One of the members of the Newlyn Art School was able to offer a few of
his own impressions concerning the pixies of Devonshire, where he has
frequently made sketches of pixies from descriptions given to him by
peasants:--

_Devonshire Pixies._--'Throughout all the west of Devonshire, anywhere
near the moorlands, the country people are much given to belief in
pixies and ghosts. I think they expect to see them about the twilight
hour; though I have not found anybody who has actually seen a pixy--the
belief now is largely based on hearsay.'


TESTIMONY FROM THE HISTORIAN OF MOUSEHOLE

To Mr. Richard Harry, the historian of Mousehole, I am indebted for
these remarks about the nature and present state of the belief in pixies
as he observes it in that region:--

_The Pixy Belief._--'The piskies, thought of as little people who appear
on moonlight nights, are still somewhat believed in here. If interfered
with too much they are said to exhibit almost fiendish powers. In a
certain sense they are considered spiritual, but in another sense they
are much materialized in the conceptions of the people. Generally
speaking, the belief in them has almost died out within the last fifty
years.'


A SEAMAN'S TESTIMONY

'Uncle Billy Pender,' as our present witness is familiarly called, is
one of the oldest natives of Mousehole, being eighty-five years old; and
most of his life has been passed on the ocean, as a fisherman, seaman,
and pilot. After having told me the usual things about piskies, fairies,
spirits, ghosts, and the devil, Uncle Billy Pender was very soon talking
about the dead:--

_Cornish Legend of the Dead._--'I was up in bed, and I suppose asleep,
and I dreamt that the boy James came to my bedside and woke me up by
saying, "How many lights does Death put up?" And in the dream there
appeared such light as I never saw in my life; and when I woke up
another light like it was in the room. Within three months afterwards we
buried two grand-daughters out of this house. This was four years ago.'
When this strange tale was finished, Uncle Billy Pender's daughter, who
had been listening, added:--'For three mornings, one after another,
there was a robin at our cellar door before the deaths, and my husband
said he didn't like that.'

Then Uncle Billy told this weird Breton-like tale:--'"Granny" told about
a boat named _Bluecher_, going from Newlyn to Bristol with six thousand
mackerel, which put in at Arbor Cove, close to Padstow, on account of
bad weather. The boat dragged her anchors and was lost. "Granny"
afterwards declared that he saw the crew going up over the Newlyn Slip;
and the whole of Newlyn and Mousehole believed him.'


TESTIMONY BY TWO LAND'S END FARMERS

In the Sennen country, within a mile of the end of Britain, I talked
with two farmers who knew something about piskies. The first one,
Charles Hutchen, of Trevescan, told me this legend:--

_A St. Just Pisky._--'Near St. Just, on Christmas Day, a pisky carried
away in his cloak a boy, but the boy got home. Then the pisky took him a
second time, and again the boy got home. Each time the boy was away for
only an hour' (probably in a dream or trance state).

_Seeing the Pisky-Dance._--Frank Ellis, seventy-eight years old, of the
same village of Trevescan, then gave the following evidence:--'Up on
Sea-View Green there are two rings where the piskies used to dance and
play music on a moonlight night. I've heard that they would come there
from the moors. _Little people_ they are called. If you keep quiet when
they are dancing you'll see them, but if you make any noise they'll
disappear.' Frank Ellis's wife, who is a very aged woman, was in the
house listening to the conversation, and added at this point:--'My
grandmother, Nancy Maddern, was down on Sea-View Green by moonlight and
saw the piskies dancing, and passed near them. She said they were like
little children, and had red cloaks.'


TESTIMONY FROM A SENNEN COVE FISHERMAN

John Gilbert Guy, seventy-eight years old, a retired fisherman of Sennen
Cove, offers very valuable testimony, as follows:--

_'Small People'._--'Many say they have seen the _small people_ here by
the hundreds. In Ireland they call the _small people_ the fairies. My
mother believes there were such things, and so did the old folks in
these parts. My grandmother used to put down a good furze fire for
_them_ on stormy nights, because, as she said, "_They_ are a sort of
people wandering about the world with no home or habitation, and ought
to be given a little comfort." The most fear of _them_ was that they
might come at night and change a baby for one that was no good. My
mother said that Joan Nicholas believed the fairies had changed her
baby, because it was very small and cross-tempered. Up on the hill
you'll see a round ring with grass greener than anywhere else, and that
is where the _small people_ used to dance.'

_Danger of Seeing the 'Little People'._--'I heard that a woman set out
water to wash her baby in, and that before she had used the water the
_small people_ came and washed their babies in it. She didn't know about
this, and so in washing her baby got some of the water in her eyes, and
then all at once she could see crowds of _little people_ about her. One
of them came to her and asked if she was able to see their crowd, and
when she said "Yes," the _little people_ wanted to take her eyes out,
and she had to clear away from them as fast as she could.'


TESTIMONY FROM A CORNISH MINER

William Shepherd, a retired miner of Pendeen, near St. Just, where he
has passed all his life, offers us from his own experiences under the
earth the evidence which follows:--

_Mine Piskies._--'There are mine-piskies which are not the "knockers".
I've heard old men in the mines say that they have seen them, and they
call them the _small people_. It appears that they don't like company,
for they are always seen singly. The "knockers" are spirits, too, as one
might say. They are said to bring bad luck, while the _small people_ may
bring good luck.'


TESTIMONY FROM KING ARTHUR'S COUNTRY

Leaving the Land's End district and South Cornwall, we now pass
northward to King Arthur's country. Our chief researches there are to be
made outside the beaten track of tourists as far as possible, in the
country between Camelford and Tintagel. At Delabole, the centre of this
district, we find our first witness, Henry Spragg, a retired
slate-quarryman, seventy years old. Mr. Spragg has had excellent
opportunities of hearing any folk-lore that might have been living
during his lifetime; and what he offers first is about King Arthur:--

_King Arthur._--'We always thought of King Arthur as a great warrior.
And many a time I've heard old people say that he used to appear in this
country in the form of a nath.'[74] This was all that could be told of
King Arthur; and the conversation finally was directed toward piskies,
with the following results:--

_Piskies._--'A man named Bottrell, who lived near St. Teath, was
pisky-led at West Down, and when he turned his pockets inside out he
heard the piskies going away laughing.[75] Often my grandmother used to
say when I got home after dark, "You had better mind, or the piskies
will carry you away." And I can remember hearing the old people say that
the piskies are the spirits of dead-born children.' From pixies the
conversation drifted to the spirit-hounds 'often heard at night near
certain haunted downs in St. Teath parish', and then, finally, to
ordinary Cornish legends about the dead.

Our next witnesses from Delabole are John Male, eighty-two years old,
one of the very oldest men in King Arthur's country, and his wife; and
all of Mr. Male's ancestors as far back as he can trace them have lived
in the same parish.

_Piskies in General._--Mr. Male remarked:--'I have heard a good deal
about the piskies, but I can't remember any of the old women's tales. I
have heard, too, of people saying that they had seen the piskies. It was
thought that when the piskies have misled you they show themselves
jumping about in front of you; they are a race of little people who live
out in the fields.' Mrs. Male had now joined us at the open fire, and
added:--'Piskies always come at night, and in marshy ground there are
round places called pisky beds where they play. When I was little, my
mother and grandmother would be sitting round the fire of an evening
telling fireside stories, and I can remember hearing about a pisky of
this part who stole a new coat, and how the family heard him talking to
himself about it, and then finally say:--

  Pisky fine and pisky gay,
  Pisky's got a bright new coat,
  Pisky now will run away.

And I can just remember one bit of another story: A pisky looked into a
house and said:--

  All alone, fair maid?
  No, here am I with a dog and cat,
  And apples to eat and nuts to crack.'

_Tintagel Folk-Beliefs._--A retired rural policeman of the Tintagel
country, where he was born and reared, and now keeper of the Passmore
Edwards Art Gallery at Newlyn, offered this testimony from
Tintagel:--'In Tintagel I used to sit round the fire at night and hear
old women tell so much about piskies and ghosts that I was then afraid
to go out of doors after darkness had fallen. They religiously believed
in such things, and when I expressed my doubts I was driven away as a
rude boy. They thought if you went to a certain place at a certain hour
of the night that you could there see the piskies as little spirits. It
was held that the piskies could lead you astray and play tricks on you,
but that they never did you any serious injury.' Of the Arthurian
folk-legend at Tintagel he said:--'The spirit of King Arthur is supposed
to be in the Cornish chough--a beautiful black bird with red legs and
red beak.'

We now leave Great Britain and cross the English Channel to Little
Britain, the third of the Brythonic countries.


VII. IN BRITTANY

     Introduction by ANATOLE LE BRAZ, Professor of French Literature,
     University of Rennes, Brittany; author of _La Legende de la Mort, Au
     Pays des Pardons_, &c.

MON CHER MONSIEUR WENTZ,

Il me souvient que, lors de votre soutenance de these devant la Faculte
des Lettres de l'Universite de Rennes, un de mes collegues, mon ami, le
professeur Dottin, vous demanda:

'Vous croyez, dites-vous, a l'existence des fees? En avez-vous vu?'

Vous repondites, avec autant de phlegme que de sincerite:

'Non. J'ai tout fait pour en voir, et je n'en ai jamais vu. Mais il y a
beaucoup de choses que vous n'avez pas vues, monsieur le professeur, et
dont vous ne songeriez cependant pas a nier l'existence. Ainsi fais-je a
l'egard des fees.'

Je suis comme vous, mon cher monsieur Wentz: je n'ai jamais vu de fees.
J'ai bien une amie tres chere que nous avons baptisee de ce nom, mais,
malgre tous ses beaux dons magiques, elle n'est qu'une humble mortelle.
En revanche, j'ai vecu, tout enfant, parmi des personnes qui avaient
avec les fees veritables un commerce quasi journalier.

C'etait dans une petite bourgade de Basse-Bretagne, peuplee de paysans a
moitie marins, et de marins a moitie paysans. Il y avait, non loin du
village, une ancienne gentilhommiere que ses proprietaires avaient
depuis longtemps abandonnee pour on ne savait au juste quel motif. On
continuait de l'appeler le 'chateau' de Lanascol, quoiqu'elle ne fut
plus guere qu'une ruine. Il est vrai que les avenues par lesquelles on y
accedait avaient conserve leur aspect seigneurial, avec leurs quadruples
rangees de vieux hetres dont les vastes frondaisons se miraient dans de
magnifiques etangs. Les gens d'alentour se risquaient peu, le soir, dans
ces avenues. Elles passaient pour etre, a partir du coucher du soleil,
le lieu de promenade favori d'une 'dame' que l'on designait sous le nom
de _Groac'h Lanascol_,--la 'Fee de Lanascol'.

Beaucoup disaient l'avoir rencontree, et la depeignaient sous les
couleurs, du reste, les plus diverses. Ceux-ci faisaient d'elle une
vieille femme, marchant toute courbee, les deux mains appuyees sur un
troncon de bequille avec lequel, de temps en temps, elle remuait, a
l'automne, les feuilles mortes. Les feuilles mortes qu'elle retournait
ainsi devenaient soudain brillantes comme de l'or et s'entrechoquaient
avec un bruit clair de metal. Selon d'autres, c'etait une jeune
princesse, merveilleusement paree, sur les pas de qui s'empressaient
d'etranges petits hommes noirs et silencieux. Elle s'avancait d'une
majestueuse allure de reine. Parfois elle s'arretait devant un arbre, et
l'arbre aussitot s'inclinait comme pour recevoir ses ordres. Ou bien,
elle jetait un regard sur l'eau d'un etang, et l'etang frissonnait
jusqu'en ses profondeurs, comme agite d'un mouvement de crainte sous la
puissance de son regard.

On racontait sur elle cette curieuse histoire:--

Les proprietaires de Lanascol ayant voulu se defaire d'un domaine qu'ils
n'habitaient plus, le manoir et les terres qui en dependaient furent mis
en adjudication chez un notaire de Plouaret. Au jour fixe pour les
encheres nombre d'acheteurs accoururent. Les prix etaient deja montes
tres haut, et le domaine allait etre adjuge, quand, a un dernier appel
du crieur, une voix feminine, tres douce et tres imperieuse tout
ensemble, s'eleva et dit:

'Mille francs de plus!'

Il y eut grande rumeur dans la salle. Tout le monde chercha des yeux la
personne qui avait lance cette surenchere, et qui ne pouvait etre qu'une
femme. Mais il ne se trouva pas une seule femme dans l'assistance. Le
notaire demanda:

'Qui a parle?'

De nouveau, la meme voix se fit entendre.

'Groac'h Lanascol!' repondit-elle.

Ce fut une debandade generale. Depuis lors, il ne s'etait jamais
presente d'acquereur, et voila pourquoi, repetait-on couramment,
Lanascol etait toujours a vendre.

Si je vous ai entretenu a plaisir de la Fee de Lanascol, mon cher
monsieur Wentz, c'est qu'elle est la premiere qui ait fait impression
sur moi, dans mon enfance. Combien d'autres n'en ai-je pas connu, par la
suite, a travers les recits de mes compatriotes des greves, des champs
ou des bois! La Bretagne est restee un royaume de feerie. On n'y peut
voyager l'espace d'une lieue sans cotoyer la demeure de quelque fee male
ou femelle. Ces jours derniers, comme j'accomplissais un pelerinage
d'automne a l'hallucinante foret de Paimpont, toute hantee encore des
grands souvenirs de la legende celtique, je croisai, sous les opulents
ombrages du Pas-du-Houx, une ramasseuse de bois mort, avec qui je ne
manquai pas, vous pensez bien, de lier conversation. Un des premiers
noms que je prononcai fut naturellement celui de Viviane.

'Viviane!' se recria la vieille pauvresse. 'Ah! benie soit-elle, la
bonne Dame! car elle est aussi bonne que belle.... Sans sa protection,
mon homme, qui travaille dans les coupes, serait tombe, comme un loup,
sous les fusils des gardes....' Et elle se mit a me conter comme quoi
son mari, un tantinet braconnier comme tous les bucherons de ces
parages, s'etant porte, une nuit, a l'affut du chevreuil, dans les
environs de la Butte-aux-Plaintes, avait ete surpris en flagrant delit
par une tournee de gardes. Il voulut fuir: les gardes tirerent. Une
balle l'atteignit a la cuisse: il tomba, et il s'appretait a se faire
tuer sur place, plutot que de se rendre, lorsque, entre ses agresseurs
et lui, s'interposa subitement une espece de brouillard tres dense qui
voila tout,--le sol, les arbres, les gardes et le blesse lui-meme. Et il
entendit une voix sortie du brouillard, une voix legere comme un bruit
de feuilles, murmurer a son oreille: 'Sauve-toi, mon fils: l'esprit de
Viviane veillera sur toi jusqu'a ce que tu aies rampe hors de la foret.'

'Telles furent les propres paroles de la fee,' conclut la ramasseuse de
bois mort.

Et, devotement, elle se signa, car la religieuse Bretagne--vous le
savez--venere les fees a l'egal des saintes.

       *       *       *       *       *

J'ignore s'il faut rattacher les lutins au monde des fees, mais, ce qui
est sur, c'est que cette charmante et malicieuse engeance a toujours
pullule dans notre pays. Je me suis laisse dire qu'autrefois chaque
maison avait le sien. C'etait quelque chose comme le petit dieu penate.
Tantot visible, tantot invisible, il presidait a tous les actes de la
vie domestique. Mieux encore: il y participait, et de la facon la plus
efficace. A l'interieur du logis, il aidait les servantes, soufflait le
feu dans l'atre, surveillait la cuisson de la nourriture pour les hommes
ou pour les betes, apaisait les cris de l'enfant couche dans le bas de
l'armoire, empechait les vers de se mettre dans les pieces de lard
suspendues aux solives. Il avait pareillement dans son lot le
gouvernement des etables et des ecuries: grace a lui, les vaches
donnaient un lait abondant en beurre, et les chevaux avaient la croupe
ronde, le poil luisant. Il etait, en un mot, le bon genie de la famille,
mais c'etait a la condition que chacun eut pour lui les egards auxquels
il avait droit. Si peu qu'on lui manquat, sa bonte se changeait en
malice et il n'etait point de mauvais tours dont il ne fut capable
envers les gens qui l'avaient offense, comme de renverser le contenu des
marmites sur le foyer, d'embrouiller la laine autour des quenouilles, de
rendre infumable le tabac des pipes, d'emmeler inextricablement les
crins des chevaux, de dessecher le pis des vaches ou de faire peler le
dos des brebis. Aussi s'efforcait-on de ne le point mecontenter. On
respectait soigneusement toutes ses habitudes, toutes ses manies. C'est
ainsi que, chez mes parents, notre vieille bonne Filie n'enlevait jamais
le trepied du feu sans avoir la precaution de l'asperger d'eau pour le
refroidir, avant de le ranger au coin de l'atre. Si vous lui demandiez
pourquoi ce rite, elle vous repondait:

'Pour que le lutin ne s'y brule pas, si, tout a l'heure, il s'asseyait
dessus.'

       *       *       *       *       *

Il appartient encore, je suppose, a la categorie des hommes-fees, ce
_Bugul-Noz_, ce mysterieux 'Berger de la nuit' dont les Bretons des
campagnes voient se dresser, au crepuscule, la haute et troublante
silhouette, si, d'aventure, il leur arrive de rentrer tard du labour. On
n'a jamais pu me renseigner exactement sur le genre de troupeau qu'il
faisait paitre, ni sur ce que presageait sa rencontre. Le plus souvent,
on la redoute. Mais, comme l'observait avec raison une de mes
conteuses, Lise Bellec, s'il est preferable d'eviter le _Bugul-Noz_, il
ne s'ensuit pas, pour cela, que ce soit un mechant Esprit. D'apres elle,
il remplirait plutot une fonction salutaire, en signifiant aux humains,
par sa venue, que la nuit n'est pas faite pour s'attarder aux champs ou
sur les chemins, mais pour s'enfermer derriere les portes closes et pour
dormir. Ce berger des ombres serait donc, somme toute, une maniere de
bon pasteur. C'est pour assurer notre repos et notre securite, c'est
pour nous soustraire aux exces du travail et aux embuches de la nuit
qu'il nous force, brebis imprudentes, a regagner promptement le bercail.

Sans doute est-ce un role tutelaire a peu pres semblable qui, dans la
croyance populaire, est devolu a un autre homme-fee, plus specialement
affecte au rivage de la mer, comme l'indique son nom de _Yann-An-Od_. Il
n'y a pas, sur tout le littoral maritime de la Bretagne ou, comme on
dit, dans tout l'_armor_, une seule region ou l'existence de ce 'Jean
des Greves' ne soit tenue pour un fait certain, dument constate,
indeniable. On lui prete des formes variables et des aspects differents.
C'est tantot un geant, tantot un nain. Il porte tantot un 'suroit' de
toile huilee, tantot un large chapeau de feutre noir. Parfois, il
s'appuie sur une rame et fait penser au personnage enigmatique, arme du
meme attribut, qu'Ulysse doit suivre, dans l'_Odyssee_. Mais, toujours,
c'est un heros marin dont la mission est de parcourir les plages, en
poussant par intervalles de longs cris stridents, propres a effrayer les
pecheurs qui se seraient laisse surprendre dehors par les tenebres de la
nuit. Il ne fait de mal qu'a ceux qui recalcitrent; encore ne les
frappe-t-il que dans leur interet, pour les contraindre a se mettre a
l'abri. Il est, avant tout, un 'avertisseur'. Ses cris ne rappellent pas
seulement au logis les gens attardes sur les greves; ils signalent aussi
le dangereux voisinage de la cote aux marins qui sont en mer et, par la,
suppleent a l'insuffisance du mugissement des sirenes ou de la lumiere
des phares.

Remarquons, a ce propos, qu'on releve un trait analogue dans la legende
des vieux saints armoricains, pour la plupart emigres d'Irlande. Un de
leurs exercices coutumiers consistait a deambuler de nuit le long des
cotes ou ils avaient etabli leurs oratoires, en agitant des clochettes
de fer battu dont les tintements etaient destines, comme les cris de
_Yann-An-Od_, a prevenir les navigateurs que la terre etait proche.

Je suis persuade que le culte des saints, qui est la premiere et la plus
fervente des devotions bretonnes, conserve bien des traits d'une
religion plus ancienne ou la croyance aux fees jouait le principal
role. Et il en va de meme, j'en suis convaincu, pour ces mythes
funeraires que j'ai recueillis sous le titre de _La Legende de la Mort_
chez les Bretons armoricains. A vrai dire, dans la conception bretonne,
les morts ne sont pas morts; ils vivent d'une vie mysterieuse en marge
de la vie reelle, mais leur monde reste, en definitive, tout mele au
notre et, sitot que la nuit tombe, sitot que les vivants proprement dits
s'abandonnent a la mort momentanee du sommeil, les soi-disant morts
redeviennent les habitants de la terre qu'ils n'ont jamais quittee. Ils
reprennent leur place a leur foyer d'autrefois, ils vaquent a leurs
anciens travaux, ils s'interessent au logis, aux champs, a la barque;
ils se comportent, en un mot, comme ce peuple des hommes et des
femmes-fees qui formait jadis une espece d'humanite plus fine et plus
delicate au milieu de la veritable humanite.

       *       *       *       *       *

J'aurais encore, mon cher monsieur Wentz, bien d'autres types a evoquer,
dans cet intermonde de la feerie bretonne qui, chez mes compatriotes, ne
se confond ni avec ce monde-ci, ni avec l'autre, mais participe a la
fois de tous les deux, par un singulier melange de naturel et de
surnaturel. Je n'ai voulu, en ces lignes rapides, que montrer la
richesse de la matiere a laquelle vous avez, avec tant de conscience et
de ferveur, applique votre effort. Et maintenant, que les fees vous
soient douces, mon cher ami! Elles ne seront que justes en favorisant de
toute leur tendresse le jeune et brillant ecrivain qui vient de
restaurer leur culte en renovant leur gloire.

  RENNES,
    ce 1{er} _novembre_ 1910.


    My dear Mr. Wentz,

    I recollect that, at the time of your examination on your thesis
    before the Faculty of Letters of the University of Rennes, one of my
    colleagues, my friend Professor Dottin, put to you this question:--

    'You believe, you assert, in the existence of fairies? Have you seen
    any?'

    You answered, with equal coolness and candour:

    'No. I have made every effort to do so, and I have never seen any.
    But there are many things which you, sir, have not seen, and of
    which, nevertheless, you would not think of denying the existence.
    That is my attitude toward fairies.'

    I am like you, my dear Mr. Wentz: I have never seen fairies. It is
    true that I have a very dear lady friend whom we have christened by
    that name [fairy], but, in spite of all her fair supernatural gifts,
    she is only a humble mortal. On the other hand, I lived, when a mere
    child, among people who had almost daily intercourse with real
    fairies.

    That was in a little township in Lower Brittany, inhabited by
    peasants who were half sailors, and by sailors who were half
    peasants. There was, not far from the village, an ancient
    manor-house long abandoned by its owners, for what reason was not
    known exactly. It continued to be called the 'Chateau' of Lanascol,
    though it was hardly more than a ruin. It is true that the avenues
    by which one approached it had retained their feudal aspect, with
    their fourfold rows of ancient beeches whose huge masses of foliage
    were reflected in splendid pools. The people of the neighbourhood
    seldom ventured into these avenues in the evening. They were
    supposed to be, from sunset onwards, the favourite walking-ground of
    a 'lady' who went by the name of _Groac'h Lanascol_, the 'Fairy of
    Lanascol'.

    Many claimed to have met her, and described her in colours which
    were, however, the most varied. Some represented her as an old woman
    who walked all bent, her two hands leaning on a stump of a crutch
    with which, in autumn, from time to time she stirred the dead
    leaves. The dead leaves which she thus stirred became suddenly
    shining like gold, and clinked against one another with the clear
    sound of metal. According to others, it was a young princess,
    marvellously adorned, after whom there hurried curious little black
    silent men. She advanced with a majestic and queenly bearing.
    Sometimes she stopped in front of a tree, and the tree at once bent
    down as if to receive her commands. Or again, she would cast a look
    on the water of a pool, and the pool trembled to its very depths, as
    though stirred by an access of fear beneath the potency of her look.

    The following strange story was told about her:--

    The owners of Lanascol having desired to get rid of an estate which
    they no longer occupied, the manor and lands attached to it were put
    up to auction by a notary of Plouaret. On the day fixed for the
    bidding a number of purchasers presented themselves. The price had
    already reached a large sum, and the estate was on the point of
    being knocked down, when, on a last appeal from the auctioneer, a
    female voice, very gentle and at the same time very imperious, was
    raised and said:

    'A thousand francs more!'

    A great commotion arose in the hall. Every one's eyes sought for the
    person who had made this advance, and who could only be a woman. But
    there was not a single woman among those present. The notary asked:

    'Who spoke?'

    Again the same voice made itself heard.

    'The Fairy of Lanascol!' it replied.

    A general break-up followed. From that time forward no purchaser has
    ever appeared, and, as the current report ran, that was the reason
    why Lanascol continued to be for sale.

    I have designedly quoted to you the story of the Fairy of Lanascol,
    my dear Mr. Wentz, because she was the first to make an impression
    on me in my childhood. How many others have I come to know later on
    in the course of narratives from those who lived with me on the
    sandy beaches, in the fields or the woods! Brittany has always been
    a kingdom of Faerie. One cannot there travel even a league without
    brushing past the dwelling of some male or female fairy. Quite
    lately, in the course of an autumn pilgrimage to the hallucinatory
    forest of Paimpont (or Broceliande), still haunted throughout by the
    great memories of Celtic legend, I encountered beneath the thick
    foliage of the Pas-du-Houx, a woman gathering faggots, with whom I
    did not fail, as you may well imagine, to enter into conversation.
    One of the first names I uttered was naturally that of Vivian.

    'Vivian!' cried out the poor old woman. 'Ah! a blessing on her, the
    good Lady! for she is as good as she is beautiful.... Without her
    protection my good man, who works at woodcutting, would have fallen,
    like a wolf, beneath the keepers' guns....' And she began to narrate
    to me 'as how' her husband, something of a poacher like all the
    woodcutters of these districts, had one night gone to watch for a
    roebuck in the neighbourhood of the Butte-aux-Plaintes, and had been
    caught red-handed by a party of keepers. He sought to fly: the
    keepers fired. A bullet hit him in the thigh: he fell, and was
    making ready to let himself be killed on the spot, rather than
    surrender, when there suddenly interposed between him and his
    assailants a kind of very thick mist which covered everything--the
    ground, the trees, the keepers, and the wounded man himself. And he
    heard a voice coming out of the mist, a voice gentle like the
    rustling of leaves, and murmuring in his ear: 'Save thyself, my son:
    the spirit of Vivian will watch over thee till thou hast crawled out
    of the forest.'

    'Such were the actual words of the fairy,' concluded the
    faggot-gatherer. And she crossed herself devoutly, for pious
    Brittany, as you know, reveres fairies as much as saints.

           *       *       *       *       *

    I do not know if _lutins_ (mischievous spirits) should be included
    in the fairy world, but what is certain is that this charming and
    roguish tribe has always abounded in our country. I have been told
    that formerly every house had its own. It (the _lutin_) was
    something like the little Roman household god. Now visible, now
    invisible, it presided over all the acts of domestic life. Nay more;
    it shared in them, and in the most effective manner. Inside the
    house it helped the servants, blew up the fire on the hearth,
    supervised the cooking of the food for men or beasts, quieted the
    crying of the babe lying in the bottom of the cupboard, and
    prevented worms from settling in the pieces of bacon hanging from
    the beams. Similarly there fell within its sphere the management of
    the byres and stables: thanks to it the cows gave milk abounding in
    butter, and the horses had round croups and shining coats. It was,
    in a word, the good genius of the house, but conditionally on every
    one paying to it the respect to which it had the right. If
    neglected, ever so little, its kindness changed into spite, and
    there was no unkind trick of which it was not capable towards people
    who had offended it, such as upsetting the contents of the pots on
    the hearth, entangling wool round distaffs, making tobacco
    unsmokeable, mixing a horse's mane in inextricable confusion, drying
    up the udders of cows, or stripping the backs of sheep. Therefore
    care was taken not to annoy it. Careful attention was paid to all
    its habits and humours. Thus, in my parents' house, our old maid
    Filie never lifted the trivet from the fire without taking the
    precaution of sprinkling it with water to cool it, before putting it
    away at the corner of the hearth. If you asked her the reason for
    this ceremony, she would reply to you:

    'To prevent the _lutin_ burning himself there, if, presently, he sat
    on it.'

           *       *       *       *       *

    Further, I suppose there should be included in the class of male
    fairies that _Bugul-Noz_, that mysterious Night Shepherd, whose tall
    and alarming outline the rural Bretons see rising in the twilight,
    if, by chance, they happen to return late from field-work. I have
    never been able to obtain exact information about the kind of herd
    which he fed, nor about what was foreboded by the meeting with him.
    Most often such a meeting is dreaded. Yet, as one of my female
    informants, Lise Bellec, reasonably pointed out, if it is preferable
    to avoid the _Bugul-Noz_ it does not from that follow that he is a
    harmful spirit. According to her, he would rather fulfil a
    beneficial office, in warning human beings, by his coming, that
    night is not made for lingering in the fields or on the roads, but
    for shutting oneself in behind closed doors and going to sleep. This
    shepherd of the shades would then be, take it altogether, a kind of
    good shepherd. It is to ensure our rest and safety, to withdraw us
    from excesses of toil and the snares of night, that he compels us,
    thoughtless sheep, to return quickly to the fold.

    No doubt it is an almost similar protecting office which, in popular
    belief, has fallen to another male fairy, more particularly attached
    to the seashore, as his name, _Yann-An-Od_, indicates. There is not,
    along all the coast of Brittany or, as it is called, in all the
    _Armor_, a single district where the existence of this 'John of the
    Dunes' is not looked on as a real fact, fully proved and undeniable.
    Changing forms and different aspects are attributed to him.
    Sometimes he is a giant, sometimes a dwarf. Sometimes he wears a
    seaman's hat of oiled cloth, sometimes a broad black felt hat. At
    times he leans on an oar and recalls the enigmatic personage,
    possessed of the same attribute, whom Ulysses has to follow, in the
    _Odyssey_. But he is always a marine hero whose office it is to
    traverse the shores, uttering at intervals long piercing cries,
    calculated to frighten away fishermen who may have allowed
    themselves to be surprised outside by the darkness of night. He only
    hurts those who resist; and even then would only strike them in
    their own interest, to force them to seek shelter. He is, before
    all, one who warns. His cries not only call back home people out
    late on the sands; they also inform sailors at sea of the dangerous
    proximity of the shore, and, thereby, make up for the insufficiency
    of the hooting of sirens or of the light of lighthouses.

    We may remark, in this connexion, that a parallel feature is
    observed in the legend of the old Armorican saints, who were mostly
    emigrants from Ireland. One of their usual exercises consisted in
    parading throughout the night the coasts where they had set up their
    oratories, shaking little bells of wrought iron, the ringing of
    which, like the cries of _Yann-An-Od_, was intended to warn voyagers
    that land was near.

    I am persuaded that the worship of saints, which is the first and
    most fervent of Breton religious observances, preserves many of the
    features of a more ancient religion in which a belief in fairies
    held the chief place. The same, I feel sure, applies to those
    death-myths which I have collected under the name of the Legend of
    the Dead among the Armorican Bretons. In truth, in the Breton mind,
    the dead are not dead; they live a mysterious life on the edge of
    real life, but their world remains fully mingled with ours, and as
    soon as night falls, as soon as the living, properly so called, give
    themselves up to the temporary sleep of death, the so-called dead
    again become the inhabitants of the earth which they have never
    left. They resume their place at their former hearth, devote
    themselves to their old work, take an interest in the home, the
    fields, the boat; they behave, in a word, like the race of male and
    female fairies which once formed a more refined and delicate species
    of humanity in the midst of ordinary humanity.

           *       *       *       *       *

    I might, my dear Mr. Wentz, evoke many other types from this
    intermediate world of Breton Faerie, which, in my countrymen's mind,
    is not identical with this world nor with the other, but shares at
    once in both, through a curious mixture of the natural and
    supernatural. I have only intended in these hasty lines to show the
    wealth of material to which you have with so much conscientiousness
    and ardour devoted your efforts. And now may the fairies be
    propitious to you, my dear friend! They will do nothing but justice
    in favouring with all their goodwill the young and brilliant writer
    who has but now revived their cult by renewing their glory.

      RENNES,
      _November_ 1, 1910.


BRETON FAIRIES OR _FEES_

In Lower Brittany, which is the genuinely Celtic part of Armorica,
instead of finding a widespread folk-belief in fairies of the kind
existing in Wales, Ireland, and Scotland, we find a widespread
folk-belief in the existence of the dead, and to a less extent in that
of the _corrigan_ tribes. For our Psychological Theory this is very
significant. It seems to indicate that among the Bretons--who are one of
the most conservative Celtic peoples--the Fairy-Faith finds its chief
expression in a belief that men live after death in an invisible world,
just as in Ireland the dead and fairies live in Fairyland. This opinion
