4.  As there must be care used in choosing men to rule the church of
God, so there must be a consideration had, that there are many
things darkly laid down in scripture; this will temper our spirits,
and make us live in peace and unity the more firmly in things in
which we agree; this will help us to bear one another's burdens, and
so fulfil the law of Christ, inasmuch as all things necessary to
salvation and church communion are plainly laid down in scripture.
And where things are more darkly laid down, we should consider that
God intended hereby to stir up our diligence, that thereby we might
increase our knowledge, and not our divisions, for it may be said of
all discoveries of truth we have made in the Scriptures, as it is
said of the globe of the earth, that though men have made great
searches, and thereupon great discoveries, yet there is still a
terra incognita, an unknown land; so there is in the Scriptures:
for after men have travelled over them, one age after another, yet
still there is, as it were, a terra incognita, an unknown track to
put us upon farther search and inquiry, and to keep us from
censuring and falling out with those who have not yet made the same
discoveries; that so we may say with the Psalmist, when we reflect
upon our short apprehensions of the mind of God, that we have seen
an end of all perfection, but God's commands are exceeding broad;
and as one observes, speaking of the Scriptures, that there is a
path in them leading to the mind of God, which lieth a great
distance from the thoughts and apprehensions of men.  And on the
other hand, in many other places, God sits, as it were, on the
superficies, and the face of the letter, where he that runs may
discern him speaking plainly, and no parable at all.  How should the
consideration of this induce us to a peaceable deportment towards
those that differ!

5.  If we would endeavour peace and unity, we must consider how God
hath tempered the body, that so the comely parts should not separate
from the uncomely, as having no need of them; 1 Cor. xii. 23-25.
There is in Christ's body and house some members and vessels less
honourable; 2 Tim. ii. 20.  And therefore we should not, as some
now-a-days do, pour the more abundant disgrace, instead of putting
the more abundant honour upon them.  Did we but consider this, we
should be covering the weakness, and hiding the miscarriages of one
another, because we are all members one of another, and the most
useless member in his place is useful.

6.  If we would live in peace, let us remember our relations to God,
as children to a father, and to each other as brethren.  Will not
the thoughts that we have one Father, quiet us; and the thoughts
that we are brethren, unite us?  It was this that made Abraham
propose terms of peace to Lot; Gen. xiii, "Let there be no strife,"
saith he, "between us, for we are brethren."  And we read of Moses,
in Acts vii. 26, using this argument to reconcile those that strove
together, and to set them at one again:  "Sirs," saith he, "you are
brethren, why do you wrong one another?"  A deep sense of this
relation, that we are brethren, would keep us from dividing.

7.  If we would preserve peace, let us mind the gifts and graces and
virtues that are in each other; let these be more in our eye than
their failings and imperfections.  When the apostle exhorted the
Philippians to peace, as a means hereunto, that so the peace of God
might rule in their hearts, he tells them, iv. 8, "That if there
were any virtue, or any praise, they should think of these things."
While we are always talking and blazoning the faults of one another,
and spreading their infirmities, no marvel we are so little in peace
and charity; for as charity covereth a multitude of sins, so malice
covereth a multitude of virtues, and makes us deal by one another,
as the heathen persecutors dealt with Christians, viz., put them in
bears' skins, that they might the more readily become a prey to
those dogs that were designed to devour them.

8.  If we would keep unity and peace, let us lay aside provoking and
dividing language, and forgive those that use it.  Remember that old
saying, "Evil words corrupt good manners."  When men think to carry
all before them, with speaking uncharitably and disgracefully of
their brethren or their opinions, may not such be answered as Job
answered his unfriendly visitants, Job vi. 25, "How forcible are
right words; but what doth your arguing reprove?"  How healing are
words fitly spoken?  A word in season, how good is it?  If we would
seek peace, let us clothe all our treaties for peace with acceptable
words; and where one word may better accommodate than another, let
that be used to express persons or things by; and let us not, as
some do, call the different practices of our brethren, will-worship,
and their different opinions, doctrines of devils, and the doctrine
of Balaam, who taught fornication, &c., unless we can plainly, and
in expressness of terms, prove it so.  Such language as this hath
strangely divided our spirits, and hardened our hearts one towards
another.

9.  If we would live in peace, let us make the best constructions of
one another's words and actions.  Charity judgeth the best, and it
thinks no evil; if words and actions may be construed to a good
sense, let us never put a bad construction upon them.  How much hath
the peace of Christians been broken by an uncharitable
interpretation of words and actions?  As some lay to the charge of
others that which they never said, so, by straining men's words,
others lay to their charge that they never thought.

10.  Be willing to hear, and learn, and obey those that God by his
providence hath set over you; this is a great means to preserve the
unity and peace of churches:  but when men (yea, and sometimes
women) shall usurp authority, and think themselves wiser than their
teachers, no wonder if these people run into contentions and
parties, when any shall say they are not free to hear those whom the
church thinks fit to speak to them.  This is the first step to
schism, and is usually attended, if not timely prevented, with a
sinful separation.

11.  If you would keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
be mindful, that the God whom you serve is a God of peace, and your
Saviour is a Prince of peace, and that "his ways are ways of
pleasantness, and all his paths are peace;" and that Christ was sent
into the world "to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in
the shadow of death, and to guide our feet in the way of peace."

12.  Consider the oneness of spirit that is among the enemies of
religion; though they differ about other things, yet to persecute
religion, and extirpate religion out of the earth, here they will
agree; the devils in the air, and the devils in the earth, all the
devils in hell, and in the world, make one at this turn.  Shall the
devil's kingdom be united; and shall Christ's be divided?  Shall the
devils make one shoulder to drive on the design of damning men, and
shall not Christians unite to carry on the great design of saving of
them?  Shall the papists agree and unite to carry on their interest,
notwithstanding the multitudes of orders, degrees, and differences,
that are among them; and shall not those that call themselves
reformed churches, unite to carry on the common interest of Christ
in the world, notwithstanding some petty and disputable differences
that are among them?  Quarrels about religion (as one observes) were
sins not named among the Gentiles.  What a shame is it then for
Christians to abound in them, especially considering the nature of
the Christian religion, and what large provisions the Author of it
hath made, to keep the profession's of it in peace! insomuch (as one
well observes), it is next to a miracle that ever any (especially
the professors of it) should fall out about it.

13.  Consider and remember, that the Judge stands at the door.  Let
this moderate your spirits, that the Lord is at hand.  What a sad
account will they have to make when he comes, that shall be found to
smite their fellow-servants, and to make the way to his kingdom more
narrow than ever he made it!  Let me close all in the words of that
great apostle, 2 Cor. xiii. 11, "Finally, brethren, farewell.  Be
perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the
God of love and peace shall be with you."

Postscript.--Reader, I thought good to advertise thee, that I have
delivered this to thy hand in the same order and method in which it
was preached, and almost in the same words, without any diminishings
or considerable enlargings, unless it be in the thirteen last
particulars; upon some of which I have made some enlargements, which
I could not then do for want of time; but the substance of every one
of them was then laid down in the same particular order as here thou
hast them.  And now I have done, I make no other account (to use the
words of a moderate man upon the like occasion) but it will fall out
with me, as doth commonly with him that parts a fray, both parties
