the old German picture, working with her in the kitchen and preparing
the meal for the household, have little chance of meeting such
visitants at any other point of their experience or event of their
lives.

If the week be empty of the angels, you will never catch sight of a
feather of their wings on the Sunday. And if we do not recognise their
presence in the midst of all the prose, and the commonplace, and the
vulgarity, and the triviality, and the monotony, the dust of the small
duties, we shall go up to the summit of Sinai itself and see nothing
there but cold grey stone and everlasting snows. 'Jacob went on his
way, and the angels of God met him.' The true field for religion is the
field of common life.

And then another side of the same thought is this, that it is in the
path where God has bade us walk that we shall find the angels round us.
We may meet them, indeed, on paths of our own choosing, but it will be
the sort of angel that Balaam met, with a sword in his hand, mighty and
beautiful, but wrathful too; and we had better not front him! But the
friendly helpers, the emissaries of God's love, the apostles of His
grace, do not haunt the roads that we make for ourselves. They confine
themselves rigidly to 'the paths in which God has before ordained that
we should walk in them.' A man has no right to expect, and he will not
get, blessing and help and divine gifts when, self-willedly, he has
taken the bit between his teeth, and is choosing his own road in the
world. But if he will say, 'Lord! here I am; put me where Thou wilt,
and do with me what Thou wilt,' then he may be sure that that path,
though it may be solitary of human companionship, and leading up
amongst barren rocks and over bare moorlands, where the sun beats down
fiercely, will not be unvisited by a better presence, so that in sweet
consciousness of sufficiency of rich grace, he will be able to say, 'I,
being in the way, the Lord met me.'

2. Still further, we may draw from this incident the lesson that God's
angels meet us punctually at the hour of need.

Jacob is drawing nearer and nearer to his fear every step. He is now
just on the borders of Esau's country, and close upon opening
communications with his brother. At that critical moment, just before
the finger of the clock has reached the point on the dial at which the
bell would strike, the needed help comes, the angel guards draw near
and camp beside him. It is always so. 'The Lord shall help her, and
that right early.' His hosts come no sooner and no later than we need.
If they appeared before we had realised our danger and our
defencelessness, our hearts would not leap up at their coming, as men
in a beleaguered town do when the guns of the relieving force are heard
booming from afar. Often God's delays seem to us inexplicable, and our
prayers to have no more effect than if they were spoken to a sleeping
Baal. But such delays are merciful. They help us to the consciousness
of our need. They let us feel the presence of the sorrow. They give
opportunity of proving the weakness of all other supports. They test
and increase desire for His help. They throw us more unreservedly into
His arms. They afford room for the sorrow or the burden to work its
peaceable fruits. So, and in many other ways, delay of succour fits us
to receive succour, and our God makes no tarrying but for our sakes.

It is His way to let us come almost to the edge of the precipice, and
then, in the very nick of time, when another minute and we are over, to
stretch out His strong right hand and save us. So Peter is left in
prison, though prayer is going up unceasingly for him--and no answer
comes. The days of the Passover feast slip away, and still he is in
prison, and prayer does nothing for him. The last day of his life,
according to Herod's purpose, dawns, and all the day the Church lifts
up its voice--but apparently there is no answer, nor any that regarded.
The night comes, and still the vain cry goes up, and Heaven seems deaf
or apathetic. The night wears on, and still no help comes. But in the
last watch of that last night, when day is almost dawning, at nearly
the last minute when escape would have been possible, the angel touches
the sleeping Apostle, and with leisurely calmness, as sure that he had
ample time, leads him out to freedom and safety. It was precisely
because Jesus loved the Household at Bethany that, after receiving the
sisters' message, He abode still for two days in the same place where
He was. However our impatience may wonder, and our faithlessness
venture sometimes almost to rebuke Him when He comes, with words like
Mary's and Martha's--'Lord, if Thou hadst been here, such and such
sorrows would not have happened, and Thou couldst so easily have been
here'--we should learn the lesson that even if He has delayed so long
that the dreaded blow has fallen, He has come soon enough to make it
the occasion for a still more glorious communication of His power.
'Rest in the Lord, wait patiently for Him, and He shall give thee the
desires of thine heart.'

3. Again, we learn from this incident that the angels of God come in
the shape which we need.

Jacob's want at the moment was protection. Therefore the angels appear
in warlike guise, and present before the defenceless man another camp,
in which he and his unwieldy caravan of women and children and cattle
may find security. If his special want had been of some blessing of
another kind, no doubt another form of appearance, suited with
precision to his need, would have been imposed upon these angel
helpers. For God's gifts to us change their character; as the Rabbis
fabled that the manna tasted to each man what each most desired. The
same pure heavenly bread has the varying savour that commends it to
varying palates. God's grace is Protean. It takes all the forms that
man's necessities require. As water assumes the shape of any vessel
into which it is put, so this great blessing comes to each of us,
moulded according to the pressure and taking the form of our
circumstances and necessities. His fulness is all-sufficient. It is the
same blood that, passing to all the members, ministers to each
according to the needs and fashion of each. And it is the same grace
which, passing to our souls, in each man is shaped according to his
present condition and ministers to his present wants.

So, dear brethren, in that great fulness each of us may have the thing
that we need. The angel who to one man is protection, to another shall
be teaching and inspiration; to another shall appear with chariots of
fire and horses of fire to sweep the rapt soul heavenward; to another
shall draw near as a deliverer from his fetters, at whose touch the
bonds shall fall from off him; to another shall appear as the
instructor in duty and the appointer of a path of service, like that
vision that shone in the castle to the Apostle Paul, and said, 'Thou
must bear witness for me at Rome'; to another shall appear as opening
the door of heaven and letting a flood of light come down upon his
darkened heart, as to the Apocalyptic seer in his rocky Patmos. And
'all this worketh that one and the self-same' Lord of angels 'dividing
to every man severally as He will,' and as the man needs. The
defenceless Jacob has the manifestation of the divine presence in the
guise of armed warriors that guard his unwarlike camp.

I add one last word. Long centuries after Jacob's experience at
Mahanaim, another trembling fugitive found himself there, fearful, like
Jacob, of the vengeance and anger of one who was knit to him by blood.
When poor King David was flying from the face of Absalom his son, the
first place where he made a stand, and where he remained during the
whole of the rebellion, was this town of Mahanaim, away on the eastern
side of the Jordan. Do you not think that to the kingly exile, in his
feebleness and his fear, the very name of his resting-place would be an
omen? Would he not recall the old story, and bethink himself of how
round that other frightened man

  'Bright-harnessed angels stood in order serviceable'

and would he not, as he looked on his little band of friends, faithful
among the faithless, have his eyesight cleared to behold the other
camp? Such a vision, no doubt, inspired the calm confidence of the
psalm which evidently belongs to that dark hour of his life, and made
it possible for the hunted king, with his feeble band, to sing even
then, 'I will both lay me down in peace and sleep, for Thou, Lord,
makest me dwell in safety, solitary though I am.'

Nor is the vision emptied of its power to stay and make brave by all
the ages that have passed. The vision was for a moment; the fact is for
ever. The sun's ray was flashed back from celestial armour, 'the next
all unreflected shone' on the lonely wastes of the desert--but the host
of God was there still. The transitory appearance of the permanent
realities is a revelation to us as truly as to the patriarch; and
though no angel wings may winnow the air around our road, nor any
sworded seraphim be seen on our commonplace march, we too have all the
armies of heaven with us, if we tread the path which God has marked
out, and in our weakness and trembling commit ourselves to Him. The
heavenly warriors die not, and hover around us to-day, excelling in the
strength of their immortal youth, and as ready to succour us as they
were all these centuries ago to guard the solitary Jacob.

Better still, the 'Captain of the Lord's host' is 'come up' to be our
defence, and our faith has not only to behold the many ministering
spirits sent forth to minister to us, but One mightier than they, whose
commands they all obey, and who Himself is the companion of our
solitude and the shield of our defencelessness. It was blessed that
Jacob should be met by the many angels of God. It is infinitely more
blessed that '_the_ Angel of the Lord'--the One who is more than the
many--'encampeth round about them that fear Him, and delivereth them.'

The postscript of the last letter which Gordon sent from Khartoum
closed with the words, 'The hosts are with me--Mahanaim.' Were they
not, even though death was near? Was that sublime faith a mistake--the
vision an optical delusion? No, for their ranks are arrayed around
God's children to keep them from all evil while He wills that they
should live, and their chariots of fire and horses of fire are sent to
bear them to heaven when He wills that they should die.




THE TWOFOLD WRESTLE--GOD'S WITH JACOB AND JACOB'S WITH GOD


    'And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of
    my father Isaac, the Lord which saidst unto me, Return
    unto thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will deal
    well with thee: I am not worthy of the least of all the
    mercies, and of all the truth, which Thou hast shewed
    unto Thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this
    Jordan; and now I am become two bands. Deliver me, I
    pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand
    of Esau: for I fear him, lest he will come and smite me,
    and the mother with the children. And Thou saidst, I
    will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand
    of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.'
    --GENESIS xxxii. 9-12.

Jacob's subtlety and craft were, as is often the case, the weapons of a
timid as well as selfish nature. No wonder, then, that the prospect of
meeting his wronged and strong brother threw him into a panic,
notwithstanding the vision of the camp of angels by the side of his
defenceless caravan of women and children. Esau had received his abject
message of propitiation in grim silence, sent no welcome back, but with
ominous haste and ambiguous purpose began his march towards him with a
strong force. A few hours will decide whether he means revenge. Jacob's
fright does not rob him of his ready wit; he goes to work at once to
divide his party, so as to ensure safety for half of it. He schemes
first, and prays second. The order might have been inverted with
advantage, but is like the man--in the lowest phase of his character.
His prayer shows that he is beginning to profit by the long years of
schooling. Though its burden is only deliverance from Esau, it pleads
with God on the grounds of His own command and promise, of Jacob's
unworthiness of God's past mercies, and of His firm covenant. A breath
of a higher life is stirring in the shifty schemer who has all his life
been living by his wits. Now he has come to a point where he knows that
his own power can do nothing. With Laban, a man of craft like himself,
it was diamond cut diamond; and Jacob was equal to the position. But
the wild Bedouin brother, with his four hundred men, is not to be
managed so; and Jacob is driven to God by his conscious helplessness.
It is the germ, but only the germ, and needs much tending and growth
before it matures. The process by which this faint dawning of a better
life is broadened into day is begun in the mysterious struggle which
forms the main part of this lesson, and is God's answer to his prayer.

1. We have, first, the twofold wrestling. The silent night-long wrestle
with the 'traveller unknown' is generally regarded as meaning
essentially the same thing as the wonderful colloquy which follows. But
I venture to take a somewhat different point of view, and to suggest
that there are here two well-marked stages. In the first, which is
represented as transacted in unbroken silence, 'a man' wrestles with
Jacob, and does not prevail; in the second, which is represented as an
interchange of speech, Jacob strives with the 'man,' and does prevail.
Taken together, the two are a complete mirror, not only of the manner
of the transformation of Jacob into Israel, but of universal eternal
truths as to God's dealings with us, and our power with Him.

As to the former stage, the language of the narrative is to be noted,
'There wrestled a man with him.' The attack, so to speak, begins with
his mysterious antagonist, not with the patriarch. The 'man' seeks to
overcome Jacob, not Jacob the man. There, beneath the deep heavens, in
the solemn silence of night, which hides earth and reveals heaven, that
strange struggle with an unknown Presence is carried on. We have no
material for pronouncing on the manner of it, whether ecstasy, vision,
or an objective and bodily fact. The body was implicated in the
consequences, at all events, and the impression which the story leaves
is of an outward struggle. But the purpose of the incident is the same,
however the question as to its form be answered. Nor can we pronounce,
as some have done, on the other question, of the personality of the
silent wrestler. Angel, or 'the angel of the covenant,' who is a
transient, and possibly only apparent, manifestation in human form of
Him who afterwards became flesh and dwelt among us, or some other
supernatural embodiment, for that one purpose, of the divine
presence,--any of these hypotheses is consistent with the intentionally
reticent text. What it leaves unspoken, we shall wisely leave
undetermined. God acts and speaks through 'the man.' That is all we can
know or need.

What, then, was the meaning of this struggle? Was it not a revelation
to Jacob of what God had been doing with him all his life, and was
still doing? Was not that merciful striving of God with him the inmost
meaning of all that had befallen him since the far-off day when he had
left his father's tents, and had seen the opened heavens, and the
ladder, which he had so often forgotten? Were not his disappointments,
his successes, and all the swift changes of life, God's attempts to
lead him to yield himself up, and bow his will? And was not God
striving with him now, in the anxieties which gnawed at his heart, and
in his dread of the morrow? Was He not trying to teach him how crime
always comes home to roost, with a brood of pains running behind it?
Was not the weird duel in the brooding stillness a disclosure, which
would more and more possess his soul as the night passed on, of a
Presence which in silence strove with him, and only desired to overcome
that He might bless? The conception of a Divine manifestation wrestling
all night long with a man has been declared 'crude,' 'puerile,' and I
know not how many other disparaging adjectives have been applied to it.
But is it more unworthy of Him, or derogatory to His nature, than the
lifelong pleading and striving with each of us, which He undoubtedly
carries on? The idea of a man contending with God has been similarly
stigmatised; but is it more mysterious than that awful power which the
human will does possess of setting at naught His counsels and resisting
His merciful strivings?

The close of the first stage of the twofold wrestle is marked by the
laming of Jacob. The paradox that He, who could not overcome, could yet
lame by a touch, is part of the lesson. If His finger could do that,
what would the grip of His hand do, if He chose to put out His power?
It is not for want of strength that He has not crushed the antagonist,
as Jacob would feel, with deepening wonder and awe. What a new light
would be thus thrown on all the previous struggle! It was the striving
of a power which cared not for a mere outward victory, nor put forth
its whole force, lest it should crush him whom it desired to conquer
only by his own yielding. As Job says, 'Will He plead against me with
His great power?' No; God mercifully restrains His hand, in His
merciful striving with men. Desiring to overcome them, He desires not
to do so by mere superior power, but by their willing yielding to Him.

That laming of Jacob's thigh represents the weakening of all the life
of nature and self which had hitherto been his. He had trusted to his
own cunning and quick-wittedness; he had been shrewd, not
over-scrupulous, and successful. But he had to learn that 'by strength
shall no man prevail,' and to forsake his former weapons. Wrestling
with his hands and limbs is not the way to prevail either with God or
man. Fighting with God in his own strength, he is only able to thwart
God's merciful purpose towards him, but is powerless as a reed in a
giant's grasp if God chooses to summon His destructive powers into
exercise. So this failure of natural power is the turning-point in the
twofold wrestle, and marks as well as symbolises the transition in
Jacob's life and character from reliance upon self and craft to
reliance upon his divine Antagonist become his Friend. It is the path
by which we must all travel if we are to become princes with God. The
life of nature and of dependence on self must be broken and lamed in
order that, in the very moment of discovered impotence, we may grasp
the hand that smites, and find immortal power flowing into our weakness
from it.

2. So we come to the second stage, in which Jacob strives with God and
does prevail. 'Let me go, for the day breaketh.' Then did the stranger
wish to go; and if he did, why could not he, who had lamed his
antagonist, loose himself from his grasp? The same explanation applies
here which is required in reference to Christ's action to the two
disciples at Emmaus: 'He made as though He would have gone further.' In
like manner, when He came to them on the water, He appeared as though
He 'would have passed by.' In all three cases the principle is the
same. God desires to go, if we do not desire Him to stay. He will go,
unless we keep Him. Then, at last, Jacob betakes himself to his true
weapons. Then, at last, he strangely wishes to keep his apparent foe.
He has learned, in some dim fashion, whom he has been resisting, and
the blessedness of having Him for friend and companion. So here comes
in the account of the whole scene which Hosea gives (Hos. xii. 4): 'He
wept, and made supplication unto Him.' That does not describe the
earlier portion, but is the true rendering of the later stage, of which
our narrative gives a more summary account. The desire to retain God
binds Him to us. All His struggling with us has been aimed at evoking
it, and all His fulness responds to it when evoked. Prayer is power. It
conquers God. We overcome Him when we yield. When we are vanquished, we
are victors. When the life of nature is broken within us, then from
conscious weakness springs the longing which God cannot but satisfy.
'When I am weak, then am I strong.' As Charles Wesley puts it, in his
grand hymn on this incident:--

  'Yield to me now, for I am weak,
   But confident in self-despair.'

And God prevails when we prevail. His aim in all the process of His
mercy has been but to overcome our heavy earthliness and selfishness,
which resists His pleading love. His victory is our yielding, and, in
that yielding, obtaining power with Him. He delights to be held by the
hand of faith, and ever gladly yields to the heart's cry, 'Abide with
me.' I will not let Thee go, except Thou bless me,' is music to His
ear; and our saying so, in earnest, persistent clinging to Him, is His
victory as well as ours.

3. We have, next, the new name, which is the prize of Jacob's victory,
and the sign of a transformation in his character. Before this time he
had been Jacob, the worker with wiles, who supplanted his brother, and
met his foes with duplicity and astuteness like their own. He had been
mainly of the earth, earthy. But that solemn hour had led him into the
presence-chamber, the old craft had been mortally wounded, he had seen
some glimpse of God as his friend, whose presence was not 'awful,' as
he had thought it long ago, nor enigmatical and threatening, as he had
at first deemed it that night, but the fountain of blessing and the one
thing needful. A man who has once learned that lesson, though
imperfectly, has passed into a purer region, and left behind him his
old crookedness. He has learned to pray, not as before, prayers for
mere deliverance from Esau and the like, but his whole being has gone
out in yearning for the continual nearness of his mysterious
antagonist-friend. So, though still the old nature remains, its power
is broken, and he is a new creature. Therefore he needs a new name, and
gets it from Him who can name men, because He sees the heart's depths,
and because He has the right over them. To impose a name is the sign of
authority, possession, insight into character. The change of name
indicates a new epoch in a life, or a transformation of the inner man.
The meaning of 'Israel' is 'He (who) strives with God'; and the reason
for its being conferred is more accurately given by the Revised
Version, which translates, 'For thou hast striven with God and with
men,' than in the Authorised rendering. His victory with God involved
the certainty of his power with men. All his life he had been trying to
get the advantage of them, and to conquer them, not by spear and sword,
but by his brains. But now the true way to true sway among men is
opened to him. All men are the servants of the servant and the friend
of God. He who has the ear of the emperor is master of many men.

Jacob is not always called Israel in his subsequent history. His new
name was a name of character and of spiritual standing, and that might
fluctuate, and the old self resume its power; so he is still called by
the former appellation, just as, at certain points in his life, the
apostle forfeits the right to be 'Peter,' and has to hear from Christ's
lips the old name, the use of which is more poignant than many
reproachful words; 'Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have
you.' But in the last death-bed scene, when the patriarch lifted
himself in his bed, and with prophetic dignity pronounced his parting
benediction on Joseph's sons, the new name reappears with solemn pathos.

That name was transmitted to his descendants, and has passed over to
the company of believing men, who have been overcome by God, and have
prevailed with God. It is a charter and a promise. It is a stringent
reminder of duty and a lofty ideal. A true Christian is an 'Israel.'
His office is to wrestle with God. Nor can we forget how this
mysterious scene was repeated in yet more solemn fashion, beneath the
gnarled olives of Gethsemane, glistening in the light of the paschal
full moon, when the true Israel prayed with such sore crying and tears
that His body partook of the struggle, and 'His sweat was as it were
great drops of blood falling down to the ground.' The word which
describes Christ's agony is that which is often rendered 'wrestling,'
and perhaps is selected with intentional allusion to this incident. At
all events, when we think of Jacob by the brook Jabbok, and of a
'greater than our father Jacob' by the brook Kedron, we may well learn
what persistence, what earnestness and effort of the whole nature, go
to make up the ideal of prayer, and may well blush for the miserable
indifference and torpor of what we venture to call our prayers. These
are our patterns, 'as many as walk according to this rule,' and are
thereby shown to be 'the Israel of God,'--upon them shall be peace.

4. We have, as the end of all, a deepened desire after closer knowledge
of God, and the answer to it. Some expositors (as, for instance,
Robertson of Brighton, in his impressive sermon on this section) take
the closing petition, 'Tell me, I pray thee, Thy name,' as if it were
the centre point of the whole incident. But this is obviously a partial
view. The desire to know that name does not come to Jacob, as we might
have expected, when he was struggling with his unknown foe in the dark
there. It is the end, and, in some sense, the issue, of all that has
gone before. Not that he was in any doubt as to the person to whom he
spoke; it is just because he knows that he is speaking with God, who
alone can bless, that he longs to have some deeper, clearer knowledge
still of Him. He is not asking for a word by which he may call Him; the
name is the expression of the nature, and his parting request is for
something far more intimate and deep than syllables which could be
spoken by any lips. The certain sequel of the discovery of God as
striving in mercy with a man, and of yielding to him, is the thirst for
deeper acquaintance with Him, and for a fuller, more satisfying
knowledge of His inmost heart. If the season of mysterious intercourse
must cease, and day hide more than it discloses, and Jacob go to face
Esau, and we come down from the mount to sordid cares and mean tasks,
at least we long to bear with us as a love-token some whisper in our
inmost hearts that may cheer us with the peaceful truth about Him and
be a hidden sweetness. The presence of such a desire is a sure
consequence, and therefore a good test, of real prayer.

The Divine answer, which sounds at first like refusal, is anything but
that. Why dost thou ask after My name? surely I need not to give thee
more revelation of My character. Thou hast enough of light; what thou
needest is insight into what thou hast already. We have in what God has
made known of Himself already to us--both in His outward revelation,
which is so much larger and sweeter to us than it was to Jacob, but
also in His providences, and in the inward communion which we have with
Him if we have let Him overcome us, and have gained power to prevail
with Him--sources of certain knowledge of Him so abundant and precious
that we need nothing but the loving eye which shall take in all their
beauty and completeness, to have our most eager desires after His name
more than satisfied. We need not ask for more sunshine, but take care
to spread ourselves out in the full sunshine which we have, and let it
drench our eyes and fire our hearts. 'And He blessed him there.' Not
till now was he capable of receiving the full blessing. He needed to
have self beaten out of him; he needed to recognise God as lovingly
striving with Him; he needed to yield himself up to Him; he needed to
have his heart thus cleansed and softened, and then opened wide by
panting desire for the presence and benediction of God; he needed to be
made conscious of his new standing, and of the higher life budding
within him; he needed to experience the yearning for a closer vision of
the face, a deeper knowledge of the name,--and then it was possible to
pour into his heart a tenderness and fulness of blessing which before
there had been no room to receive, and which now answered in sweetest
fashion the else unanswered desire, 'Tell me, I pray thee, Thy name.'

In like manner we may each be blessed with the presence and benediction
of Him whose merciful strivings, when we knew Him not, came to us in
the darkness; and to whom, if we yield, there will be peace and power
in our hearts, and upon us, too, the sun will rise as we pass from the
place where our foe became our friend, and by faith we saw Him face to
face, and drank in life by the gaze.




A FORGOTTEN VOW


    'Arise, go up to Beth-el, and dwell there: and make
    there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when
    thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother,'
    GENESIS XXXV. 1.

Thirty years at least had passed since Jacob's vow; ten or twenty since
his return. He is in no haste to fulfil it, but has settled down at
Shechem and bought land there, and seems to have forgotten all about
Bethel.

1. _The lesson of possible negligence_.

(_a_) We are apt to forget vows when God has fulfilled His side of
them. Resolutions made in time of trouble are soon forgotten. We pray
and think about God more then than when things go well with us.
Religion is in many men's judgment for stormy weather only.

(_b_) We are often more resolved to make sacrifices in the beginning of
our Christian course than afterwards.

Many a brilliant morning is followed by cloudy day.

Youth is often full of enthusiasms which after-days forget.

2._ The reasons for the negligence_.

Jacob felt a gradual fading away of impressions of need. He was
comfortably settled at Shechem. He was surrounded by a wild, godless
household who cherished their idols, and he knew that if he went to
Bethel idolatry must be given up.

3. _The essentials to communion and service_.

Surrender. Purity. Must bury idols under oak.

4._The reward of sacrifice and of duty discharged_.

The renewed appearance of God. The confirmation of name Israel.
Enlarged promises. So the old man's vision may be better than the
youth's, if he lives up to his youthful vows.




THE TRIALS AND VISIONS OF DEVOUT YOUTH


    'And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a
    stranger, in the land of Canaan. These are the generations
    of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding
    the flock with his brethren; and the lad was with the
    sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's
    wives: and Joseph brought unto his father their evil
    report. Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his children,
    because he was the son of his old age: and he made him
    a coat of many colours. And when his brethren saw that
    their father loved him more than all his brethren, they
    hated him, and could not speak peaceably unto him. And
    Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it his brethren: and
    they hated him yet the more. And he said unto them, Hear,
    I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed: For, behold,
    we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf
    arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves
    stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf. And
    his brethren said to him, Shalt thou indeed reign over
    us? or shalt thou Indeed have dominion over us? And they
    hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.
    And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren,
    and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and behold,
    the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance
    to me. And he told it to his father, and to his brethren:
    and his father rebuked him, and said unto him, What is
    this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I and thy mother
    and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to
    thee to the earth? And his brethren envied him; but his
    father observed the saying.'--GENESIS xxxvii. 1-11.

'The generations of Jacob' are mainly occupied with the history of
Joseph, because through him mainly was the divine purpose carried on.
Jacob is now the head of the chosen family, since Isaac's death (Gen.
xxxv. 29), and therefore the narrative is continued under that new
heading. There may possibly be intended a contrast in 'dwelt' and
'sojourned' in verse 1, the former implying a more complete settling
down.

There are two principal points in this narrative,--the sad insight that
it gives into the state of the household in which so much of the
world's history and hopes was wrapped up, and the preludings of
Joseph's future in his dreams.

As to the former, the account of it is introduced by the statement that
Joseph, at seventeen years of age, was set to work, according to the
wholesome Eastern usage, and so was thrown into the company of the sons
of the two slave-women, Bilhah and Zilpah. Delitzsch understands 'lad'
in verse 2 in the sense in which we use 'boy,' as meaning an attendant.
Joseph was, then, told off to be subordinate to these two sets of his
rough brothers. The relationship was enough to rouse hatred in such
coarse souls. And, indeed, the history of Jacob's household strikingly
illustrates the miserable evils of polygamy, which makes families
within the family, and turns brothers into enemies. Bilhah's and
Zilpah's sons reflected in their hatred of Rachel's their mothers' envy
of the true wife of Jacob's heart. The sons of the bondwoman were sure
to hate the sons of the free.

If Joseph had been like his brothers, they would have forgiven him his
mother. But he was horrified at his first glimpse of unrestrained young
passions, and, in the excitement of disgust and surprise, 'told their
evil report.' No doubt, his brothers had been unwilling enough to be
embarrassed by his presence, for there is nothing that wild young men
dislike more than the constraint put on them by the presence of an
innocent youth; and when they found out that this 'milk-sop' of a
brother was a spy and a telltale, their wrath blazed up. So Joseph had
early experience of the shock which meets all young men who have been
brought up in godly households when they come into contact with sin in
fellow-clerks, servants, students, or the like. It is a sharp test of
what a young man is made of, to come forth from the shelter of a
father's care and a mother's love, and to be forced into witnessing and
hearing such things as go on wherever a number of young men are thrown
together. Be not 'partaker of other men's sins.' And the trial is
doubly great when the tempters are elder brothers, and the only way to
escape their unkindness is to do as they do. Joseph had an early
experience of the need of resistance; and, as long as the world is a
world, love to God will mean hatred from its worst elements. If we are
'sons of the day,' we cannot but rebuke the darkness.

It is an invidious office to tell other people's evil-doing, and he who
brings evil reports of others generally and deservedly gets one for
himself. But there are circumstances in which to do so is plain duty,
and only a mistaken sense of honour keeps silence. But there must be no
exaggeration, malice, or personal ends in the informer. Classmates in
school or college, fellow-servants, employees in great businesses, and
the like, have not only a duty of loyalty to one another, but of
loyalty to their superior. We are sometimes bound to be blind to, and
dumb about, our associates' evil deeds, but sometimes silence makes us
accomplices.

Jacob had a right to know, and Joseph would have been wrong if he had
not told him, the truth about his brothers. Their hatred shows that his
purity had made their doing wrong more difficult. It is a grand thing
when a young man's presence deprives the Devil of elbow-room for his
tricks. How much restraining influence such a one may exert!

Jacob's somewhat foolish love, and still more foolish way of showing
it, made matters worse. There were many excuses for him. He naturally
clung to the son of his lost but never-forgotten first love, and as
naturally found, in Joseph's freedom from the vices of his other sons,
a solace and joy. It has been suggested that the 'long garment with
sleeves,' in which he decked the lad, indicated an intention of
transferring the rights of the first-born to him, but in any case it
meant distinguishing affection; and the father or mother who is weak
enough to show partiality in the treatment of children need not wonder
if their unwise love creates bitter heart-burnings. Perhaps, if
Bilhah's and Zilpah's sons had had a little more sunshine of a father's
love, they would have borne brighter flowers and sweeter fruit. It is
fatal when a child begins to suspect that a parent is not fair.

So these surly brothers, who could not even say 'Peace be to thee!'
(the common salutation) when they came across Joseph, had a good deal
to say for themselves. It is a sad picture of the internal feuds of the
house from which all nations were to be blessed. The Bible does not
idealise its characters, but lets us see the seamy side of the
tapestry, that we may the more plainly recognise the Mercy which
forgives, and the mighty Providence which works through, such imperfect
men. But the great lesson for all young people from the picture of
Joseph's early days, when his whiteness rebuked the soiled lives of his
brothers, as new-fallen snow the grimy cake, hardened and soiled on the
streets, is, 'My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.' Never
mind a world's hatred, if you have a father's love. There is one Father
who can draw His obedient children into the deepest secrets of His
heart without withholding their portion from the most prodigal.

Joseph's dreams are the other principal point in the narrative. The
chief incidents of his life turn on dreams,--his own, his
fellow-prisoners', Pharaoh's. The narrative recognises them as divinely
sent, and no higher form of divine communication appears to have been
made to Joseph, He received no new revelations of religious truth. His
mission was, not to bring fresh messages from heaven, but to effect the
transference of the nation to Egypt. Hence the lower form of the
communications made to him.

The meaning of both dreams is the same, but the second goes beyond the
first in the grandeur of the emblems, and in the inclusion of the
parents in the act of obeisance. Both sets of symbols were drawn from
familiar sights. The homeliness of the 'sheaves' is in striking
contrast with the grandeur of the 'sun, moon, and stars.' The
interpretation of the first is ready to hand, because the sheaves were
'your sheaves' and 'my sheaf.' There was no similar key included in the
second, and his brothers do not appear to have caught its meaning. It
was Jacob who read it. Probably Rachel was dead when the dream came,
but that need not make a difficulty.

Note that Joseph did not tell his dreams with elation, or with a notion
that they meant anything particular. It is plainly the singularity of
them that makes him repeat them, as is clearly indicated by the
repeated 'behold' in his two reports. With perfect innocence of
intention, and as he would have told any other strange dream, the lad
repeats them. The commentary was the work of his brothers, who were
ready to find proofs of his being put above them, and of his wish to
humiliate them, in anything he said or did. They were wiser than he
was. Perhaps they suspected that Jacob meant to set him at the head of
the clan on his decease, and that the dreams were trumped up and told
to them to prepare them for the decision which the special costume may
have already hinted.

At all events, hatred is very suspicious, and ready to prick up its
ears at every syllable that seems to speak of the advancement of its
object.

There is a world of contempt, rage, and fear in the questions, 'Shalt
thou indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us?'
The conviction that Joseph was marked out by God for a high position
seems to have entered these rough souls, and to have been fuel to fire.
Hatred and envy make a perilous mixture. Any sin can come from a heart
drenched with these. Jacob seems to have been wise enough to make light
of the dreams to the lad, though much of them in his heart. Youthful
visions of coming greatness are often best discouraged. The surest way
to secure their fulfilment is to fill the present with strenuous,
humble work. 'Do the duty that is nearest thee.' 'The true
apprenticeship for a ruler is to serve.' 'Act, act, in the living
present.' The sheaves may come to bow down some day, but 'my sheaf' has
to be cut and bound first, and the sooner the sickle is among the corn,
the better.

But yet, on the other hand, let young hearts be true to their early
visions, whether they say much about them or not. Probably it will be
wisest to keep silence. But there shine out to many young men and
women, at their start in life, bright possibilities of no ignoble sort,
and rising higher than personal ambition, which it is the misery and
sin of many to see 'fade away into the light of common day,' or into
the darkness of night. Be not 'disobedient to the heavenly vision'; for
the dreams of youth are often the prophecies of what God means and
makes it possible for the dreamer to be, if he wakes to work towards
that fair thing which shone on him from afar.




MAN'S PASSIONS AND GOD'S PURPOSE


    'And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his
    brethren, that they stript Joseph out of his coat, his
    coat of many colours that was on him; And they took him,
    and cast him into a pit: and the pit was empty, there
    was no water in it. And they sat down to eat bread: and
    they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a
    company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their
    camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to
    carry it down to Egypt. And Judah said unto his brethren,
    What profit is it if we slay our brother, and conceal
    his blood! Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmeelites,
    and let not our hand be upon him; for he is our brother
    and our flesh. And his brethren were content. Then there
    passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and
    lifted up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the
    Ishmeelites for twenty pieces of silver: and they brought
   Joseph into Egypt. And Reuben returned unto the pit; and,
    behold, Joseph was not in the pit; and he rent his
    clothes. And he returned unto his brethren, and said,
    The child is not; and I, whither shall I go? And they
    took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and
    dipped the coat in the blood; And they sent the coat of
    many colours, and they brought it to their father; and
    said, This have we found: know now whether it be thy
    son's coat or no. And he knew it, and said, It is my
    son's coat; an evil beast hath devoured him; Joseph is
    without doubt rent in pieces. And Jacob rent his clothes,
    and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his
    son many days. And all his sons and all his daughters
    rose up to comfort him; but he refused to be comforted;
    and he said, For I will go down into the grave unto my
    son mourning. Thus his father wept for him. And the
    Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an officer
    of Pharaoh's and captain of the guard.'--GENESIS xxxvii. 23-36.

We have left the serene and lofty atmosphere of communion and saintship
far above us. This narrative takes us down into foul depths. It is a
hideous story of vulgar hatred and cruelty. God's name is never
mentioned in it; and he is as far from the actors' thoughts as from the
writer's words. The crime of the brothers is the subject, and the
picture is painted in dark tones to teach large truths about sin.
