the Sun himself in energy, and set their hearts on acquiring the regions
of Brahman.

"'Thus hath been recited by me, as heard in the Purana, of progeny of the
gods and the Asuras, both of great strength and energy. I am incapable, O
king, of counting the descendants of these, countless as they are, are not
much known to fame.

"'And the sons of Vinata were Tarkhya and Arishtanemi, and Garuda and
Aruna, and Aruni and Varuni. And Sesha of Ananta, Vasuki, Takshaka, Kumara,
and Kulika are known to be the sons of Kadru; and Bhimasena, Ugrasena,
Suparna, Varuna, Gopati, and Dhritarashtra, and Suryavarchas the seventh,
Satyavachas, Arkaparna, Prayuta, Bhima, and Chitraratha known to fame, of
great learning, and a controller of his passions, and then Kalisiras, and,
O king, Parjanya, the fourteenth in the list, Kali, the fifteenth, and
Narada, the sixteenth--these Devas and Gandharvas are known to be the sons
of Muni (Daksha's daughter as mentioned before). I shall recount many
others, O Bharata! Anavadya Manu, Vansa, Asura, Marganapria, Anupa,
Subhaga, Vasi, were the daughters brought forth by Pradha, Siddha, and
Purna, and Varhin, and Purnayus of great fame, Brahmacharin, Ratiguna, and
Suparna who was the seventh; Viswavasu, Bhanu, and Suchandra who was the
tenth, were also the sons of Pradha. All these were celestial Gandharvas.
And it is also known that this Pradha of great fortune, through the
celestial Rishi (Kasyapa, her husband), brought forth the sacred of the
Apsaras, Alamvusha, Misrakesi, Vidyutparna, Tilottama, Aruna, Rakshita,
Rambha, Manorama, Kesini, Suvahu, Surata, Suraja, and Supria were the
daughters, and Ativahu and the celebrated Haha and Huhu, and Tumvuru were
the sons--the best of Gandharvas--of Pradha and Amrita. The Brahmanas,
kine, Gandharvas, and Apsaras, were born of Kapila as stated in the Purana.

"'Thus hath been recited to thee by me the birth of all creatures duly--of
Gandharvas and Apsaras, of Snakes, Suparnas, Rudras, and Maruts; of kine
and of Brahmanas blessed with great good fortune, and of sacred deeds. And
this account (if read) extendeth the span of life, is sacred, worthy of
all praise, and giveth pleasure to the ear. It should be always heard and
recited to others, in a proper frame of mind.

"'He who duly readeth this account of the birth of all high-souled
creatures in the presence of the gods and Brahmanas, obtaineth large
progeny, good fortune, and fame, and attaineth also to excellent worlds
hereafter.'"


SECTION LXVI

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'It is known that the spiritual sons of Brahman were
the six great Rishis (already mentioned). There was another of the name of
Sthanu. And the sons of Sthanu, gifted with great energy, were, it is
known, eleven. They were Mrigavayadha, Sarpa, Niriti of great fame:
Ajaikapat, Ahivradhna, and Pinaki, the oppressor of foes; Dahana and
Iswara, and Kapali of great splendour; and Sthanu, and the illustrious
Bharga. These are called the eleven Rudras. It hath been already said,
that Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, and Kratu--these six great
Rishis of great energy--are the sons of Brahman. It is well-known in the
world that Angiras's sons are three,--Vrihaspati, Utathya, and Samvarta,
all of rigid vows. And, O king, it is said that the sons of Atri are
numerous. And, being great Rishis, they are all conversant with the Vedas,
crowned with ascetic success, and of souls in perfect peace. And, O tiger
among kings, the sons of Pulastya of great wisdom are Rakshasas, Monkeys,
Kinnaras (half-men and half-horses), and Yakshas. And, O king, the sons of
Pulaha were, it is said, the Salabhas (the winged insects), the lions, the
Kimpurushas (half-lions and half-men), the tigers, bears, and wolves. And
the sons of Kratu, sacred as sacrifices, are the companions of Surya, the
Valikhilyas, known in three worlds and devoted to truth and vows. And, O
protector of the Earth, the illustrious Rishi Daksha, of soul in complete
peace, and of great asceticism, sprung from the right toe of Brahman. And
from the left toe of Brahman sprang the wife of the high-souled Daksha.
And the Muni begat upon her fifty daughters; and all those daughters were
of faultless features and limbs and of eyes like lotus-petals. And the
lord Daksha, not having any sons, made those daughters his Putrikas (so
that their sons might belong both to himself and to their husbands). And
Daksha bestowed, according to the sacred ordinance, ten of his daughters
on Dharma, twenty-seven on Chandra (the Moon), and thirteen on Kasyapa.
Listen as I recount the wives of Dharma according to their names. They are
ten in all--Kirti, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Medha, Pushti, Sraddha, Kria, Buddhi,
Lajja, and Mali. These are the wives of Dharma as appointed by the Self-
create. It is known also throughout the world that the wives of Soma
(Moon) are twenty-seven. And the wives of Soma, all of sacred vows, are
employed in indicating time; and they are the Nakshatras and the Yoginis
and they became so for assisting the courses of the worlds.

"'And Brahman had another son named Manu. And Manu had a son of the name of
Prajapati. And the sons of Prajapati were eight and were called Vasus whom
I shall name in detail. They were Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Aha, Anila, Anala,
Pratyusha, and Prabhasa. These eight are known as the Vasus. Of these,
Dhara and the truth-knowing Dhruva were born of Dhumra; Chandramas (Soma)
and Swasana (Anila) were born of the intelligent Swasa; Aha was the son of
Rata; and Hutasana (Anala) of Sandilya; and Pratyusha and Prabhasa were
the sons of Prabhata. And Dhara had two sons, Dravina and Huta-havya-vaha.
And the son of Dhruva is the illustrious Kala (Time), the destroyer of the
worlds. And Soma's son is the resplendent Varchas. And Varchas begot upon
his wife Manohara two sons--Sisira, and Ramana. And the sons of Aha were
Jyotih, Sama, Santa, and also Muni. And the son of Agni is the handsome
Kumara born in a forest of reeds. And, he is also called Kartikeya because
he was reared by Krittika and others. And, after Kartikeya, there were
born his three brothers Sakha, Visakha, Naigameya. And the wife of Anila
is Siva, and Siva's son were Manojava and Avijnataagati. These two were
the sons of Anila. The son of Pratyusha, you must know, is the Rishi named
Devala; and Devala had two sons who were both exceedingly forgiving and of
great mental power. And the sister of Vrihaspati, the first of women,
uttering the sacred truth, engaged in ascetic penances, roamed over the
whole earth; and she became the wife of Prabhasa, the eighth Vasu. And she
brought forth the illustrious Viswakarman, the founder of all arts. And he
was the originator of a thousand arts, the engineer of the immortals, the
maker of all kinds of ornaments, and the first of artists. And he it was
who constructed the celestial cars of the gods, and mankind are enabled to
live in consequence of the inventions of that illustrious one. And he is
worshipped, for that reason, by men. And he is eternal and immutable, this
Viswakarman.

"'And the illustrious Dharma, the dispenser of all happiness, assuming a
human countenance, came out through the right breast of Brahman. And
Ahasta (Dharma) hath three excellent sons capable of charming every
creature. And they are Sama, Kama, Harsha (Peace, Desire, and Joy). And by
their energy they are supporting the worlds. And the wife of Kama is Rati,
of Sama is Prapti; and the wife of Harsha is Nanda. And upon them, indeed,
are the worlds made to depend.

"'And the son of Marichi is Kasyapa. And Kasyapa's offspring are the gods
and the Asuras. And, therefore, is Kasyapa, the Father of the worlds. And
Tvashtri, of the form of Vadava (a mare), became the wife of Savitri. And
she gave birth, in the skies, to two greatly fortunate twins, the Aswins.
And, O king, the sons of Aditi are twelve with Indra heading them all. And
the youngest of them all was Vishnu upon whom the worlds depend.

"'These are the thirty-three gods (the eight Vasus, the eleven Rudras, the
twelve Adityas, Prajapati, and Vashatkara). I shall now recount their
progeny according to their Pakshas, Kulas, and Ganas. The Rudras, the
Saddhyas, the Maruts, the Vasus, the Bhargavas, and the Viswedevas are
each reckoned as a Paksha. Garuda the son of Vinata and the mighty Aruna
also, and the illustrious Vrihaspati are reckoned among the Adityas. The
twin Aswins, all annual plants, and all inferior animals, are reckoned
among the Guhyakas.

"'These are the Ganas of the gods recited to thee, O king! This recitation
washes men of all sins.

"'The illustrious Bhrigu came out, ripping open the breast of Brahman. The
learned Sukra is Bhrigu's son. And the learned Sukra becoming a planet and
engaged according to the command of the Self-existent in pouring and
withholding rain, and in dispensing and remitting calamities, traverses,
for sustaining the lives of all the creatures in the three worlds, through
the skies. And the learned Sukra, of great intelligence and wisdom, of
rigid vows, leading the life of a Brahmacharin, divided himself in twain
by power of asceticism, and became the spiritual guide of both the Daityas
and the gods. And after Sukra was thus employed by Brahman in seeking the
welfare (of the gods and the Asuras), Bhrigu begot another excellent son.
This was Chyavana who was like the blazing sun, of virtuous soul, and of
great fame. And he came out of his mother's womb in anger and became the
cause of his mother's release, O king (from the hands of the Rakshasas).
And Arushi, the daughter of Manu, became the wife of the wise Chyavana.
And on her was begotten Aurva of great reputation. And he came out,
ripping open the thigh of Arushi. And Aurva begot Richika. And Richika
even in his boyhood became possessed of great power and energy, and of
every virtue. And Richika begot Jamadagni. And the high-souled Jamadagni
had four sons. And the youngest of them all was Rama (Parasurama). And
Rama was superior to all his brothers in the possession of good qualities.
And he was skilful in all weapons, and became the slayer of the Kshatriyas.
And he had his passions under complete control. And Aurva had a hundred
sons with Jamadagni the eldest. And these hundred sons had offspring by
thousands spread over this earth.

"'And Brahman had two other sons, viz., Dhatri and Vidhatri who stayed with
Manu. Their sister is the auspicious Lakshmi having her abode amid lotuses.
And the spiritual sons of Lakshmi are the sky-ranging horses. And the
daughter born of Sukra, named Divi, became the eldest wife of Varuna. Of
her were born a son named Vala and a daughter named Sura (wine), to the
joy of the gods. And Adharma (Sin) was born when creatures (from want of
food) began to devour one another. And Adharma always destroys every
creature. And Adharma hath Niriti for his wife, whence the Rakshasas who
are called Nairitas (offspring of Niriti). And she hath also three other
cruel sons always engaged in sinful deeds. They are Bhaya (fear),
Mahabhaya (terror), and Mrityu (Death) who is always engaged in slaying
every created thing. And, as he is all-destroying, he hath no wife, and no
son. And Tamra brought forth five daughters known throughout the worlds.
They are Kaki (crow), Syeni (hawk), Phasi (hen), Dhritarashtri (goose),
and Suki (parrot). And Kaki brought forth the crows; Syeni, the hawks, the
cocks and vultures; Dhritarashtri, all ducks and swans; and she also
brought forth all Chakravakas; and the fair Suki, of amiable qualities,
and possessing all auspicious signs brought forth all the parrots. And
Krodha gave birth to nine daughters, all of wrathful disposition. And
their names were Mrigi, Mrigamanda, Hari, Bhadramana, Matangi, Sarduli,
Sweta, Surabhi, and the agreeable Surasa blessed with every virtue. And, O
foremost of men, the offspring of Mrigi are all animals of the deer
species. And the offspring of Mrigamanda are all animals of the bear
species and those called Srimara (sweet-footed). And Bhadramana begot the
celestial elephants, Airavata. And the offspring of Hari are all animals
of the simian species endued with great activity, so also all the horses.
And those animals also, that are called Go-langula (the cow-tailed), are
said to be the offspring of Hari. And Sarduli begot lions and tigers in
numbers, and also leopards and all other strong animals. And, O king, the
offspring of Matangi are all the elephants. And Sweta begat the large
elephant known by the name of Sweta, endued with great speed. And, O king,
Surabhi gave birth to two daughters, the amiable Rohini and the far-famed
Gandharvi. And, O Bharata, she had also two other daughters named Vimala
and Anala. From Rohini have sprung all kine, and from Gandharvi all
animals of the horse species. And Anala begat the seven kinds of trees
yielding pulpy fruits. (They are the date, the palm, the hintala, the tali,
the little date, the nut, and the cocoanut.) And she had also another
daughter called Suki (the mother of the parrot species). And Surasa bore a
son called Kanka (a species of long-feathered birds). And Syeni, the wife
of Aruna, gave birth to two sons of great energy and strength, named
Sampati and the mighty Jatayu. Surasa also bore the Nagas, and Kadru, the
Punnagas (snakes). And Vinata had two sons Garuda and Aruna, known far and
wide. And, O king of men, O foremost of intelligent persons, thus hath the
genealogy of all the principal creatures been fully described by me. By
listening to this, a man is fully cleansed of all his sins, and acquireth
great knowledge, and finally attaineth to the first of states in after-
life!'"


SECTION LXVII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Janamejaya said, 'O worshipful one, I wish to hear from thee in detail
about the birth, among men, of the gods, the Danavas, the Gandharvas, the
Rakshasas, the lions, the tigers, and the other animals, the snakes, the
birds, and in fact, of all creatures. I wish also to hear about the acts
and achievements of those, in due order, after they became incarnate in
human forms.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'O king of men, I shall first tell thee all about
those celestials and Danavas that were born among men--The first of
Danavas, who was known by the name of Viprachitti, became that bull among
men, noted as Jarasandha. And, O king, that son of Diti, who was known as
Hiranyakasipu, was known in this world among men as the powerful Sisupala.
He who had been known as Samhlada, the younger brother of Prahlada, became
among men the famous Salya, that bull amongst Valhikas. The spirited
Anuhlada who had been the youngest became noted in the world as
Dhrishtaketu. And, O king, that son of Diti who had been known as Sivi
became on earth the famous monarch Druma. And he who was known as the
great Asura Vashkala became on earth the great Bhagadatta. The five great
Asuras gifted with great energy, Ayahsira, Aswasira, the spirited Aysanku,
Gaganamurdhan, and Vegavat, were all born in the royal line of Kekaya and
all became great monarchs. That other Asura of mighty energy who was known
by the name of Ketumat became on earth the monarch Amitaujas of terrible
deeds. That great Asura who was known as Swarbhanu became on earth the
monarch Ugrasena of fierce deeds. That great Asura who was known as Aswa
became on earth the monarch Asoka of exceeding energy and invincible in
battle. And, O king, the younger brother of Aswa who was known as Aswapati,
a son of Diti, became on earth the mighty monarch Hardikya. The great and
fortunate Asura who was known as Vrishaparvan became noted on earth as
king Dirghaprajna. And, O king, the younger brother of Vrishaparvan who
was known by the name of Ajaka became noted on earth as king Salwa. The
powerful and mighty Asura who was known as Aswagriva became noted on earth
as king Rochamana. And, O king, the Asura who was known as Sukshma, endued
with great intelligence and whose achievements also were great, became on
earth the famous king Vrihadratha. And that first of Asuras who was known
by the name of Tuhunda, became noted on earth as the monarch, Senavindu.
That Asura of great strength who was known as Ishupa became the monarch
Nagnajita of famous prowess. The great Asura who was known as Ekachakra
became noted on earth as Pritivindhya. The great Asura Virupaksha capable
of displaying various modes of fight became noted on earth as king
Chitravarman. The first of Danavas, the heroic Hara, who humbled the pride
of all foes became on earth the famous and fortunate Suvahu. The Asura
Suhtra of great energy and the destroyer of foemen, became noted on earth
as the fortunate monarch, Munjakesa. That Asura of great intelligence
called Nikumbha, who was never vanquished in battle was born on earth as
king Devadhipa, the first among monarchs. That great Asura known amongst
the sons of Diti by the name of Sarabha became on earth the royal sage
called Paurava. And, O king, the great Asura of exceeding energy, the
fortunate Kupatha, was born on earth as the famous monarch Suparswa. The
great Asura, O king, who was called Kratha, was born on earth as the royal
sage Parvateya of form resplendent like a golden mountain. He amongst the
Asura who was known as Salabha the second, became on earth the monarch
Prahlada in the country of the Valhikas. The foremost, among the sons of
Diti known by the name of Chandra and handsome as the lord of the stars
himself, became on earth noted as Chandravarman, the king of the Kamvojas.
That bull amongst the Danavas who was known by the name of Arka became on
earth, O king, the royal sage Rishika. That best of Asuras who was known
as Mritapa became on earth, O best of kings, the monarch, Pascimanupaka.
That great Asura of surpassing energy known as Garishtha became noted on
earth as king Drumasena. The great Asura who was known as Mayura became
noted on earth as the monarch Viswa. He who was the younger brother of
Mayura and called Suparna became noted on earth as the monarch, Kalakirti.
The mighty Asura who was known as Chandrahantri became on earth the royal
sage Sunaka. The great Asura who was called Chandravinasana became noted
on earth as the monarch, Janaki. That bull amongst the Danavas, O prince
of the Kuru race, who was called Dhirghajihva, became noted on earth as
Kasiraja. The Graha who was brought forth by Sinhika and who persecuted
the Sun and the Moon became noted on earth as the monarch Kratha. The
eldest of the four sons of Danayu, who was known by the name of Vikshara,
became known on earth the spirited monarch, Vasumitra. The second brother
of Vikshara, the great Asura, was born on earth as the king of the country,
called Pandya. That best of Asuras who was known by the name of Valina
became on earth the monarch Paundramatsyaka. And, O king, that great Asura
who was known as Vritra became on earth the royal sage known by the name
of Manimat. That Asura who was the younger brother of Vritra and known as
Krodhahantri became noted on earth as king Danda. That other Asura who was
known by the name Krodhavardhana became noted on earth as the monarch,
Dandadhara. The eight sons of the Kaleyas that were born on earth all
became great kings endued with the prowess of tigers. The eldest of them
all became king Jayatsena in Magadha. The second of them, in prowess, like
Indra, became noted on earth as Aparajita. The third of them, endued with
great energy and power of producing deception, was born on earth as the
king of the Nishadas gifted with great prowess. That other amongst them
who was known as the fourth was noted on earth as Srenimat, that best of
royal sages. That great Asura amongst them who was the fifth, became noted
on earth as king Mahanjas, the oppressor of enemies. That great Asura
possessing great intelligence who was the sixth of them became noted on
earth as Abhiru, that best of royal sages. The seventh of them became
known throughout earth, from the centre to the sea, as king Samudrasena
well acquainted with the truths of the scriptures. The eighth of the
Kaleyas known as Vrihat became on earth a virtuous king ever engaged in
the good of all creatures. The mighty Danava known by the name of Kukshi
became on earth as Parvatiya from his brightness as of a golden mountain.
The mighty Asura Krathana gifted with great energy became noted on earth
as the monarch Suryaksha. The great Asura of handsome features known by
the name of Surya, became on earth the monarch of the Valhikas by name
Darada, that foremost of all kings. And, O king, from the tribe of Asuras
called Krodhavasa, of whom I have already spoken to thee, were born many
heroic kings on earth. Madraka, and Karnaveshta, Siddhartha, and also
Kitaka; Suvira, and Suvahu, and Mahavira, and also Valhika, Kratha,
Vichitra, Suratha, and the handsome king Nila; and Chiravasa, and
Bhumipala; and Dantavakra, and he who was called Durjaya; that tiger
amongst kings named Rukmi; and king Janamejaya, Ashada, and Vayuvega, and
also Bhuritejas; Ekalavya, and Sumitra, Vatadhana, and also Gomukha; the
tribe of kings called the Karushakas, and also Khemadhurti; Srutayu, and
Udvaha, and also Vrihatsena; Kshema, Ugratirtha, the king of the Kalingas;
and Matimat, and he was known as king Iswara; these first of kings were
all born of the Asura class called Krodhavasa.

"'There was also born on earth a mighty Asura known amongst the Danavas by
the name of Kalanemi, endued with great strength, of grand achievements,
and blessed with a large share of prosperity. He became the mighty son of
Ugrasena and was known on earth by the name of Kansa. And he who was known
among the Asuras by the name of Devaka and was besides in splendour like
unto Indra himself, was born on earth as the foremost king of the
Gandharvas. And, O monarch, know thou that Drona, the son of Bharadwaja,
not born of any woman, sprung from a portion of the celestial Rishi
Vrihaspati of grand achievements. And he was the prince of all bowmen,
conversant with all weapons, of mighty achievements, of great energy. Thou
shouldst know he was also well-acquainted with the Vedas and the science
of arms. And he was of wonderful deeds and the pride of his race. And, O
king, his son the heroic Aswatthaman, of eyes like the lotus-petals,
gifted with surpassing energy, and the terror of all foes, the great
oppressor of all enemies, was born on earth, of the united portions of
Mahadeva, Yama, Kama, and Krodha. And from the curse of Vasishtha and the
command also of Indra, the eight Vasus were born of Ganga by her husband
Santanu. The youngest of them was Bhishma, the dispeller of the fears of
the Kurus, gifted with great intelligence, conversant with the Vedas, the
first speakers, and the thinner of the enemy's ranks. And possessed of
mighty energy and the first of all persons acquainted with weapons, he
encountered the illustrious Rama himself, the son of Jamadagni of the
Bhrigu race. And, O king, that Brahman sage who, on earth, was known by
the name of Kripa and was the embodiment of all manliness was born of the
tribe of the Rudras. And the mighty chariot-fighter and king who on earth
was known by the name of Sakuni, that crusher of foes, thou shouldst know,
O king, was Dwapara himself (the third yuga). And he who was Satyaki of
sure aim, that upholder of the pride of Vrishni race, that oppressor of
foes, begotten of the portion of gods called the Maruts. And that royal
sage Drupada who on earth was a monarch, the first among all persons
bearing arms, was also born of the same tribe of the celestials. And, O
king, thou shouldst also know that Kritavarman, that prince among men, of
deeds unsurpassed by any one, and the foremost of all bulls amongst
Kshatriyas, was born of the portion of the same celestials. And that royal
sage also, Virata by name, the scorcher of the kingdoms of others, and the
great oppressor of all foes, was born of the portion of the same gods.
That son of Arishta who was known by the name of Hansa, was born in the
Kuru race and became the monarch of the Gandharvas. He who was known as
Dhritarashtra born of the seed of Krishna-Dwaipayana, and gifted with long
arms and great energy, also a monarch, of the prophetic eye, became blind
in consequence of the fault of his mother and the wrath of the Rishi. His
younger brother who was possessed of great strength and was really a great
being known as Pandu, devoted to truth and virtue, was Purity's self. And,
O king, thou shouldst know that he who was known on earth as Vidura, who
was the first of all virtuous men, who was the god of Justice himself, was
the excellent and greatly fortunate son of the Rishi Atri. The evil-minded
and wicked king Duryodhana, the destroyer of the fair fame of the Kurus,
was born of a portion of Kali on earth. He it was who caused all creatures
to be slain and the earth to be wasted; and he it was who fanned the flame
of hostility that ultimately consumed all. They who had been the sons of
Pulastya (the Rakshasas) were born on earth among men of Duryodhana's
brothers, that century of wicked individuals commencing with Duhsasana as
their first. And, O bull among the Bharata princes, Durmukha, Duhsaha, and
others whose names I do not mention, who always supported Duryodhana (in
all his schemes), were, indeed, the sons of Pulastya. And over and above
these hundred, Dhritarashtra had one son named Yuyutsu born of a Vaisya
wife.'

"Janamejaya said, 'O illustrious one, tell me the names of Dhritarashtra's
sons according to the order of their birth beginning from the eldest.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'O king, they are as follows: Duryodhana, and Yuyutsu,
and also Duhsasana; Duhsaha and Duhshala, and then Durmukha; Vivinsati,
and Vikarna, Jalasandha, Sulochna, Vinda and Anuvinda, Durdharsha, Suvahu,
Dushpradharshana; Durmarshana, and Dushkarna, and Karna; Chitra and
Vipachitra, Chitraksha, Charuchitra, and Angada, Durmada, and
Dushpradharsha, Vivitsu, Vikata, Sama; Urananabha, and Padmanabha, Nanda
and Upanandaka; Sanapati, Sushena, Kundodara; Mahodara; Chitravahu, and
Chitravarman, Suvarman, Durvirochana; Ayovahu, Mahavahu, Chitrachapa and
Sukundala, Bhimavega, Bhimavala, Valaki, Bhimavikrama, Ugrayudha,
Bhimaeara, Kanakayu, Dridhayudha, Dridhavarman, Dridhakshatra Somakirti,
Anadara; Jarasandha, Dridhasandha, Satyasandha, Sahasravaeh; Ugrasravas,
Ugrasena, and Kshemamurti; Aprajita, Panditaka, Visalaksha, Duradhara,
Dridhahasta, and Suhasta, Vatavega, and Suvarchasa; Adityaketu, Vahvasin,
Nagadatta and Anuyaina; Nishangi, Kuvachi, Dandi, Dandadhara, Dhanugraha;
Ugra, Bhimaratha, Vira, Viravahu, Alolupa; Abhaya, and Raudrakarman, also
he who was Dridharatha; Anadhrishya, Kundaveda, Viravi, Dhirghalochana;
Dirghavahu; Mahavahu; Vyudhoru, Kanakangana; Kundaja and Chitraka. There
was also a daughter named Duhsala who was over and above the hundred. And
Yuyutsu who was Dhritarashtra's son by a Vaisya wife, was also over and
above the hundred. Thus, O king, have I recited the names of the hundred
sons and also that of the daughter (of Dhritarashtra). Thou hast now known
their names according to the order of their births. All of them were
heroes and great car-warriors, and skilled in the art of warfare. Besides,
all of them were versed in the Vedas, and, O king, all of them had got
through the scriptures. All of them were mighty in attack and defence, and
all were graced with learning. And, O monarch, all of them had wives
suitable to them in grace and accomplishments. And, O king, when the time
came, the Kaurava monarch bestowed his daughter Duhsala on Jayadratha, the
king of the Sindhus, agreeably to the counsels of Sakuni.

"'And, O monarch, learn that king Yudhishthira was a portion of Dharma;
that Bhimasena was of the deity of wind; that Arjuna was of Indra, the
chief of the celestials; and that Nakula and Sahadeva, the handsomest
beings among all creatures, and unrivalled for beauty on earth, were
similarly portions of the twin Aswins. And he who was known as the mighty
Varchas, the son of Soma, became Abhimanyu of wonderful deeds, the son of
Arjuna. And before his incarnation, O king, the god Soma had said these
words to the celestials, "I cannot give (part with) my son. He is dearer
to me than life itself. Let this be the compact and let it be not
transgressed. The destruction of the Asuras on earth is the work of the
celestials, and, therefore, it is our work as well. Let this Varchas,
therefore, go thither, but let him not stay there long. Nara, whose
companion is Narayana, will be born as Indra's son and indeed, will be
known as Arjuna, the mighty son of Pandu. This boy of mine shall be his
son and become a mighty car-warrior in his boyhood. And let him, ye best
of immortals, stay on earth for sixteen years. And when he attaineth to
his sixteenth year, the battle shall take place in which all who are born
of your portions shall achieve the destruction of mighty warriors. But a
certain encounter shall take place without both Nara and Narayana (taking
any part in it). And, indeed, your portions, ye celestials, shall fight,
having made that disposition of the forces which is known by the name of
the Chakra-vyuha. And my son shall compel all foes to retreat before him.
The boy of mighty arms having penetrated the impenetrable array, shall
range within it fearlessly and send a fourth part of the hostile force, in
course of half a day, unto the regions of the king of the dead. Then when
numberless heroes and mighty car-warriors will return to the charge
towards the close of the day, my boy of mighty arms, shall reappear before
me. And he shall beget one heroic son in his line, who shall continue the
almost extinct Bharata race." Hearing these words of Soma, the dwellers in
heaven replied, "So be it." And then all together applauded and worshipped
(Soma) the king of stars. Thus, O king, have I recited to thee the
(particulars of the) birth of thy father's father.

"'Know also, O monarch, that the mighty car-warrior Dhrishtadyumna was a
portion of Agni. And know also that Sikhandin, who was at first a female,
was (the incarnation of) a Rakshasa. And, O bull in Bharata's race, they
who became the five sons of Draupadi, those bulls amongst the Bharata
princes, were the celestials known as the Viswas. Their names were
Pritivindhya, Sutasoma, Srutakirti, Satanika, Nakula, and Srutasena,
endued with mighty energy.

"'Sura, the foremost of the Yadus, was the father of Vasudeva. He had a
daughter called Pritha, who for her beauty, was unrivalled on earth. And
Sura, having promised in the presence of fire that he would give his
firstborn child to Kuntibhoja, the son of his paternal aunt, who was
without offspring, gave his daughter unto the monarch in expectation of
his favours. Kuntibhoja thereupon made her his daughter. And she became,
thenceforth, in the house of her (adoptive) father, engaged in attending
upon Brahmanas and guests. One day she had to wait upon the wrathful
ascetic of rigid vows, Durvasa by name, acquainted with truth and fully
conversant with the mysteries of religion. And Pritha with all possible
care gratified the wrathful Rishi with soul under complete control. The
holy one, gratified with the attentions bestowed on him by the maiden,
told her, "I am satisfied, O fortunate one, with thee! By this mantra
(that I am about to give thee), thou shall be able to summon (to thy side)
whatever celestials thou likest. And, by their grace, shall thou also
obtain children." Thus addressed, the girl (a little while after), seized
with curiosity, summoned, during the period of her maiden-hood, the god
Surya. And the lord of light thereupon made her conceive and begot on her
a son who became the first of all wielders of weapons. From fear of
relatives she brought forth in secrecy that child who had come out with
ear-rings and coat of mail. And he was gifted with the beauty of a
celestial infant, and in splendour was like unto the maker of day himself.
And every part of his body was symmetrical and well-adorned. And Kunti
cast the handsome child into the water. But the child thus thrown into the
water was taken up by the excellent husband of Radha and given by him to
his wife to be adopted by her as their son. And the couple gave him the
name of Vasusena, by which appellation the child soon became known all
over the land. And, as he grew up, he became very strong and excelled in
all weapons. The first of all successful persons, he soon mastered the
sciences. And when the intelligent one having truth for his strength
recited the Vedas, there was nothing he would not then give to the
Brahmanas. At that time Indra, the originator of all things, moved by the
desire of benefiting his own son Arjuna, assumed the guise of a Brahmana,
came to him, and begged of the hero his ear-rings and natural armour. And
the hero taking off his ear-rings and armour gave them unto the Brahmana.
And Sakra (accepting the gift) presented to the giver a dart, surprised
(at his open handedness), and addressed him in these words, "O invincible
one, amongst the celestials, Asuras, men, Gandharvas, Nagas, and Rakshasas,
he at whom thou hurlest (this weapon), that one shall certainly be slain."
And the son of Surya was at first known in the world by the name of
Vasusena. But, for his deeds, he subsequently came to be called Karna. And
because that hero of great fame had taken off his natural armour,
therefore was he--the first son of Pritha--called Karna. And, O best of
kings, the hero began to grow up in the Suta caste. And, O king, know thou
that Karna--the first of all exalted men--the foremost of all wielders of
weapons--the slayer of foes--and the best portion of the maker of day--was
the friend and counsellor of Duryodhana. And he, called Vasudeva, endued
with great valour, was among men a portion of him called Narayana--the god
of gods--eternal. And Valadeva of exceeding strength was a portion of the
Naga, Sesha. And, O monarch, know that Pradyumna of great energy was
Sanatkumara. And in this way the portion of various other dwellers in
heaven became exalted men in the race of Vasudeva, increasing the glory
thereof. And, O king, the portions of the tribe of Apsaras which I have
mentioned already, also became incarnate on earth according to Indra's
commands--And sixteen thousand portions of those goddesses became, O king,
in this world of men, the wives of Vasudeva. And a portion of Sri herself
became incarnate on earth, for the gratification of Narayana, in the line
of Bhishmaka. And she was by name the chaste Rukmini. And the faultless
Draupadi, slender-waisted like the wasp, was born of a portion of Sachi
(the queen of the celestials), in the line of Drupada. And she was neither
low nor tall in stature. And she was of the fragrance of the blue lotus,
of eyes large as lotus-petals, of thighs fair and round, of dense masses
of black curly hair. And endued with every auspicious feature and of
complexion like that of the emerald, she became the charmer of the hearts
of five foremost of men. And the two goddesses Siddhi and Dhriti became
the mothers of those five, and were called Kunti and Madri. And she who
was Mati became the daughter (Gandhari) of Suvala.

"'Thus, O king, have I recited to thee all about the incarnation, according
to their respective portions, of the gods, the Asuras, the Gandharvas, the
Apsaras, and of the Rakshasas. They who were born on earth as monarchs
invincible in battle, those high-souled ones who were born in the wide
extended line of the Yadus, they who were born as mighty monarchs in other
lines, they who were born as Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, have
all been recited by me duly. And this account of the incarnation (of
superior beings according to their respective portions) capable of
bestowing wealth, fame, offspring, long life, and success, should always
be listened to in a proper frame of mind. And having listened to this
account of incarnation, according to their portions, of gods, Gandharvas,
and Rakshasas, the hearer becoming acquainted with the creation,
preservation, and destruction of the universe and acquiring wisdom, is
never cast down even under the most engrossing sorrows.'"


SECTION LXVIII

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Janamejaya said, 'O Brahmana, I have, indeed, heard from thee this
account of the incarnation, according to their portions, of the gods, the
Danavas, the Rakshasas, and also of the Gandharvas and the Apsaras. I
however, again desire to hear of the dynasty of the Kurus from the very
beginning. Therefore, O Brahmana, speak of this in the presence of all
these regenerate Rishis.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'O exalted one of Bharata's race, the founder of the
Paurava line was Dushmanta gifted with great energy. And he was the
protector of the earth bounded by the four seas. And that king had full
sway over four quarters of this world. And he was the lord also of various
regions in the midst of the sea. And that great oppressor of all foes had
sway over the countries even of the Mlechchhas.

"'And during his rule there were no men of mixed castes, no tillers of the
soil (for the land, of itself, yielded produce), no workers of mines (for
the surface of the earth yielded in abundance), and no sinful men. All
were virtuous, and did everything from virtuous motives, O tiger among men.
There was no fear of thieves, O dear one, no fear of famine, no fear of
disease. And all four orders took pleasure in doing their respective
duties and never performed religious acts for obtaining fruition of
desires. And his subjects, depending upon him, never entertained any fear.
And Parjanya (Indra) poured showers at the proper time, and the produce of
the fields was always pulpy and juicy. And the earth was full of all kinds
of wealth and all kinds of animals. And the Brahmanas were always engaged
in their duties and they were always truthful. And the youthful monarch
was endued with wonderful prowess and a physical frame hard as the
thunderbolt, so that he could, taking up the mountain Mandara with its
forests and bushes, support it on his arms. And he was well-skilled in
four kinds of encounters with the mace (hurling it at foes at a distance,
striking at those that are near, whirling it in the midst of many, and
driving the foe before). And he was skilled also in the use of all kinds
of weapons and in riding elephants and horses. And in strength he was like
unto Vishnu, in splendour like unto the maker of day, in gravity like unto
the ocean, and in patience, like unto the earth. And the monarch was loved
by all his subjects, and he ruled his contented people virtuously.'"


SECTION LXIX

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Janamejaya said, 'I desire to hear from thee about the birth and life of
the high-souled Bharata and of the origin of Sakuntala. And, O holy one, I
also desire to hear all about Dushmanta--that lion among men--and how the
hero obtained Sakuntala. It behoveth thee, O knower of truth and the first
of all intelligent men, to tell me everything.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Once on a time (king Dushmanta) of mighty arms,
accompanied by a large force, went into the forest. And he took with him
hundreds of horses and elephants. And the force that accompanied the
monarch was of four kinds (foot-soldiers, car-warriors, cavalry, and
elephants)--heroes armed with swords and darts and bearing in their hands
maces and stout clubs. And surrounded by hundreds of warriors with lances
and spears in their hands, the monarch set out on his journey. And with
the leonine roars of the warriors and the notes of conchs and sound of
drums, with the rattle of the car-wheels and shrieks of huge elephants,
all mingling with the neighing of horses and the clash of weapons of the
variously armed attendants in diverse dresses, there arose a deafening
tumult while the king was on his march. And ladies gifted with great
beauty beheld from the terraces of goodly mansions that heroic monarch,
the achiever of his own fame. And the ladies saw that he was like unto
Sakra, the slayer of his enemies, capable of repulsing the elephants of
foes--And they believed that he was the wielder of the thunderbolt himself.
And they said, "This is that tiger among men who in battle is equal unto
the Vasus in prowess, and in consequence of the might of whose arms no
foes are left." And saying this, the ladies from affection gratified the
monarch by showering flowers on his head. And followed by foremost of
Brahmanas uttering blessings all the way, the king in great gladness of
heart went towards the forest, eager for slaying the deer. And many
Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaisyas, and Sudras, followed the monarch who was
like unto the king of the celestials seated on the back of a proud
elephant. The citizens and other classes followed the monarch for some
distance. And they at last refrained from going farther at the command of
the king. And the king, then, ascending his chariot of winged speed,
filled the whole earth and even the heavens, with the rattle of his
chariot wheels. And, as he went, he saw around him a forest like unto
Nandana itself (the celestial garden). And it was full of Vilwa, Arka,
Khadira (catechu), Kapittha (wood-apple) and Dhava trees. And he saw that
the soil was uneven and scattered over with blocks of stone loosened from
the neighbouring cliffs. And he saw that it was without water and without
human beings and lay extended for many Yojanas around. And it was full of
deer, and lions, and other terrible beasts of prey.

"'And king Dushmanta, that tiger among men, assisted by his followers and
the warriors in his train, agitated that forest, killing numerous animals.
And Dushmanta, piercing them with his arrows, felled numerous tigers that
were within shooting range. And the king wounded many that were too
distant, and killed many that were too near with his heavy sword. And that
foremost of all wielders of darts killed many by hurling his darts at them.
And well-conversant with the art of whirling the mace, the king of
immeasurable prowess fearlessly wandered over the forest. And the king
roamed about, killing the denizens of the wilderness sometimes with his
sword and sometimes by fast-descending blows of his mace and heavy club.

"'And when the forest was so disturbed by the king possessed of wonderful
energy and by the warriors in his train delighting in warlike sports, the
lions began to desert it in numbers. And herds of animals deprived of
their leaders, from fear and anxiety began to utter loud cries as they
fled in all directions. And fatigued with running, they began to fall down
on all sides, unable to slake their thirst, having reached river-beds that
were perfectly dry. And many so falling were eaten up by the hungry
warriors, while others were eaten up after having been duly quartered and
roasted in fires lit up by them. And many strong elephants, maddened with
the wounds they received and alarmed beyond measure, fled with trunks
raised on high. And those wild elephants, betraying the usual symptoms of
alarm by urinating and ejecting the contents of their stomachs and
vomiting blood in large quantities, trampled, as they ran, many warriors
to death. And that forest which had been full of animals, was by the king
with his bands of followers and with sharp weapons soon made bereft of
lions and tigers and other monarchs of the wilderness.'"


SECTION LXX

(Sambhava Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then the king with his followers, having killed
thousands of animals, entered another forest with a view to hunting. And
attended by a single follower and fatigued with hunger and thirst, he came
upon a large desert on the frontiers of the forest. And having crossed
this herbless plain, the king came upon another forest full of the
retreats of ascetics, beautiful to look at, delightful to the heart and of
cool agreeable breezes. And it was full of trees covered with blossoms,
the soil overgrown with the softest and greenest grass, extending for many
miles around, and echoing with the sweet notes of winged warblers. And it
resounded with the notes of the male Kokila and of the shrill cicala. And
it was full of magnificent trees with outstretched branches forming a
shady canopy overhead. And the bees hovered over flowery creepers all
around. And there were beautiful bowers in every place. And there was no
tree without fruits, none that had prickles on it, none that had no bees
swarming around it. And the whole forest resounded with the melody of
winged choristers. And it was decked with the flowers of every season. And
there were refreshing shades of blossoming trees.

"'Such was the delicious and excellent forest that the great bowman
entered. And trees with branches beautified with clusters began to wave
gently at the soft breeze and rain their flowers over the monarch's head.
And the trees, clad in their flowery attires of all colours, with sweet-
throated warblers perched on them, stood there in rows with heads touching
the very heavens. And around their branches hanging down with the weight of
flowers the bees tempted by the honey hummed in sweet chorus. And the king,
endued with great energy, beholding innumerable spots covered with bowers
of creepers decked with clusters of flowers, from excess of gladness,
became very much charmed. And the forest was exceedingly beautiful in
consequence of those trees ranged around with flowery branches twining with
each other and looking like so many rainbows for gaudiness and variety of
colour. And it was the resort of bands of Siddhas, of the Charanas, of
tribes of Gandharvas, and Apsaras, of monkeys and Kinnaras drunk with
delight. Delicious cool, and fragrant breezes, conveying the fragrance from
fresh flowers, blew in all directions as if they had come there to sport
with the trees. And the king saw that charming forest gifted with such
beauties. And it was situated in a delta of the river, and the cluster of
high trees standing together lent the place the look of a gaudy pole
erected to Indra's honour.

"'And in that forest which was the resort of ever cheerful birds, the
monarch saw a delightful and charming retreat of ascetics. And there were
many trees around it. And the sacred fire was burning within it. And the
king worshipped that unrivalled retreat. And he saw seated in it numerous
Yotis, Valakhilyas and other Munis. And it was adorned with many chambers
containing sacrificial fire. And the flowers dropping from the trees had
formed a thick carpet spread over the ground. And the spot looked
exceedingly beautiful with those tall trees of large trunks. And by it
flowed, O king, the sacred and transparent Malini with every species of
water-fowl playing on its bosom. And that stream infused gladness into the
hearts of the ascetics who resorted to it for purposes of ablutions. And
the king beheld on its banks many innocent animals of the deer species and
was exceedingly delighted with all that he saw.

"'And the monarch, the course of whose chariot no foe could obstruct, then
entered that asylum which was like unto the region of the celestials,
being exceedingly beautiful all over. And the king saw that it stood on
the margin of the sacred stream which was like the mother of all the
living creatures residing in its vicinage. And on its bank sported the
Chakravaka, and waves of milkwhite foam. And there stood also the
habitations of Kinnaras. And monkeys and bears too disported themselves in
numbers. And there lived also holy ascetics engaged in studies and
meditation. And there could be seen also elephants and tigers and snakes.
And it was on the banks of that stream that the excellent asylum of the
illustrious Kasyapa stood, offering a home to numerous Rishis of great
ascetic merit. And beholding that river, and also the asylum washed by
that river which was studded with many islands and which possessed banks
of so much beauty,--an asylum like unto that of Nara and Narayana laved by
the water of the Ganga--the king resolved to enter into that sacred abode.
And that bull among men, desirous of beholding the great Rishi of ascetic
wealth, the illustrious Kanwa of the race of Kasyapa, one who possessed
