imparted life.




A BATTLE WITHOUT A SWORD

'And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a dream
unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a cake
of barley-bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a tent,
and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay along.
14. And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the
sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand
hath God delivered Midian, and all the host. 15, And it was so, when
Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation thereof,
that he worshipped, and returned into the host of Israel, and said,
Arise; for the Lord hath delivered into your hand the host of Midian.
16. And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he
put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps
within the pitchers. 17. And he said unto them, Look on me, and do
likewise: and, behold, when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall
be, that as I do, so shall ye do. 18. When I blow with a trumpet, I and
all that are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of
all the camp, and say, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon. 19. So
Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the outside
of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had but
newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the pitchers
that were in their hands. 20. And the three companies blew the
trumpets, and brake the pitchers, and held the lamps in their left
hands, and the trumpets in their right hands to blow withal: and they
cried, The sword of the Lord, and of Gideon. 21. And they stood every
man in his place round about the camp: and all the host ran, and cried,
and fled. 22. And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the Lord set
every man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and
the host fled to Beth-shittah in Zererath, and to the border of
Abel-meholah, unto Tabbath. 23. And the men of Israel gathered
themselves together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all
Manasseh, and pursued after the Midianites.'--JUDGES vii. 13-23.


To reduce thirty-two thousand to three hundred was a strange way of
preparing for a fight; and, no doubt, the handful left felt some
sinking of their courage when they looked on their own small number and
then on the widespread Midianite host. Gideon, too, would need
heartening. So the first thing to be noted is the encouragement given
him. God strengthens faith when it needs strengthening, and He has many
ways of doing so. Note that Gideon's visit to the Midianite camp was on
'the same night' on which his little band was left alone after the
ordeal by water. How punctually to meet our need, when it begins to be
felt, does God's help come! It was by God's command that he undertook
the daring adventure of stealing down to the camp. We can fancy how
silently he and Phurah crept down the hillside, and, with hushed breath
and wary steps, lest they should stumble on and wake some sleeper, or
even rouse some tethered camel, picked their way among the tents. But
they had God's command and promise, and these make men brave, and turn
what would else be foolhardy into prudence. Ho put his ear to the black
camel's-hair wall of one tent, and heard what his faith could not but
recognise as God's message to him.

The soldier's dream was just such as such a man would dream in such
circumstances. A round loaf of barley (the commonest kind of bread) was
dreamed of as rolling down from a height and upsetting '_the_ tent.'
The use of the definite article seems to point to some particular tent,
perhaps simply the one in which the dreamer lay, or perhaps the
general's; but the noun may be used as a collective, and what is meant
may be that the loaf went through the camp, overturning all the tents
in its way. The interpretation needed no Daniel, but the immediate
explanation given, shows not only the transparency of the symbol, but
the dread in the Midianite ranks of Gideon's prowess. A nameless awe,
which goes far to produce the defeat it dreads, was beginning to creep
over them. It finds utterance both in the dream and in its translation.
The tiny loaf worked effects disproportioned to its size. A rock
thundering down the hillside might have mass and momentum enough to
level a line of tents, but one poor loaf to do it! Some mightier than
human hand must have set it going on its career. So the soldier
interprets that God had delivered the army into Gideon's hand.

This dream suggests two or three considerations. In several instances
we find God speaking to those outside Israel by dreams; for example, to
Pharaoh and his two officers, Nebuchadnezzar, Pilate's wife. It is the
lowest form of divine communication, and, like other lower forms, is
not to be looked for when the higher teaching of the Spirit of Christ
is open to us all.

Again, while both dream and interpretation might be accounted for on
simply natural grounds, a deeper insight into the so-called 'natural'
brings us to see it as all penetrated by the operations of the
ever-present God. And the coincidences which brought Gideon to just
that tent among the thousands along the valley at just the moment when
the two startled sleepers were talking, might well strike Gideon, as
they did, as being God's own fulfilment of the promise that 'what they
say' would strengthen his hands for the attack (v. 11).

Further, Gideon had already had the sign of the fleece and the dew; but
God does not disdain to let him have an additional encouragement, and
to let him draw confirmation of his own token from the talk of two
Midianites. Faith may be buttressed by men's words, albeit its only
foundation is God's.

Gideon has a place in the muster-roll of heroes of faith in Hebrews
xi., and his whole conduct in this incident proves his right to stand
there. 'He worshipped,' for his soul went out in trust to God, whose
voice he heard through the two Midianites, and bowed in thankfulness
and submissive obedience. There could be no outward worship there, with
an army of sleepers close by, but the silent uplifting of confidence
and desire reaches God and strengthens the man. So he went back with
new assurance of victory, and roused his sleeping band.

Mark his words as another token of his faith. The Midianite interpreter
had said, '_God_ has delivered'; Gideon says, 'The _Lord_ has
delivered.' The former name is the more general, and is natural on the
lips of a heathen; the latter is the covenant name, and to use it
implies reliance on the Jehovah revealed by His acts to Israel. The
Midianite had said that the host was delivered into Gideon's hand; he
says that it is delivered into the hands of the three hundred,
suppressing himself and honouring them. God's soldiers must be willing
to 'esteem others better than themselves,' and to fight for God's
glory, not their own. The Midianite had said, 'This is ... the sword of
Gideon'; he bid his men cry 'the sword of _the Lord, and_ of Gideon.'
It was God's cause for which they were contending, not his; and yet it
was his, inasmuch as he was God's instrument. 'Excellent mixture,' says
Thomas Fuller, 'both joined together; admirable method, God put in the
first place. Where divine blessing leads up the van, and man's valour
brings up the battle, must not victory needs follow in the rear?'

Gideon does not seem to have been divinely directed to the stratagem by
which the Midianites were thrown into panic. He had been promised
victory, but that does not lead him to idle waiting for fulfilment of
the promise. 'To wait for God's performance in doing nothing is to
abuse that divine providence, which will so work that it will not allow
us to idle' (_Bishop Hall_). True faith will wisely adopt means to
reach promised ends, and, having used brain and hand as if all depended
on ourselves, will look to Him, as if nothing depended on us, but all
on Him.

There was strong faith as well as daring and skilful generalship in
leading down the three hundred, with no weapons but trumpets and
pitchers, to close quarters with an armed enemy so superior in numbers.
And did it not need some faith, too, not only in Gideon but in God, on
the part of his band, to plunge down the hill on such an errand, each
man with both his hands full, and so unable to strike a blow? The other
three hundred at Thermopylae have been wept over and sung; were not
these three hundred as true heroes? Let us not count heads when we are
called on to take God's side. His soldiers are always in the minority,
but, if He is reckoned in, the minority becomes the majority. 'They
that be with us are more than they that be with them.'

One can fancy the sleepers starting up dazed by the sudden bray of the
trumpets and the wild shout of that war-cry yelled from every side. As
they stumbled out of their tents, without leaders, without knowledge of
the numbers of their foe, and saw all around the flaring torches, and
heard the trumpet-blasts, which seemed to speak of an immense attacking
force, no wonder that panic shook them, and they fled. Huge mobs of
undisciplined men, as Eastern armies are, and these eminently were, are
especially liable to such infectious alarms; and the larger the force,
the faster does panic spread, the more unmanageable does the army
become, and the more fatal are the results. Each man reflects, and so
increases, his neighbour's fear. 'Great armies, once struck with
amazement, are like wounded whales. Give them but line enough, and the
fishes will be the fishermen to catch themselves.'

So the host broke up in wild disorder, and hurried in fragments towards
the Jordan fords, trampling each other down as they raced through the
darkness, and each man, as he ran, dreading to feel the enemy's sword
in his back next moment. `The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the
righteous is bold as a lion.' Thus without stroke of weapon was the
victory won. The battle was the Lord's.

And the story is not antiquated in substance, however the form of the
contests which God's soldiers have to-day to fight has changed. Still
it is true that we shall only wage war aright when we feel that it is
His cause for which we contend, and His sword which wins the victory.
If Gideon had put himself first in his warcry, or had put his own name
only in it, the issue would have been different.

May we not also venture to apply the peculiar accoutrements of the
victorious three hundred to ourselves? Christ's men have no weapons to
wield but the sounding out from them, as from a trumpet, of the word of
the Lord, and the light of a Christian life shining through earthen
vessels. If we boldly lift up our voices in the ancient war-cry, and
let that word peal forth from us, and flash the light of holy lives on
a dark world, we may break the sleeper's slumbers to a glad waking, and
win the noblest of victories by leading them to enlist in the army of
our Captain, and to become partakers of His conquests by letting Him
conquer, and thereby save them.




STRENGTH PROFANED AND LOST

'But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought him
down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did grind in
the prison-house. 22, Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again
after he was shaven. 23. Then the lords of the Philistines gathered
them together for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and
to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into
our hand. 24. And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for
they said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the
destroyer of our country, which slew many of us. 25. And it came to
pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson,
that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the
prison-house; and he made them sport; and they set him between the
pillars. 20. And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand.
Suffer me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth,
that I may lean upon them. 27. Now the house was full of men and women;
and all the lords of the Philistines were there; and there were upon
the roof about three thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson
made sport. 28. And Samson called unto the Lord, and said, O Lord God,
remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this
once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Phillistines.  And he
bowed himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords,
and upon all the people that were therein.  So the dead which he slew
at his death were more than they which he slew in his life.  31. Then
his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and took him,
and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Ishtaol in the
burying place of Munnah his father.  And he judged Israel twenty
years.'--Judges xvi. 21-31.


Nobody could be less like the ordinary idea of an Old Testament 'saint'
than Samson. His gift from 'the spirit of the Lord' was simply physical
strength, and it was associated with the defects of his qualities. His
passions were strong, and apparently uncontrolled. He had no moral
elevation or religious fervour. He led no army against the Philistines,
nor seems to have had any fixed design of resisting them. He seeks a
wife among them, and is ready to feast and play at riddles with them.
When he does attack them, it is because he is stung by personal
injuries; and it is only with his own arm that he strikes. His exploits
have a mixture of grim humour and fierce hatred quite unlike anything
else in Scripture, and more resembling the horse-play of Homeric or
Norse heroes than the stern purpose and righteous wrath of a soldier
who felt that he was God's instrument. We seem to hear his loud
laughter as he ties the firebrands to the struggling jackals, or swings
the jaw-bone. A strange champion for Jehovah! But we must not leave out
of sight, in estimating his character, the Nazarite vow, which his
parents had made before his birth, and he had endorsed all his life.


That supplies the substratum which is lacking, The unshorn hair and the
abstinence from wine were the signs of consecration to God, which might
often fail of reaching the deepest recesses of the will and spirit, but
still was real, and gave the point of contact for the divine gift of
strength. Samson's strength depended on his keeping the vow, of which
the outward sign was the long, matted locks; and therefore, when he let
these be shorn, he voluntarily cast away his dependence on and
consecration to God, and his strength ebbed from him. He had broken the
conditions on which he received it, and it disappeared. So the story
which connects the loss of his long hair with the loss of his
superhuman power has a worthy meaning, and puts in a picturesque form
an eternal truth.

We see here, first, Samson the prisoner. Milton has caught the spirit
of the sad picture in verses 21 and 22, in that wonderful line,

           'Eyeless, in Gaza, at the mill, with slaves,'

in which the clauses drop heavily like slow tears, each adding a new
touch of woe. The savage manners of the times used the literal forcing
out of the eyes from their sockets as the easiest way of reducing
dangerous enemies to harmlessness. Pitiable as the loss was, Samson was
better blind than seeing. The lust of the eye had led him astray, and
the loss of his sight showed him his sin. Fetters of brass betrayed his
jailers' dread of his possibly returning strength; and the menial task
to which he was set was meant as a humiliation, in giving him woman's
work to do, as if this were all for which the eclipsed hero was now
fit. Generous enemies are merciful; the baser sort reveal their former
terror by the indignities they offer to their prisoner.

In Samson we see an impersonation of Israel. Like him, the nation was
strong so long as it kept the covenant of its God. Like him, it was
ever prone to follow after strange loves. Its Delilahs were the gods of
the heathen, in whose laps it laid its anointed head, and at whose
hands it suffered the loss of its God-given strength; for, like Samson,
Israel was weak when it forgot its consecration, and its punishment
came from the objects of its infatuated desires. Like him, it was
blinded, bound, and reduced to slavery, for all its power was held, as
was his, on condition of loyalty to God. His life is as a mirror, in
which the nation might see their own history reflected; and the lesson
taught by the story of the captive hero, once so strong, and now so
weak, is the lesson which Moses taught the nation: 'Because thou
servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of
heart, by reason of the abundance of all things: therefore shalt thou
serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger,
and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things, and He
shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck' (Deut. xxviii. 47, 48). The
blind Samson, chained, at the mill, has a warning for us, too. That is
what God's heroes come to, if once they prostitute the God-given
strength to the base loves of self and the flattering world. We are
strong only as we keep our hearts clear of lower loves, and lean on God
alone. Delilah is most dangerous when honeyed words drop from her lips.
The world's praise is more harmful than its censure. Its favours are
only meant to draw the secret of our strength from us, that we may be
made weak; and nothing gives the Philistines so much pleasure as the
sight of God's warriors caught in their toils and robbed of power.

But Samson's misery was Samson's blessedness. The 'howbeit' of verse 22
is more than a compensation for all the wretchedness. The growth of his
hair is not there mentioned as a mere natural fact, nor with the
superstitious notion that his hair made him strong. God made him strong
on condition of his keeping his vow of consecration. The long matted
locks were the visible sign that he kept it. Their loss was the
consequence of his own voluntary breach of it. So their growth was the
visible token that the fault was being repaired. Chastisement wrought
sorrow; and in the bondage of the prison he found freedom from the
worse chains of sin, and in its darkness felt the dawning of a better
light. As Bishop Hall puts it: 'His hair grew together with his
repentance, and his strength with his hair.' The cruelties of the
Philistines were better for him than their kindness. The world outwits
itself when it presses hard on God's deserters, and thus drives them to
repent. God mercifully takes care that His wandering children shall not
have an easy time of it; and his chastisements, at their sharpest, are
calls to us to come back to Him. Well for those, even if in chains, who
know their meaning, and yield to it.

II. We have here Samson,--the occasion of godless triumph. The worst
consequence of the fall of a servant of God is that it gives occasion
for God's enemies to blaspheme, and reflects discredit on Him, as if He
were vanquished. Samson's capture is Dagon's glory. The strife between
Philistia and Israel was, in the eyes of both combatants, a struggle
between their gods; and so the men of Gaza lit their sacrificial fires
and sent up their hymns to their monstrous deity as victor. What would
Samson's bitter thoughts be, as the sound of the wild rejoicings
reached him in his prison? And is not all this true to-day? If ever
some conspicuous Christian champion falls into sin or inconsistency,
how the sky is rent with shouts of malicious pleasure! What paragons of
virtue worldly men become all at once! How swiftly the conclusion is
drawn that all Christians are alike, and none of them any better than
the non-Christian world! How much more harm the one flaw does than all
the good which a life of service has done! The faults of Christians are
the bulwarks of unbelief. `The name of God is blasphemed among the
Gentiles through you.' The honour of Christ is a sacred trust, and it
is in the keeping of us His followers. Our sins do not only darken our
own reputation, but they cloud His. Dagon's worshippers have a right to
rejoice when they have Samson safe in their prison, with his eyes out.

III. We have Samson made a buffoon for drunkards. The feasts of
heathenism were wild orgies, very unlike the pure joy of the
sacrificial meals in Jehovah's worship. Dagon's temple was filled with
a drunken crowd, whose mirth would be made more boisterous by a spice
of cruelty. So, a roar of many voices calls for Samson, and this
deepest degradation is not spared him. The words employed for 'make
sport' seem to require that we should understand that he was not
brought out to be the passive object of their gibes and drunken
mockery, but was set to play the fool for their delectation. They imply
that he had to dance and laugh, while three thousand gaping
Philistines, any one of whom would have run for his life if he had been
free, fed their hatred by the sight. Perhaps his former reputation for
mirth and riddles suggested this new cruelty. Surely there is no more
pathetic picture than that of the blind hero, with such thoughts as we
know were seething in him, dragged out to make a Philistine holiday,
and set to play the clown, while the bitterness of death was in his
soul. And this is what God's soldiers come down to, when they forget
Him: 'they that wasted us required of us mirth.'

Wearied with his humiliating exertions, the blind captive begs the boy
who guided him to let him lean, till he can breathe again, on the
pillars that held up the light roof. We need not discuss the probable
architecture of Dagon's temple, of which we know nothing. Only we may
notice that it is not said that there were only _two_ pillars, but
rather necessarily implied that there were more than two, for those
against which he leaned were 'the two middle' ones. It is quite easy to
understand how, if there were a row of them, knocking out the two
strongest central ones would bring the whole thing down, especially
when there was such a load on the flat roof. Apparently the principal
people were in the best places on the ground floor, sheltered from the
sun by the roof, on which the commonalty were clustered, all waiting
for what their newly discovered mountebank would do next, after he had
breathed himself. The pause was short, and they little dreamed of what
was to follow.

IV. We have the last cry and heroic death of Samson. It is not to be
supposed that his prayer was audible to the crowd, even if it were
spoken aloud. It is not an elevated prayer, but is, like all the rest
of his actions at their best, deeply marked with purely personal
motives. The loss of his two eyes is uppermost in his mind, and he
wants to be revenged for them. Instead of trying to make a lofty hero
out of him, it is far better to recognise frankly the limitations of
his character and the imperfections of his religion. The distance
between him and the New Testament type of God's soldier measures the
progress which the revelation of God's will has made, and the debt we
owe to the Captain of the host for the perfect example which He has
set. The defects and impurity of Samson's zeal, which yet was accepted
of God, preach the precious lesson that God does not require virtues
beyond the standard of the epoch of revelation at which His servants
stand, and that imperfection does not make service unacceptable. If the
merely human passion of vengeance throbbed fiercely in Samson's prayer,
he had never heard 'Love your enemies'; and, for his epoch, the
destruction of the enemies of God and Israel was duty. He was not the
only soldier of God who has let personal antagonism blend with his zeal
for God; and we have less excuse, if we do it, than he had.

But there is the true core of religion in the prayer. It is penitence
which pleads, 'Remember me, O Lord God!' He knows that his sin has
broken the flow of loving divine thought to him, but he asks that the
broken current may be renewed. Many a silent tear had fallen from
Samson's blind eyes, before that prayer could have come to his lips, as
he leaned on the great pillars. Clear recognition of the Source of his
strength is in the prayer; if ever he had forgotten, in Delilah's lap,
where it came from, he had recovered his conscious dependence amid the
misery of the prison. There is humility in the prayer 'Only this once.'
He feels that, after such a fall, no more of the brilliant exploits of
former days are possible. They who have brought such despite on Jehovah
and such honour to Dagon may be forgiven, and even restored to much of
their old vigour, but they must not be judges in Israel any more. The
best thing left for the penitent Samson is death.

He had been unconscious of the departure of his strength, but he seems
to have felt it rushing back into his muscles; so he grasps the two
pillars with his mighty hands; the crowd sees that the pause for breath
is over, and prepares to watch the new feats. Perhaps we may suppose
that his last words were shouted aloud, 'Let me die with the
Philistines!' and before they have been rightly taken in by the mob, he
sways himself backwards for a moment, and then, with one desperate
forward push, brings down the two supports, and the whole thing rushes
down to hideous ruin amid shrieks and curses and groans. But Samson
lies quiet below the ruins, satisfied to die in such a cause.

He 'counted not his life dear' unto himself, that he might be God's
instrument for God's terrible work. The last of the judges teaches us
that we too, in a nobler cause, and for men's life, not their
destruction, must be ready to hazard and give our lives for the great
Captain, who in His death has slain more of our foes than He did in His
life, and has laid it down as the law for all His army, 'He that loseth
his life for My sake shall find it.'

How beautifully the quiet close of the story follows the stormy scene
of the riotous assembly and the sudden destruction. The Philistines,
crushed by this last blow, let the dead hero's kindred search for his
body amid the chaos, and bear it reverently up from the plain to the
quiet grave among the hills of Dan, where Manoah his father slept.
There they lay that mighty frame to rest. It will be troubled no more
by fierce passions or degrading chains. Nothing in his life became him
like the leaving of it. The penitent heroism of its end makes us
lenient to the flaws in its course; and we leave the last of the judges
to sleep in his grave, recognising in him, with all his faults and
grossness, a true soldier of God, though in strange garb.




THE BOOK OF RUTH




A GENTLE HEROINE, A GENTILE CONVERT

'And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where thou
lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my
God: 17. Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried: the
Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and me.
18. When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then
she left speaking unto her. 19. So they two went until they came to
Beth-lehem. And it came to pass, when they were come to Beth-lehem,
that all the city was moved about them, and they said, Is this Naomi?
20. And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the
Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me. 21. I went out full, And the
Lord hath brought me home again empty: why then call ye me Naomi,
seeing the Lord hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath
afflicted me? 22. So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her
daughter in law, with her, which returned out of the country of Moab:
and they came to Beth-lehem in the beginning of barley harvest.'--RUTH
1 16-22.


The lovely idyl of _Ruth_ is in sharp contrast with the bloody and
turbulent annals of _Judges_. It completes, but does not contradict,
these, and happily reminds us of what we are apt to forget in reading
such pages, that no times are so wild but that in them are quiet
corners, green oases, all the greener for their surroundings, where
life glides on in peaceful isolation from the tumult. Men and women
love and work and weep and laugh, the gossips of Bethlehem talk over
Naomi's return ('they said,' in verse 19, is feminine), Boaz stands
among his corn, and no sounds of war disturb them. Thank God! the
blackest times were not so dismal in reality as they look in history.
There are clefts in the grim rock, and flowers blooming, sheltered in
the clefts. The peaceful pictures of this little book, multiplied many
thousand times, have to be set as a background to the lurid pictures of
the _Book of Judges_.

The text begins in the middle of Naomi's remonstrance with her two
daughters-in-law. We need not deal with the former part of the
conversation, nor follow Orpah as she goes back to her home and her
gods. She is the first in the sad series of those, 'not far from the
kingdom of God,' who needed but a little more resolution at the
critical moment, and, for want of it, shut themselves out from the
covenant, and sank back to a world which they had half renounced.

So these two lonely widows are left, each seeking to sacrifice herself
for the other. Who shall decide which was the more noble and truly
womanly in her self-forgetfulness,--the elder, sadder heart, which
strove to secure for the other some joy and fellowship at the price of
its own deepened solitude; or the younger, which steeled itself against
entreaties, and cast away friends and country for love's sweet sake? We
rightly praise Ruth's vow, but we should not forget Naomi's unselfish
pleading to be left to tread her weary path alone.

Ruth's passionate burst of tenderness is immortal. It has put into
fitting words for all generations the deepest thoughts of loving
hearts, and comes to us over all the centuries between, as warm and
living as when it welled up from that gentle, heroic soul. The two
strongest emotions of our nature are blended in it, and each gives a
portion of its fervour--love and religion. So closely are they
interwoven that it is difficult to allot to each its share in the
united stream; but, without trying to determine to which of them the
greater part of its volume and force is due, and while conscious of the
danger of spoiling such words by comments weaker than themselves, we
may seek to put into distinct form the impressions which they make.

We see in them the heroism of gentleness. Put the sweet figure of the
Moabitess beside the heroes of the _Book of Judges_, and we feel the
contrast. But is there anything in its pages more truly heroic than her
deed, as she turned her back on the blue hills of Moab, and chose the
joyless lot of the widowed companion of a widow aged and poor, in a
land of strangers, the enemies of her country and its gods? It is
easier far to rush on the spears of the foe, amid the whirl and
excitement of battle, than to choose with open eyes so dreary a
lifelong path. The gentleness of a true woman covers a courage of the
patient, silent sort, which, in its meek steadfastness, is nobler than
the contempt of personal danger, which is vulgarly called bravery. It
is harder to endure than to strike. The supreme type of heroic, as of
all, virtue is Jesus Christ, whose gentleness was the velvet glove on
the iron hand of an inflexible will. Of that best kind of heroes there
are few brighter examples, even in the annals of the Church which
numbers its virgin martyrs by the score, than this sweet figure of
Ruth, as the eager vow comes from her young lips, which had already
tasted sorrow, and were ready to drink its bitterest cup at the call of
duty. She may well teach us to rectify our judgments, and to recognise
the quiet heroism of many a modest life of uncomplaining suffering. Her
example has a special message to women, and exhorts them to see to it
that, in the cultivation of the so-called womanly excellence of
gentleness, they do not let it run into weakness, nor, on the other
hand, aim at strength, to the loss of meekness. The yielding
birch-tree, the 'lady of the woods,' bends in all its elastic branches
and tossing ringlets of foliage to the wind; but it stands upright
after storms that level oaks and pines. God's strength is gentle
strength, and ours is likest His when it is meek and lowly, like that
of the 'strong Son of God.'

Ruth's great words may suggest, too, the surrender which is the natural
language of true love. Her story comes in among all these records of
bloodshed and hate, like a bit of calm blue sky among piles of ragged
thunder-clouds, or a breath of fresh air in the oppressive atmosphere
of a slaughter-house. Even in these wild times there was still a quiet
corner where love could spread his wings. The question has often been
asked, what the purpose of the _Book of Ruth_ is, and various answers
have been given. The genealogical table at the end, showing David's
descent from her, the example which it supplies of the reception of a
Gentile into Israel, and other reasons for its presence in Scripture,
have been alleged, and, no doubt, correctly. But the Bible is a very
human book, just because it is a divine one; and surely it would be no
unworthy object to enshrine in its pages a picture of the noble working
of that human love which makes so much of human life. The hallowing of
the family is a distinct purpose of the Old Testament, and the
beautiful example which this narrative gives of the elevating influence
of domestic affection entitles it to a place in the canon. How many
hearts, since Ruth spoke her vow, have found in it the words that
fitted their love best! How often they have been repeated by quivering
lips, and heard as music by loving ears! How solemn, and even awful, is
that perennial freshness of words which came hot and broken by tears,
from lips that have long ago mouldered into dust! What has made them
thus 'enduring for ever,' is that they express most purely the
self-sacrifice which is essential to all noble love. The very inmost
longing of love is to give itself away to the object beloved. It is not
so much a desire to acquire as to bestow, or, rather, the antithesis of
giving and receiving melts into one action which has a twofold
motion,--one outwards, to give; one inwards, to receive. To love is to
give one's self away, therefore all lesser givings are its food and
delight; and, when Ruth threw herself on Naomi's withered breast, and
sobbed out her passionate resolve, she was speaking the eternal
language of love, and claiming Naomi for her own, in the very act of
giving herself to Naomi, Human love should be the parent of all
self-sacrificing as of all heroic virtues; and in our homes we do not
live in love, as we ought, unless it leads us to the daily exercise of
self-suppression and surrender, which is not felt to be loss but the
natural expression of our love, which it would be a crime against it,
and a pain to ourselves, to withhold. If Ruth's temper lived in our
families, they would be true 'houses of God' and 'gates of heaven.'

We hear in Ruth's words also that forsaking of all things which is an
essential of all true religion. We have said that it was difficult to
separate, in the words, the effects of love to Naomi from those of
adoption of Naomi's faith. Apparently Ruth's adhesion to the worship of
Jehovah was originally due to her love for her mother-in-law. It is in
order to be one with her in all things that she says, 'Thy God shall be
my God.' And it was because Jehovah was Naomi's God that Ruth chose Him
for hers. But whatever the origin of her faith, it was genuine and
robust enough to bear the strain of casting Chemosh and the gods of
Moab behind her, and setting herself with full purpose of heart to seek
the Lord. Abandoning them was digging an impassable gulf between
herself and all her past, with its friendships, loves, and habits. She
is one of the first, and not the least noble, of the long series of
those who 'suffer the loss of all things, and count them but dung, that
they may win' God for their dearest treasure. We have seen how, in her,
human love wrought self-sacrifice. But it was not human love alone that
did it. The cord that drew her was twisted of two strands, and her love
to Naomi melted into her love of Naomi's God. Blessed they who are
drawn to the knowledge and love of the fountain of all love in heaven
by the sweetness of the characters of His representatives in their
homes, and who feel that they have learned to know God by seeing Him in
dear ones, whose tenderness has revealed His, and whose gracious words
have spoken of His grace! If Ruth teaches us that we must give up all,
in order truly to follow the Lord, the way by which she came to her
religion may teach us how great are the possibilities, and consequently
the duties, of Christians to the members of their own families. If we
had more elder women like Naomi, we should have more younger women like
Ruth.

The self-sacrifice which is possible and blessed, even to inferior
natures, at the bidding of love, is too precious to be squandered on
earthly objects. Men's capacities for it, at the call of dear ones
here, should be the rebuke of their grudging surrender to God. He gave
the capacity that it might find its true field of operation in our
relation to Him. But how much more ready we all are to give up
everything for the sake of our Naomis than for His sake: and how we may
be our own accusers, if the measure of our devotion to them be
contrasted with the measure of our devotion to God!

Finally, we may see, in Ruth's entrance into the religion of Israel, a
picture of what was intended to be the effect of Israel's relation with
the Gentile world.

The household of Elimelech emigrated to Moab in a famine, and, whether
that were right or wrong, they were there among heathens as Jehovah
worshippers. They were meant to be missionaries, and, in Ruth's case,
the purpose was fulfilled. She became the 'first-fruits of the
Gentiles'; and one aim of the book, no doubt, is to show how the
believing Gentile was to be incorporated into Israel. Boaz rejoices
over her, and especially over her conversion, and prays, 'A full reward
be given thee of Jehovah, the God of Israel, under whose wings thou art
come to trust.' She is married to him, and becomes the ancestress of
David, and, through him, of the Messiah. All this is a beautiful
completion to the other side of the picture which the fierce fighting
in Judges makes prominent, and teaches that Israel's relation to the
nations around was not to be one of mere antagonism, but that they had
another mission than destruction, and were set in their land, as the
candlestick in the Tabernacle, that light might stream out into the
darkness of the desert. The story of the Moabitess, whose blood flowed
in David's veins, was a standing protest against the later narrow
exclusiveness which called Gentiles 'dogs,' and prided itself on
outward connection with the nation, in the exact degree in which it
lost real union with the nation's God, and real understanding of the
nation's mission.

We have left ourselves no space to speak of the remainder of this
passage, which is of less importance. It gives us a lively picture of
the stir in the little town of Bethlehem, as the two way-worn women
came into it, in their strange attire, and attracting notice by
travelling alone. As we have observed, 'they said,' in verse 19, is
feminine. The women of the village buzzed round the strangers, as they
sat in silence, perhaps by that well at the gate, of which, long after,
David longed to drink. Wonder, curiosity, and possibly a spice of
malice, mingle in the question, 'Is _this_ Naomi?' It is heartless, at
any rate; it had been better to have found them food and shelter than
to have let them sit, the mark for sharp tongues. Naomi's bitter words
seem to be moved partly by a sense of the coldness of the reception.
She realises that she has indeed come back to a changed world, where
there will be little sympathy except such as Ruth can give. It is with
almost passion that she abjures her name 'Pleasant,' as a satire on her
woful lot, and bids them call her 'Bitter,' as truer to fact now. The
burst of sorrow is natural, as she finds herself again where she had
been a wife and mother, and 'remembers happier things.' Her faith
wavers, and her words almost reproach God. The exaggerations in which
memory is apt to indulge colour them. 'I went out full.' She has
forgotten that they 'went out' to seek for bread. She only remembers
that four went away, and three sleep in Moab. Possibly she thinks of
their emigration as a sin, and traces her dear ones' deaths to God's
displeasure on its account. His 'testifying' against her probably means
that His providence in bereaving her witnessed to His disapprobation.
But, whether that be so or not, her wild words are not those of a
patient sufferer, who bows to His will. But true faith may sometimes
break down, and Ruth's 'trusting under the wings of Jehovah' is proof
enough that, in the long years of lonely sorrow, Naomi's example had
shown how peaceful and safe was the shelter there.




THE FIRST BOOK OF SAMUEL




THE CHILD PROPHET

'And the child Samuel ministered unto the Lord before Eli. And the word
of the Lord was precious in those days; there was no open vision. 2.
And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place,
and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; 8. And ere the
lamp of God went out in the temple of the Lord, where the ark of God
was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep; 4. That the Lord called Samuel:
and he answered, Here am I. 5. And he ran onto Eli, and said, Here am
I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie down again. And
he went and lay down. 6. And the Lord called yet again, Samuel. And
Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call
me. And he answered, I called not, my son; lie down again. 7. Now
Samuel did not yet know the Lord, neither was the word of the Lord yet
revealed unto him. 8. And the Lord called Samuel again the third time.
And he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call
me. And Eli perceived that the Lord had called the child. 9. Therefore
Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if He call thee,
that thou shalt say, Speak, Lord; for Thy servant heareth. So Samuel
went and lay down in his place. 10. And the Lord came, and stood, and
called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak;
for Thy servant heareth. 11. And the Lord said to Samuel, Behold, I
will do a thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that
heareth it shall tingle. 12. In that day I will perform against Eli all
things which I have spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will
also make an end. 13. For I have told him that I will judge his house
for ever for the iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made
themselves vile, and he restrained them not. 14. And therefore I have
sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not
be purged with sacrifice nor offering for ever.'--1 SAMUEL ill. 1-14.


The opening words of this passage are substantially repeated from 1
Samuel ii. 11,18. They come as a kind of refrain, contrasting the
quiet, continuous growth and holy service of the child Samuel with the
black narrative of Eli's riotous sons. While the hereditary priests
were plunging into debauchery, and making men turn away from the
Tabernacle services, Hannah's son was ministering unto the Lord, and,
though no priest, was 'girt with an ephod.' This white flower blossomed
on a dunghill. The continuous growth of a character, from a child
serving God, and to old age walking in the same path, is the great
lesson which the story of Samuel teaches us. 'The child is father of
the man,' and all his long days are 'bound each to each' by true
religion. There are two types of experience among God's greatest
servants. Paul, made an Apostle from a persecutor, heads the one class.
Timothy in the New Testament and Samuel in the Old, represent the
other. An Augustine or a Bunyan is made the more earnest, humble, and
whole-hearted by the remembrance of a wasted youth and of God's
arresting mercy. But there are a serenity and continuity about a life
which has grown up in the fear of God that have their own charm and
blessing. It is well to have 'much transgression' forgiven, but it may
be better to have always been 'innocent' and ignorant of it. Pardon
cleanses sin, and even turns the memory of it into an ally of holiness;
but traces are left on character, and, at the best, years have been
squandered which do not return. Samuel is the pattern of child religion
and service, to which teachers should aim that their children may be
conformed. How beautifully his double obedience is expressed in the
simple words! His service was 'unto the Lord,' and it was 'before Eli';
that is to say, he learned his work from the old man, and in obeying
him he served God. The child's religion is largely obedience to human
guides, and he serves God best by doing what he is bid,--a lesson
needed in our days by both parents and children.

Samuel's peaceful service is contrasted, in the second half of the
first verse, with the sad cessation of divine revelations in that
dreary time of national laxity. A demoralised priesthood, an alienated
people, a silent God,--these are the outstanding features of the period
when this fair life of continuous worship unfolded itself. This flower
grew in a desert. The voice of God had become a tradition of the past,
not an experience of the present. 'Rare' conveys the idea better than
'precious.' The intention is not to tell the estimate in which the word
was held, but the infrequency of its utterance, as appears from the
following parallel clause. The fact is mentioned in order to complete
the picture of Samuel's 'environment' to fling into relief against that
background his service, and to prepare the way for the narrative of the
beginning of an epoch of divine speech. When priests are faithless and
people careless, God's voice will often sound from lowly childlike
lips. The man who is to be His instrument in carrying on His work will
often come from the very centre of the old order, into which he is to
breathe new life, and on which he is to impress a new stamp.

The artless description of the night in the Tabernacle is broken by the
more general notice of Eli's dim sight, which the Revised Version
rightly throws into a parenthesis. It is somewhat marred, too, by the
transposition which the Authorised Version, following some more ancient
ones, has made, in order to avoid saying, as the Hebrew plainly does,
that Samuel slept in the 'Temple of the Lord, where the ark was.' The
picture is much more vivid and tender, if we conceive of the dim-eyed
old man, lying somewhat apart; of the glimmering light, nearly extinct
but still faintly burning; and of the child laid to sleep in the
Tabernacle. Surely the picturesque contrast between the sanctity of the
ark and the innocent sleep of childhood is meant to strike us, and to
serve as connecting the place with the subsequent revelation. Childlike
hearts, which thus quietly rest in the 'secret place of the Most High,'
and day and night are near His ark, will not fail of hearing His voice.
He sleeps secure who sleeps 'beneath the shadow of the Almighty.' May
not these particulars, too, be meant to have some symbolic
significance? Night hung over the nation. The spiritual eye of the
priest was dim, and the order seemed growing old and decrepit, but the
lamp of God had not altogether gone out; and if Eli was growing blind,
Samuel was full of fresh young life. The darkest hour is that before
the dawn; and that silent sanctuary, with the slumbering old half-blind
priest and the expiring lamp, may stand for an emblem of the state of
Israel.

The thrice-repeated and misunderstood call may yield lessons of value.
We note the familiar form of the call. There is no vision, no symbol of
the divine glory, such as other prophets had, but an articulate voice,
so human-like that it is thought to be Eli's. Such a kind of call
fitted the child's stature best. We note the swift, cheery obedience to
what he supposes to be Eli's voice. He sprang up at once, and 'ran to
Eli,'--a pretty picture of cheerful service, grudging not his broken
sleep, which, no doubt, had often been similarly broken by similar
calls. Perhaps it was in order to wait on Eli, quite as much as to tend
the lamp or open the gates, that the singular arrangement was made of
his sleeping in the Temple; and the reason for the previous parenthesis
about Eli's blindness may have been to explain why Samuel slept near
him. Where were Eli's sons? They should have been their father's
attendants, and the watchers 'by night ... in the house of the Lord';
but they were away rioting, and the care of both Temple and priest was
left to a child.

The old man's heart evidently went out to the boy. How tenderly he bids
him lie down again! How affectionately he calls him 'my son,' as if he
was already beginning to feel that this was his true successor, and not
the blackguards that were breaking his heart! The two were a pair of
friends: on the one side were sedulous care and swift obedience by
night and by day; on the other were affection and a discernment of
coming greatness, made the clearer by the bitter contrast with his own
children's lives. The old and the young are good companions for one
another, and often understand each other better and help each other
more than either does his contemporaries.

Samuel mistook God's voice for Eli's, as we all often do. And not less
often we make the converse blunder, and mistake Eli's voice for God's.
It needs a very attentive ear, and a heart purged from selfishness and
self-will, and ready for obedience, to know when God speaks, though men
may be His mouthpieces, and when men speak, though they may call
themselves His messengers. The child's mistake was venial. It is less
pardonable and more dangerous when repeated by us. If we would be
guarded against it, we must be continually where Samuel was, and we
must not _sleep_ in the Temple, but 'watch and be sober.'

Eli's perception that it was God who spoke must have had a pang in it.
It is not easy for the old to recognise that the young hear God's voice
more clearly than they, nor for the superior to be glad when he is
passed over and new truth dawns on the inferior. But, if there were any
such feeling, it is silenced with beautiful self-abnegation, and he
tells the wondering child the meaning of the voice and the answer he
must make. What higher service can any man do to his fellows, old or
