
Luke puts the interpretation of the thorns even more vividly than
the other Evangelists, because he represents them as being three
different forms of one thing, 'cares and riches and pleasures,'
which all come into the one class, 'of this life.' Or, in other
words, the present world, with all its various appeals to our animal
and sensual nature, with all its possible delights for part of our
being, a real and important part of it; and with all the troubles
and anxieties which it is cowardly for us to shirk, and impossible
for us to escape--this world is ever present to each of us, and if
there is anything in us to which it appeals, then certainly the
thorns will come up. The cares and the wealth and the pleasures are
three classes of one thing. Perhaps the first chiefly besets
struggling people; the second mainly threatens well-to-do people;
the third, perhaps, is most formidable to leisurely and idle people.
But all three appeal to us all, for in every one of us there are the
necessary anxieties of life, and every one of us knows that there is
real and substantial good to a part of our being, in the possession
of a share of this world's wealth, without which no man can live,
and all of us carry natures to which the delights of sense do
legitimately and necessarily appeal.

So the soil for the growth of the thorns is always in us all. But
what then? Are these things so powerful in our hearts as that they
become hindrances to our Christian life? That is the question. The
cares and the occupation of mind with, and desire for, the wealth
and the pleasures are of God's appointment. He did not make them
thorns, but you and I make them thorns; and the question for us is,
has our Christianity driven out the undue regard to this life,
regarded in these three aspects--undue in measure or in any other
respect, by which they are converted into hindrances that mar our
Christian life? Dear brethren, it is not enough to say, 'I have
received the word into my heart.' There is another question besides
that--Has the word received into your heart cast out the thorns? Or
are they and the seed growing there side by side? The picture of my
text is that of a man who, in a real fashion, has accepted the
Gospel, but who has accepted it so superficially as that it has not
exercised upon him the effect that it ought to produce, of expelling
from him the tendencies which may become hindrances to his Christian
life. If we have known nothing of 'the expulsive power of a new
affection,' and if we thought it was enough to cut down the thickest
and tallest thorn-bushes, and to leave all the seeds and the roots
of them in our hearts, no wonder if, as we get along in life, they
grow up and choke the word. 'Ye cannot serve God and Mammon'; that
is just putting into a sentence the lesson of my text.

II. Further, note the growth of the thorns. Luke employs a very
significant phrase. He says, 'When they have heard they _go
forth_, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of
this life.' That is to say, the path of daily life upon which we all
have to walk, the common duties which necessarily draw us to
themselves, will certainly stimulate the growth of the thorns if
these are not rooted out. Life is full of appeals to our desires
after earthly good or pleasure, to our greed after earthly gain, to
our dread of earthly sorrow, of pain, of loss, and of poverty. As
surely as we are living, and have to go out into the world day by
day, so surely will the thorns grow if they are left in us. And so
we come back to the old lesson that because we are set in this
world, with all its temptations that appeal so strongly to many
needs and desires of our nature, we must make thorough work of our
religion if it is to be of any good to us at all, and we are not to
go on the Christian pilgrimage with one foot upon the higher level
and the other upon the lower, like a man walking with one foot on
the kerbstone and the other on the roadway. Let us be one thing or
the other, out and out, thorough and  consistent. If we have the
seed in our hearts, remember that _we_ are responsible for its
growth.

Let us make certain that we have cast out the thorns. There is an
old German proverb, the vulgarity of which may be excused for its
point. 'You must not sit near the fire if your head is made of
butter.' We should not try to walk through this wicked world without
making very certain that we have stubbed the thorns out of our
hearts. Oh, dear friends! here is the secret to the miserable
inconsistencies of the great bulk of professing Christians. They
have got the seed in, but they have not got the thorns out.

III. Lastly, mark the choking of the growth. Of course it is rapid,
according to the old saying, 'Ill weeds grow apace.' 'They are
choked with the cares and riches and pleasures of this life and
bring no fruit to perfection.' The weeds grow faster than the seed.
'Possession is nine-tenths of the law,' and they have got possession
of the soil, and their roots go far and strike deep, and so they
come up, with their great, strong, coarse, quick-growing stems and
leaves, and surround the green, infant, slender shoot, and keep the
air and light out from it, and exhaust all the goodness of the soil,
which has not nutriment in it enough for the modest seed and for the
self-asserting thorn. And so the thorn beats in the race, and grows
inches whilst the other grows hairbreadths. Is not that a true
statement of our experience? If Christian men and women permit as
much of their interest and affection and effort and occupation of
mind to go out towards the world and worldly things, as, alas! most
of us do, no wonder if the tiny, yellow, rather than green, blade is
choked and gets covered with parasitical disease, and perhaps dies
at last. You cannot grow two crops on one field. Some of us have
tried; it will never do. It must be one thing or another, and we
must make up our minds whether we are going to cultivate corn or
thorn. May God help us to make the right choice of the crop we
desire to bear!

Our text tells us that this man, represented by the seed among
thorns, was a Christian, did, and does, bear fruit, but, as Luke
says, 'brings no fruit to perfection.' The first seed never grew at
all; the second got the length of putting forth a blade; this one
has got as far as the ear, but not so far as 'the full corn in the
ear.' It has fruited, but the fruit is green and scanty, not
ripened, as it ought to be, since it grows under such a sky and was
taken out of such a seed-basket as our seed has come from. It brings
forth no fruit _to perfection_';--is not that a picture of so
many Christian people? One cannot say that they are not Christians.
One cannot say that there are no signs of a divine life in them. One
cannot say but that they do a good many things that are right and
pure, and obviously the result of a Divine Spirit working upon them;
but all that they do just falls short of the crowning grace and
beauty. There is always something about it that strikes one as being
incomplete. They are Christian men and Christian women bringing
forth many of the fruits of the Christian life, but the climax
somehow or other is always absent. The pyramid goes up many stages,
but there is never the gilded summit flashing in the light--'No
fruit to perfection.'

Dear brethren, let us take our poor, imperfect services, and lay
them down at the Master's feet, and ask Him to help us to make clean
work of these hearts of ours, and to turn out of them all our
worldly hankerings after the seen and temporal. Then we shall bear
fruit that He will gather into His garner. The cares and the
pleasures and the wealth that terminate in, and are occupied with,
this poor fleeting present are small and insignificant. Let us try
to yield ourselves up wholly to the higher influences of that Divine
Spirit, and in true consecration receive the engrafted word. And
then He will give to us to drink of that river of His pleasures,
drinking of which we shall not thirst, nor need to come to any of
earth's fountains to draw. If the Saviour comes in in His power, He
will cast out the uncleanness that dwells in us and make us fruitful
as He would have us to be.




A MIRACLE WITHIN A MIRACLE


    'And a woman, having an issue of blood twelve years,
    which had spent all her living upon physicians,
    neither could be healed of any, 44. Came behind Him,
    and touched the border of His garment: and immediately
    her issue of blood stanched. 45. And Jesus said, Who
    touched Me? When all denied, Peter, and they that were
    with Him, said, Master, the multitude throng Thee and
    press Thee, and sayest Thou, Who touched Me? 46. And
    Jesus said, Somebody hath touched Me: for I perceive
    that virtue is gone out of Me. 47. And when the woman
    saw that she was not hid, she came trembling, and,
    falling down before Him, she declared unto Him before
    all the people for what cause she had touched Him, and
    how she was healed immediately. 48. And He said unto
    her, Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith hath made
    thee whole; go in peace.'--LUKE viii. 43-48.

The story of Jairus's daughter is, as it were, cut in two by that of
the poor invalid woman. What an impression of calm consciousness of
power and of leisurely dignity is made by Christ's having time to
pause, even on His way to a dying sufferer, in order to heal, as if
parenthetically, this other afflicted one! How Jairus must have
chafed at the delay! He had left his child 'at the point of death'
and here was the Healer loitering, as it must have seemed to a
father's agony of impatience.

But Jesus, with His infinite calm and as infinite power, can afford
to let the one wait and even die, while He tends the other. The
child shall receive no harm, and her sister in sorrow has as great a
claim on Him as she. He has leisure of heart to feel for each, and
power for both. We do not rob one another of His gifts. Attending to
one, He does not neglect another.

This miracle illustrates the genuineness and power of feeble and
erroneous faith, and Christ's merciful way of strengthening and
upholding it. The woman, a poor, shrinking creature, has been made
more timid by long illness, disappointed hopes of cure, and by
poverty. She does not venture to stop Jesus, as He goes with an
important official of the synagogue to heal his daughter, but creeps
up in the crowd behind Him, puts out a wasted, trembling hand to
touch the tasselled fringe of His robe--and she is whole.

She would fain have glided away with a stolen cure, but Jesus forced
her to stand out before the throng, and with all their eyes on her,
to conquer diffidence and womanly reticence, and tell all the truth.
Strange contrast, this, to His usual avoidance of notoriety and
regard for shrinking weakness! But it was true kindness, for it was
the discipline by which her imperfect faith was cleared and
confirmed.

It is easy to point out the imperfections in this woman's faith. It
was very ignorant. She was sure that this Rabbi would heal her, but
she expected it to be done by the material contact of her finger
with His robe. She had no idea that Christ's will, much less His
love, had anything to do with His cures. She thinks that she may
carry away the blessing, and He be none the wiser. It is easy to
say, What blank ignorance of Christ's way of working! what grossly
superstitious notions! Yes, and with them all what a hunger of
intense desire to be whole, and what absolute confidence that a
finger-tip on His robe was enough!

Her faith was very imperfect, but the main fact is that she had it.
Let us be thankful for a living proof of the genuineness of ignorant
and even of superstitious faith. There are many now who fall with
less excuse into a like error with this woman's, by attaching undue
importance to externals, and thinking more of the hem of the garment
and its touch by a finger than of the heart of the wearer and the
grasp of faith. But while we avoid such errors, let us not forget
that many a poor worshipper clasping a crucifix may be clinging to
the Saviour, and that Christ does accept faith which is tied to
outward forms, as He did this woman's.

There was no real connection between the touch of her finger and her
healing, but she thought that there  was, and Christ stoops to her
childish thought, and lets her make the path for His gift.
'According to thy faith be it unto thee': His mercy, like water,
takes the shape of the containing vessel.

The last part of the miracle, when the cured woman is made the bold
confessor, is all shaped so as to correct and confirm her imperfect
faith. We note this purpose in every part of it. She had thought of
the healing energy as independent of His knowledge and will.
Therefore she is taught that He was aware of the mute appeal, and of
the going out of power in answer to it. The question, 'Who touched
me?' has been regarded as a proof that Jesus was ignorant of the
person; but if we keep the woman's character and the nature of her
disease in view, we can suppose it asked, not to obtain information,
but to lead to acknowledgment, and that without ascribing to Him in
asking it any feigning of ignorance.

The contrast between the pressure of the crowd and the touch of
faith has often been insisted on, and carries a great lesson. The
unmannerly crowd hustled each other, trod on His skirts, and elbowed
their way to gape at Him, and He took no heed. But His heart
detected the touch, unlike all the rest, and went out with healing
power towards her who touched. We may be sure that, though a
universe waits before Him, and the close-ranked hosts of heaven
stand round His throne, we can reach our hands through them all, and
get the gifts we need.

She had shrunk from publicity, most naturally. But if she had stolen
away, she would have lost the joy of confession and greater
blessings than the cure. So He mercifully obliges her to stand
forth. In a moment she is changed from a timid invalid to a
confessor. A secret faith is like a plant growing in the dark, the
stem of which is blanched and weak, and its few blossoms pale and
never matured. 'With the mouth confession is made unto salvation.'

Christ's last word to her is tender. He calls her 'Daughter'--the
only woman whom He addressed by such a name. He teaches her that her
faith, not her finger, had been the medium through which His healing
power had reached her. He confirms by His authoritative word the
furtive blessing: '_Be_ whole of thy plague.' And she goes,
having found more than she sought, and felt a loving heart where she
had only seen a magic-working robe.




CHRIST TO JAIRUS


    'When Jesus heard it, He answered, saying, Fear not:
    believe only, and she shall be made whole.'
    --LUKE viii. 60.

The calm leisureliness of conscious power shines out very
brilliantly from this story of the raising of Jairus's daughter. The
father had come to Jesus, in an agony of impatience, and besought
Him to heal his child, who lay 'at the point of death.' Not a moment
was to be lost. Our Lord sets out with him, but on the road pauses
to attend to another sufferer, the woman who laid her wasted finger
on the hem of Christ's robe. How Jairus must have chafed at the
delay, and thought every moment an eternity; and perhaps said hard
things In his heart about Christ's apparent indifference! Delay
seemed to be fatal, for before Christ had finished speaking to the
woman, the messenger comes with a word which appears to me to have
in it a touch of bitterness and of blame. 'Trouble not the Master'
sounds as if the speaker hinted that the Master was thinking it a
trouble, and had not put Himself much about to meet the necessity.
But one's gain shall not be another's loss, and Christ does not let
any applicant to Him suffer whilst He attends to any other. Each has
an equal claim on His heart. So He turns to the father with the
words that I have read for my text.

They are the first of three sayings of our Lord round which this
whole narrative is remarkably grouped. I have read the first, but I
mean to speak about all three. There is a word of encouragement
which sustains a feeble faith: there is a word of revelation which
smooths the grimness of death; 'She is not dead but sleepeth'; and
there is a word of power which goes into the darkness, and brings
back the child; 'Maiden, arise!' Now, I think if we take these
three, we get the significance of this whole incident.

I. First, then, the word of cheer which sustains a staggering faith.

'When Jesus heard this, He said unto him, Fear not, believe only,
and she shall be made whole.' How preposterous this rekindling of
hope must have seemed to Jairus when the storm had blown out the
last flickering spark! How irrelevant, if it were not cruel, the
'Fear not!' must have sounded when the last possible blow had
fallen. And yet, because of the word in the middle, embedded between
the obligation to hope and the prohibition to fear, neither the one
nor the other is preposterous, 'Only believe.' That is in the
centre; and on the one side,' Fear not!'--a command ridiculous
without it; and on the other side, 'Hope!' an injunction impossible
apart from faith.

Jesus Christ is saying the very same things to us. His fundamental
commandment is 'Only believe,' and there effloresce from it the two
things, courage that never trembles, and hope that never despairs.
'Only believe'--usually He made the outflow of His miraculous power
contingent upon the faith, either of the sufferer himself or of some
others. There was no necessity for the connection. We have instances
in His life of miracles wrought without faith, without asking, simply
at the bidding of His own irrepressible pity. But the rule in regard
to His miracles is that faith was the condition that drew out the
miraculous energy. The connection between our faith and our experience
of His supernatural, sustaining, cleansing, gladdening, enlightening
power is closer than that. For without our trust in Him, He can do
no mighty works upon us, and there must be confidence, on our part,
before there is in our experience the reception into our lives of His
highest blessings; just because they are greater and deeper, and belong
to a more inward sphere than these outward and inferior miracles of
bodily healing. Therefore the connection between our faith and His
gifts to us is inevitable, and constant, and the commandment 'Only
believe,' assumes a more imperative stringency, in regard to our
spiritual experience, than it ever did in regard to those who felt
the power of His miracle-working hand. So it stands for us, as the
one central appeal and exhortation which Christ, by His life, by the
record of His love, by His Cross and Passion, by His dealings and
pleadings with us through His Spirit, and His providence to-day, is
making to us all. 'Only believe'--the one act that vitally knits the
soul to Christ, and makes it capable of receiving unto itself the
fullness of His loftiest blessings.

But we must note the two clauses which stand on either side of this
central commandment. They deal with two issues of faith. One forbids
fear, the other gives fuel for the fire of hope. On the one hand,
the exhortation, 'Fear not,' which is the most futile that
can be spoken if the speaker does not touch the cause of the fear,
comes from His lips with a gracious power. Faith is the one
counterpoise of fear. There is none other for the deepest dreads
that lie cold and paralysing, though often dormant, in every human
spirit; and that ought to lie there. If a man has not faith in God,
in Christ, he ought to have fear. For there rise before him,
solitary, helpless, inextricably caught into the meshes of this
mysterious and awful system of things--a whole host of possible, or
probable, or certain calamities, and what is he to do? stand there
in the open, with the pelting of the pitiless storm coming down upon
him? The man is an idiot if he is not afraid. And what is to calm
those rational fears, the fear of wrath, of life, of death, of what
lies beyond death? You cannot whistle them away. You cannot ignore
them always. You cannot grapple with them in your own strength.
'Only believe,' says the Comforter and the Courage-bringer. The
attitude of trust banishes dread, and nothing else will effectually
and reasonably do it. 'I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear.' Him
who can slay and who judges. You have, and you cannot break, a
connection with God. He ought to be one of two things--your
ghastliest dread or your absolute trust. 'Only believe then,' 'fear
not.' Believe not, _then_ be afraid; for you have reason to be.

Men say, 'Oh! keep your courage up'; and they contribute no means to
keep it up: Christ says 'Fear not; only believe,' and gives to faith
the courage which He enjoins. Like a child that never dreams of any
mischief being able to reach it when the mother's breast is beneath
its head, and the mother's arms are round its little body, each of
us may rest on Christ's breast, and feel His arm round about us.
Then we may smile at all that men call evils; and whether they are
possible, or probable, or certain, we can look at them all and say,
'Ah! I have circumvented you.' 'All things work together for good to
them that' trust Christ. 'Fear not; only believe.'

But on the other hand, from that simple faith will spring up also
hope that cannot despair. 'She shall be made whole.' Irreversible
disasters have no place in Christian experience. There are no
irrevocable losses to him who trusts. There are no wounds that
cannot be stanched, when we go to Him who has the balm and the
bandage. Although it is true that dead faces do not smile again upon
us until we get beyond earth's darkness, it is also true that bonds
broken may be knit in a finer fashion, if faith instead of sense
weaves them together; and that in the great future we shall find
that the true healing of those that went before was not by
deliverance from, but by passing through, the death that emancipates
from the long disease of earthly life.

Brethren! if we trust Christ we may 'hope perfectly.' If we do not
trust Him our firmest hopes are as spiders' webs that are swept away
by a besom; and our deepest desires remain unfulfilled. 'Only
believe,' then, on the one side, 'Fear not,' and on the other side
'Hope ever.'

II. We have here a word of revelation which softens the grimness of
death.

Our Lord reaches the house of affliction, and finds it a house of
hubbub and noise. The hired mourners, with their shrill shrieks,
were there already, bewailing the child. The tumult jarred upon His
calmness, and He says 'Weep not; she is not dead but sleepeth.' One
wonders how some people have read those words as if they declared
that the apparent physical death was only a swoon or a faint, or
some kind of coma, and that so there was no miracle at all in the
case. 'They laughed Him to scorn; knowing that she was dead.' You
can measure the hollowness of their grief by its change into
scornful laughter when a promise of consolation began to open before
them. And you can measure their worth as witnesses to the child's
resurrection by their absolute certainty of her death.

But notice that our Lord never forbids weeping unless He takes away
its cause. 'Weep not,' is another of the futile forms of words with
which men try to encourage and comfort one another. There is nothing
more cruel than to forbid tears to the sad heart. Jesus Christ never
did that except when He was able to bring that which took away
occasion for weeping. He lets grief have its way. He means us to run
rivers of waters down our cheeks when He sends us sorrows. We shall
never get the blessing of these till we have felt the bitterness of
them. We shall never profit by them if we stoically choke back the
manifestations of our grief, and think that it is submissive to be
dumb. Let sorrow have way. Tears purge the heart from which their
streams come. But Jesus Christ says to us all, 'Weep not,' because
He comes to us all with that which, if I may so say, puts a rainbow
into the tear-drops, and makes it possible that the great paradox
should be fulfilled in our hearts, 'As sorrowful yet always
rejoicing.' Weep not; or if you weep, let the tears have
thankfulness as well as grief in them. It is a difficult
commandment, but it is possible when His lips tell us not to weep,
and we have obeyed the central exhortation, 'Only believe.'

Note, further, in this second of our Lord's words, how He smooths
away the grimness of death. I do not claim for Him anything like a
monopoly of that most obvious and natural symbolism which regards
death as a sleep. It must have occurred to all who ever looked upon
a corpse. But I do claim that when He used the metaphor, and by His
use of it modified the whole conception of death in the thoughts of
His disciples, He put altogether different ideas into it from that
which it contained on the lips of others. He meant to suggest the
idea of repose--

  'Sleep, full of rest from head to foot.'

The calm immobility of the body so lately racked with pain, or
restless in feverish tossings, is but a symbol of the deeper
stillness of truer repose which remaineth for the people of God and
laps the blessed spirits who 'sleep in Jesus.' He meant to suggest
the idea of separation from this material world. He did not mean to
suggest the idea of unconsciousness. A man is not unconscious when
he is asleep, as dreams testify. He meant, above all, if sleep, then
waking.

So the grim fact is smoothed down, not by blinking any of its
aspects, but by looking deeper into them. They who, only believing,
have lived a life of courage and of hope, and have fronted sorrows,
and felt the benediction of tears, pass into the great darkness, and
know that they there are rocked to sleep on a loving breast, and,
sleeping in Jesus, shall wake with the earliest morning light.

This is a revelation for all His servants. And how deeply these
words, and others like them which He spake at the grave of Lazarus
and at other times, were dinted into the consciousness of the
Christian Church, is manifested by the fact, not only that they are
recurrently used by Apostles in their Epistles, but that all through
the New Testament you scarcely ever find the physical fact of
dissolution designated by the name 'death,' but all sorts of
gracious paraphrases, which bring out the attractive and blessed
aspects of the thing, are substituted. It is a 'sleep'; it is a
'putting off the tabernacle'; it is a 'departure'; it is a pulling
up of the tent-pegs, and a change of place. We do not need the ugly
word, and we do not need to dread the thing that men call by it. The
Christian idea of death is not the separation of self from its
house, of the soul from the body, but the separation of self from
God, who is the life.

III. So, lastly, the life-giving word of power.

'Maiden, arise!' All the circumstances of the miracle are marked by
the most lovely consideration, on Christ's part, of the timidity of
the little girl of twelve years of age. It is because of that that
He seeks to raise her in privacy, whereas the son of the widow of
Nain and Lazarus were raised amidst a crowd. It is because of that
that He selects as His companions in the room only the three chief
Apostles as witnesses, and the father and mother of the child. It is
because of that that He puts forth His hand and grasps hers, in
order that the child's eyes when they open should see only the
loving faces of parents, and the not less loving face of the
Master; and that her hand, when it began to move again, should
clasp, first, His own tender hand. It is for the same reason that
the remarkable appendix to the miracle is given--'He commanded that
they should give her food.' Surely that is an inimitable note of
truth. No legend-manufacturer would have dared to drop down to such
a homely word as that, after such a word as 'Maiden, arise!' An
economy of miraculous power is shown here, such as was shown when,
after Lazarus came forth, other hands had to untie the grave-clothes
which tripped him as he stumbled along. Christ will do by miracle
what is needful and not one hairs-breadth more. In His calm majesty
He bethinks Himself of the hungry child, and entrusts to others the
task of giving her food. That homely touch is, to me, indicative of
the simple veracity of the historian.

But the life-giving word itself; what can we say about it? Only this
one thing: here Jesus Christ exercises a manifest divine prerogative.
It was no more the syllables that He spoke than it was the touch of
His hand that raised the child. What was it? The forth-putting of
His will, which went away straight into the darkness; and if the
disembodied spirit was in a locality, went straight there; and somehow
or other, laid hold of the spirit, and somehow or other, reinstated it
in its home. Christ's will, like the king's writ, runs through all the
universe. 'He spake, and it was done';--whose prerogative is that?
God's; and God manifest in the flesh exercised it. The words of the
Incarnate Word have power over physical things.

Here, too, are the prelude and first-fruits of our resurrection. Not
that there are not wide differences between the raising of this
child, and that future resurrection to which Christian hope looks
forward, but that in this one little incident, little, compared with
the majestic scale of the latter, there come out these two things--the
demonstration that conscious life runs on, irrespective of the accident
of its being united with or separated from a bodily organisation; and
the other, that Jesus Christ has power over men's spirits, and can
fit them at His will to bodies appropriate to their condition. Time
is no element in the case. What befalls the particles of the human
frame is no element in the case. 'Thou sowest not the body that shall
be.' But if that Lord had the power which He showed in that one
chamber, with that one child, then, as a little window may show us
great matters, so we see through this single incident the time when
'they that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come
forth.'

Brethren! there is a higher lesson still; He that gives and gives
again, physical life, does so as a symbol of the highest gift which
He can bestow upon us all. If we 'only believe,' then, 'you hath He
quickened which were dead in trespasses and sins ... and for His
great love wherewith He loved us.... He hath raised us up together,
and made us sit together, in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.'




BREAD FROM HEAVEN


    'And the apostles, when they were returned, told Him
    all that they had done. And He took them, and went
    aside privately into a desert place belonging to the
    city, called Bethsaida. 11. And the people, when they
    knew it, followed Him; and He received them, and spake
    unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that
    had need of healing. 12. And when the day began to
    wear away, then came the twelve, and said unto Him,
    Send the multitude away, that they may go into the
    towns and country round about, and lodge, and get
    victuals; for we are here in a desert place. 13. But He
    said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We
    have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we
    should go and buy meat for all this people. 14. (For
    they were about five thousand men.) And He said to His
    disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company.
    15. And they did so, and made them all sit down.
    16. Then He took the five loaves, and the two fishes;
    and, looking up to heaven, He blessed them, and brake,
    and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.
    17. And they did eat, and were all filled: and there
    was taken up of fragments that remained to them twelve
    baskets.'--LUKE ix. 10-17.

The Apostles needed rest after their trial trip as evangelists. John
the Baptist's death had just been told to Christ. The Passover was
at hand, and many pilgrims were on the march. Prudence and care for
His followers as well as Himself suggested a brief retirement, and
our Lord sought it at the Eastern Bethsaida, a couple of miles up
the Jordan from its point of entrance to the lake. Matthew and Mark
tell us that He went by boat, which Luke does not seem to have
known. Mark adds that the curious crowd, which followed on foot,
reached the place of landing before Him, and so effectually
destroyed all hope of retirement. It was a short walk round the
north-western part of the head of the lake, and the boat would be in
sight all the way, so that there was no escape for its passengers.

Luke records the self-oblivious cordiality of Christ's reception of
the intrusive crowd. Without a sigh or sign of impatience, He
'welcomed them'--a difficult thing to do, and one which few of us
could have achieved. The motives of most of them can have been
nothing higher than what leads vulgar people of all ranks and
countries to buzz about distinguished men, utterly regardless of
delicacy or considerateness. They want to see the notoriety, no
matter what it costs him. But Jesus received them patiently,
because, as Mark touchingly tells, He was 'moved with pity,' and saw
in their rude crowding round Him the token of their lack of guides
and teachers. They seemed to Him, not merely a mob of intrusive
sight-seers, but like a huddled mass of unshepherded sheep.

Christ's heart felt more lovingly than ours because His eye saw
deeper, and His eye saw deeper because His heart felt more lovingly.
If we would live nearer Him, we should see, as He did, enough in
every man to draw our pity and help, even though he may jostle and
interfere with us.

The short journey to Bethsaida would be in the early morning, and a
long day of toil followed instead of the hoped-for quiet. Note that
singular expression, 'Them that had need of healing He healed.' Why
not simply 'them that were sick'? Probably to bring out the thought
that misery made unfailing appeal to Him, and that for Him to see
need was to supply it. His swift compassion, His all-sufficient
power to heal, and the conditions of receiving His healing, are all
wrapped up in the words. Coming to the miracle itself, we may throw
the narrative into three parts--the preliminaries, the miracle, and
the abundant overplus.

I. Our Lord leads up to the miracle by forcing home on the minds of
the disciples the extent of the need and the utter inadequacy of
their resources to meet it, and by calling on them and the crowd for
an act of obedience which must have seemed to many of them
ludicrous. John shows us that He had begun to prepare them, at the
moment of meeting the multitude, by His question to Philip. That had
been simmering in the disciples' minds all day, while they leisurely
watched Him toiling in word and work, and now they come with their
solution of the difficulty. Their suggestion was a very sensible one
in the circumstances, and they are not to be blamed for not
anticipating a miracle as the way out. However many miracles they
saw, they never seem to have expected another. That has been thought
to be unnatural, but surely it is true to nature. They moved in a
confusing mixture of the miraculous and the natural which baffled
calculation as to which element would rule at any given moment.
Their faith was feeble, and Christ rebuked them for their slowness
to learn the lesson of this very miracle and its twin feeding of the
four thousand. They were our true brothers in their failure to grasp
the full meaning of the past, and to trust His power.

The strange suggestion that the disciples should feed the crowd must
have appeared to them absurd, but it was meant to bring out the
clear recognition of the smallness of their supply. Therein lie
great lessons. Commands are given and apparent duties laid on us, in
order that we may find out how impotent we are to do them. It can
never be our duty to do what we cannot do, but it is often our duty
to attempt tasks to which we are conspicuously inadequate, in the
confidence that He who gives them has laid them on us to drive us to
Himself, and there to find sufficiency. The best preparation of His
servants for their work in the world is the discovery that their own
stores are small. Those who have learned that it is their task to
feed the multitude, and who have said 'We have no more than such and
such scanty resources,' are prepared to be the distributors of His
all-sufficient supply.

What a strange scene that must have been as the hundred groups of
fifty each arranged themselves on the green grass, in the setting
sunlight, waiting for a meal of which there were no signs! It took a
good deal of faith to seat the crowd, and some faith for the crowd
to sit. How expectant they would be! How they would wonder what was
to be done next! How some of them would laugh, and some sneer, and
all watch the event! We, too, have to put ourselves in the attitude
to receive gifts of which sense sees no sign; and if, in obedience
to Christ's word, we sit down expecting Him to find the food, we
shall not be disappointed, though the table be spread in the
wilderness, and neither storehouse nor kitchen be in sight.

II. The miracle itself has some singular features. Like that of the
draught of fishes, it was not called forth by the cry of suffering,
nor was the need which it met one beyond the reach of ordinary
means. It was certainly one of the miracles most plainly meant to
strike the popular mind, and the enthusiasm excited by it, according
to John's account, was foreseen by Christ. Why did He evoke
enthusiasm which He did not mean to gratify? For the very purpose of
bringing the carnal expectations of the crowd to a head, that they
might be the more conclusively disappointed. The miracle and its
sequel sifted and sent away many 'disciples,' and were meant to do
so.

All the accounts tell of Christ's 'blessing.' Matthew and Mark do
not say what He blessed, and perhaps the best supplement is 'God,'
but Luke says that He blessed the food. What He blesses is blessed;
for His words are deeds, and communicate the blessing which they
speak. The point at which the miraculous multiplication of the food
came in is left undetermined, but perhaps the difference in the
tenses of the verbs hints at it. 'Blessed' and 'brake' are in the
tense which describes a single act; 'gave' is in that which
describes a continuous repeated action. The pieces grew under His
touch, and the disciples always found His hands full when they came
back with their own empty. But wherever the miraculous element
appeared, creative power was exercised by Jesus; and none the less
was it creative, because there was the 'substratum' of the loaves
and fishes. Too much stress has been laid on their being used, and
some commentators have spoken as if without them the miracle could
not have been wrought. But surely the distinction between pure
creation and multiplication of a thing already existing vanishes
when a loaf is 'multiplied' so as to feed a thousand men.

The symbolical aspect of the miracle is set forth in the great
discourse which follows it in John's Gospel. Jesus is the 'Bread of
God which came down from heaven.' That Bread is broken for us. Not
in His Incarnation alone, but in His Death, is He the food of the
world; and we have not only to 'eat His flesh,' but to 'drink His
blood,' if we would live. Nor can we lose sight of the symbol of His
servants' task. They are the distributors of the heaven-sent bread.
If they will but take their poor stores to Jesus, with the
acknowledgment of their insufficiency, He will turn them into
inexhaustible supplies, and they will find that 'there is that
scattereth, and yet increaseth.' What Christ blesses is always
enough.

III. The abundance left over is significant. Twelve baskets, such as
poor travellers carried their belongings in, were filled; that is to
say, each Apostle who had helped to feed the hungry had a basketful
to bring off for future wants. The 'broken pieces' were not crumbs
that littered the grass, but the portions that came from Christ's
hands.

His provision is more than enough for a hungry world, and they who
share it out among their fellows have their own possession of it
increased. There is no surer way to receive the full sweetness and
blessing of the Gospel than to carry it to some hungry soul. These
full baskets teach us, too, that In Christ's gift of Himself as the
Bread of Life there is ever more than at any given moment we can
appropriate. The Christian's spiritual experiences have ever an
element of infinity in them; and we feel that if we were able to
take in more, there would be more for us to take. Other food cloys
and does not satisfy, and leaves us starving. Christ satisfies and
does not cloy, and we have always remaining, yet to be enjoyed, the
boundless stores which neither eternity will age nor a universe
feeding on them consume. The Christian's capacity of partaking of
Christ grows with what it feeds on, and he alone is safe in
believing that 'To-morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant.'




THE LORD THAT HEALETH THEE'


    'He healed them that had need of healing.'--Luke ix. 11.

Jesus was seeking a little quiet and rest for Himself and His
followers. For that purpose He took one of the fishermen's boats to
cross to the other side of the sea. But the crowd, inconsiderate and
selfish, like all crowds, saw the course of the boat, and hurried,
as they could easily do, on foot round the head of the lake, to be
ready for Him wherever He might land. So when He touched the shore,
there they all were, open-mouthed and mostly moved by mere
curiosity, and the prospect of a brief breathing-space vanished.

But not a word of rebuke or disappointment came from His lips, and
no shade of annoyance crossed His spirit. Perhaps with a sigh, but
yet cheerfully, He braced Himself to work where He had hoped for
leisure. It was a little thing, but it was the same in kind, though
infinitely smaller in magnitude, as that which led Him to lay aside
'the glory that He had with the Father before the world was,' and
come to toil and die amongst men.

But what I especially would note are Luke's remarkable words here.
Why does he use that periphrasis, 'Them that had need of healing,'
instead of contenting himself with straightforwardly saying, 'Them
that were sick,' as do the other Evangelists? Well, I suppose he
wished to hint to us the Lord's discernment of men's necessities,
the swift compassion which moved to supply a need as soon as it was
observed, and the inexhaustible power by which, whatsoever the
varieties of infirmity, He was able to cure and to bring strength.
'He healed them that had need of healing,' because His love could
not look upon a necessity without being moved to supply it, and
because that love wielded the resources of an infinite power.

Now, all our Lord's miracles are parables, illustrating upon a lower
platform spiritual facts; and that is especially true about the
miracles of healing. So I wish to deal with the words before us as
having a direct application to ourselves, and to draw from them two
or three very old, threadbare, neglected lessons, which I pray God
may lead some of us to recognise anew our need of healing, and
Christ's infinite power to bestow it. There are three things that I
want to say, and I name them here that you may know where I am
going. First, we all need healing; second, Christ can heal us all;
third, we are not all healed.

I. We all need healing.

The people in that crowd were not all diseased. Some of them He
taught; some of them He cured; but that crowd where healthy men
mingled with cripples is no type of the condition of humanity.
Rather we are to find it in that Pool of Bethesda, with its five
porches, wherein lay a multitude of impotent folk, tortured with
varieties of sickness, and none of them sound. Blessed be God! we
are in _Bethesda_, which means 'house of mercy,' and the
fountain that can heal is perpetually springing up beside us all.
There is a disease, dear brethren, which affects and infects all
mankind, and it is of that that I wish to speak to you two or three
plain, earnest words now. Sin is universal.

What does the Bible mean by sin? Everything that goes against, or
neglects God's law. And if you will recognise in all the acts of
every life the reference, which really is there, to God and His
will, you will not need anything more to establish the fact that
'all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.' Whatever
other differences there are between men, there is this fundamental
similarity. Neglect--which is a breach--of the law of God pertains
to all mankind. Everything that we do ought to have reference to
Him. _Does_ everything that we do have such reference? If not,
there is a quality of evil in it. For the very definition of sin is
living to myself and neglecting Him. He is the centre, and if I
might use a violent figure, every planet that wrenches itself away
from gravitation towards, and revolution round, that centre, and
prefers to whirl on its own axis, has broken the law of the
celestial spheres, and brought discord into the heavenly harmony.
All men stand condemned in this respect.

Now, there is no need to exaggerate. I am not saying that all men
are on the same level. I know that there are great differences in
the nobleness, purity, and goodness of lives, and Christianity has
never been more unfairly represented than when good men have called,
as they have done with St. Augustine, the virtues of godless men,
'splendid vices.' But though the differences are not unimportant,
the similarity is far more important. The pure, clean-living man,
and the loving, gentle woman, though they stand high above the
sensuality of the profligate, the criminal, stand in this respect on
the same footing that they, too, have to put their hands on their
mouths, and their mouths in the dust, and cry 'Unclean!'  I do not
want to exaggerate, and sure I am that if men will be honest with
themselves there is a voice that responds to the indictment when I
say sadly, in the solemn language of Scripture, 'we all have sinned
and come short of the glory of God.' For there is no difference. If
you do not believe in a God, you can laugh at the old wife's notion
of 'sin.' If you do believe in a God, you are shut up to believe
this other thing, 'Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned.'

And, brethren, if this universal fact is indeed a fact, it is the
gravest element in human nature. It matters very little, in
comparison, whether you and I are wise or foolish, educated or
illiterate, rich or poor, happy or miserable. All the superficial
distinctions which separate men from one another, and are all right
in their own places, dwindle away into nothing before this solemn
truth that in every frame there is a plague spot, and that the
leprosy has smitten us all.

But, brethren, do not let us lose ourselves in generalities. All
means each, and each means me. We all know how hard it is to bring
general truths to bear, with all their weight, upon ourselves. That
is an old commonplace: 'All men think all men mortal but
